UNITED NA TIONS

I
OFFICIAL

RECO

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l833/Rev.l)

,. . . . , . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

i

Expression of welcome to the representative of the United States of America

1

Adoption of the agenda . , , . , , . , . . . . . . , . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Emergency Force
(S/l 1758) . . . . . . . . , . , , , , , . . . , . . . . . . . . . , , . . . . , . . , . . . . , . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . .

1

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures, Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the OfJicial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions oJ’ rlze Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before I January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1833rd MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 24 July 1975, at 3 p.m.
President:

Mr. Eugenio PLAJA (Italy),

and Israel have asked to participate in the Council’s
debate of the matter of which it is seized. In accordance
with the usual practice of the Council and with the
provisions of article 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure, I intend, with the consent of the Council,
to invite the representatives of Egypt and Israel to
participate in the debate, without the right to vote.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, China, Costa
Rica, France, Guyana, Iraq, Italy, Japan, Mauritania,
Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Cameroon, United Republic of
Tanzania and United States of America.
Provisional

At the invitation
of the President, Mr. Abdel
Meguid (Egypt) and Mr. Doron (Israel) took places at
the Council table.

agenda (S/Agenda/l833/Rev.l)

1.

Adoption

2.

The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Emergency Force (S/l 1758)

3. The PRESIDENT
(interprerarion ,fixwn Frerzch):
It will be recalled that at its 1832nd meeting, held on
21 July 1975, the Security Council approved the text
of an appeal addressed to the President of the Arab
Republic of Egypt [see S/1177/]. In accordance with
my intention indicated at the end of that meeting,
I immediately
transmitted that appeal to President
Anwar El-Sadat through the representative of Egypt
to the United Nations.

of the agenda

Tlze meeting was called to order at 6 p.m.
Expression of welcome to the representative
United States of America

of the

4. Yesterday I received the Egyptian reply, the text
of which was signed by the Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Egypt [ibid.]. On
behalf of the Council I should like to express my
appreciation to the Government of Egypt for that
positive response.

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
Before the Security Council proceeds to its agenda,
I should like personally and on behalf of Council
members to express our warmest welcome to our new
colleague on the Council, the representative of the
United Sates, Mr. Moynihan, who has in fact already
made an important contribution to the work of the
Council in the course of the unofficial meetings that
have taken place in the past few days. The very late
hour at which we held our last meeting, the first in
which he oMicially participated, made it impossible
for me to welcome him formally. The Council is
gratified to count among its members Mr. Moynihan,
a university professor of established prestige whose
vast diplomatic experience will doubtless be of great
benefit to our work.

5. Furthermore, may I draw the attention of members
of the Council to the draft resolution contained in
document S/l 1774/Rev. 1. During consultations among
the members of the Council, an agreement was reached
on this draft resolution. It was also agreed amonn the
members that this draft should im;ediately
be put
before the Council for approval, and that representatives wishing to speak would do so after the vote.
6. I shall therefore now put to the vote the draft
resolution S/l 1774/Rev. 1 before the Council.

Adoption of the agenda
The

agenda

A vote was taken by show of hands.

was adopted.

The draft resolution
none. l

\vas adopted

by 13 votes to

The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Emergency Force (S/11758)

Two members (China and Iraq) did riot participate
in the voting.

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation Jiom French):
In accordance with the terms of the relevant Articles
of the Charter and the provisional rules of procedure
of the Security Council, the representatives of Egypt

7. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
j?orn French):
Before calling on the first representative, I call on the
Secretary-General,
who wishes to make a brief
statement.
1

8. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
I should like to
express my gratification at the decision just taken by
the Security Council. The extension of the mandate
of the United Nations Emergency Force (UNEF) is of
great importance, not only from the point of view of
maintaining quiet in that critical area but also because
I believe that its continued
functioning
should
facilitate the negotiating process.

the responsibility
peace efforts.

for the failure of the then ongoing

14. What has developed since we last came before
the Council three months ago is a clear vindication of
our view. It is clear that the situation has remained
as explosive as ever before. It is clear also that the
deadlock in the efforts towards achieving a just and
lasting peace has been caused by the persistently
negative Israeli attitude. For our part, we have been
for peace throughout all the past peace efforts, To
that end, we declared our readiness immediately to
implement resolution 338 (1973) of 22 October 1973,
in all its parts. Egypt spared no effort in reaching the
Disengagement
Agreement with Israel which was
signed on 18 January 1974 [see S/11198]. Furthermore, Egypt has given its whole-hearted co-operation
to the efforts undertaken by the United States of
America for the achievement of a second disengagement agreement, a fact which was duly recognized
by the Secretary of State and the President of the
United States at the time and by the United States
information
media, which then criticized Israeli
inflexibility
and short-sightedness. And no wonder,
since Israel’s position has all along been one of sathing
and procrastination.
As a result, it has been overwhelmmgly held responsible for the breakdown of the
peace efforts in March this year.

9. I should like to express my gratitude to you,
Mr. President, for your tireless and dedicated work,
and also to all the members of the Council for the
efforts which they have made to achieve this result.
I know that this has not been easy, and it shows
once again the Council’s importance and its capacity
for dealing with such serious situations.
10. I shall, of course, immediately give the necessary
instructions for the Council’s decision to be carried
out.
11. The PRESIDENT
(intelpretntion
from French):
I shall now call on those representatives who have
asked to speak in explanation of vote after the vote.
I call first on the representative of Egypt.
12. Mr. ABDEL MEGUID (Egypt): Sir, I should like
first of all to congratulate you upon your assumption
of the post of President of the Security Council. Your
exceptional qualities and skills are well known to us
here within the United Nations, as well as beyond.
They have been invaluable to the Council’s work
during the last few days. My delegation takes added
pleasure in welcoming you as the representative of
a friendly country with which Egypt enjoys the most
cordial relations, to the furtherance of which you have
personally contributed so much. I should also like to
express our appreciation and thanks to your Deputy,
Mr. Cavaglieri. May I also acknowledge the declaration of appreciation you made just now as President
of the Council concerning the favourable reply of
my Government to the appeal that was addressed to
President Anwar El-Sadat. I should like to thank you,
as well as the members of the Council, for your
efforts and concern.

15. Despite that negative Israeli attitude, Egypt has
remained forthcoming and faithful to its commitment
to peace. That was amply manifested in its decision
to reopen the Suez Canal on 5 June this year, a decision which has been acclaimed by the international
community
as a concrete contribution
to peace in
the area and to the welfare and prosperity of all
nations. Egypt has also embarked on an ambitious
programme of reconstruction of the cities in the Suez
Canal zone, a fact which has enabled 600.000 citizens
of that area who had been forced to evacuate their
homes and abandon their property destroyed by Israeli
shelling of their cities to return and rebuild their homes.
Along with that reconstruction programme, Egypt is
also engaged in developing the whole area of the
Suez Canal by the creation of new industries, the
laying of oil pipelines and the establishment of customfree zones as new centres of transit and world trade.
All those major decisions have clearly been practical
steps designed to stimulate and enhance the process
of peace. No other proof is needed of Egypt’s commitment to peace.

13. Three months have now elapsed since I spoke
before the Council [1821st meetilzg] to present Egypt’s
position as it had been stated by President Sadat on
29 March 1975-namely, that Egypt would accept the
extension of the mandate of UNEF for a period of three
months in order to allow more time for the process of
achieving a peaceful settlement of the Middle East
problem. I told the Council that our objective then
was twofold: on the one hand, to avoid placing the
international community before a sudden crisis and, on
the other hand, to remain faithful to our duty of not
permitting an illegal and long-protracted
occupation
of our territory, an occupation which persists, against
the will of the Council and indeed of the international
community. I drew the Council’s attention to the fact
that time was running out and that Israel must assume

16. Nevertheless, and once again by contrast, Israel
has resorted to its traditional delaying tactics, sometimes issuing endless ambiguous and contradictory
statements and at other times seeking still more socalled clarifications and, finally, bidding for more time
for arriving at a decision-or perhaps they were afraid
of peace. There can be no better evidence of these
Israeli delaying tactics than the statement made by
evidence of these Israeli delaying tactics than the
statement made by Prime Minister Rabin on 10 July,
2

just a few weeks ago, during his visit to Bonn.
Commenting
on the efforts by Secretary of State
Kissinger towards the conclusion of a second disengagement agreement, Prime Minister Rabin said:

perpetuation of the occupation of Egyptian territory
in defiance of the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and accepted norms
of international law.”

“I doubt whether such an agreement will be
achieved. We are prepared to take tangible risks,
including troop withdrawal, the loss of territory, the
oil fields at Abu Rhodeis. All we get in exchange
is words written on a piece of paper.”

20. Egypt’s position with regard to the nature and
presence of UNEF in its territory was already stated
before the Council when the Force was established
in October 1973 [1750tlz meeritzg] and again when its
mandate was renewed in April this year [IR2lst
meetirzg]. This position was also explicitly stated in the
letter that I, as representative of Egypt, addressed to
the Secretary-General on 27 October 1973 [s/rl05.5].
In accepting resolution 340 (1973), which established
the Force, and in giving its consent and extending its
co-operation in this respect, Egypt has consistently
underlined the temporary nature of the Force and its
function as a first step-and I stress the words “first
step”- in the implementation
of the decisions of the
Security Council. The fact that the Force is a peacekeeping force whose presence in the Middle East
cannot become a substitute for the achievement of a
permanent peace in the area is a reality which was
confirmed by many delegations in the Council during
the debate on the renewal of the mandate of UNEF
last April. The Force cannot be turned into a shield
to prolong or protract an illegal occupation.

That the Israeli Prime Minister considers the obligation to return usurped Arab territory as giving away,
and a loss of, Israel’s own territory, and that the
return of Egyptian oil fields represents a giving up of
Israeli resources, should not go unnoticed. What
is even more astonishing in such a statement is that
the Israeli Prime Minister refers to the outcome of a
binding peace agreement as a mere scrap of paper.
He seems to have forgotten that what he considers a
scrap of paper is in reality the end result of all peaceful
efforts, and the final settlement which will embody the
international
obligations binding upon all parties.
17. The statement of the Prime Minister of Israel
I have just quoted is an indication of Israel’s twisted
and lopsided vision of peace. It is that concept which is
delaying the peace efforts.

21, Because of Israel’s misuse of the presence of the
Force, Egypt has decided once again to come before
the Council and ask it to face up to its collective
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security. In its letter addressed to the SecretaryGeneral by the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of
Foreign Affairs, Egypt invited the Security Council
to deal with the situation in conformity with its prerogatives under the Charter of the United Nations.

18. But that was not all. A few days later, on
13 July, upon his return from the Federal Republic of
Germany,
there was the following culmination
of
Mr. Rabin’s series of negative statements. He declared:
“The negotiations could continue for a long time.
It may take two days; it may take half a year”. The
message to the whole world was clear: that Israel was
in no hurry to negotiate, nor was it prepared to contribute to the search for peace in the Middle East.

22. The Security Council was clearly conscious of
its responsibility under the Charter when it. decided
to address an appeal on 21 July to President Sadat.
This appeal reflected the concern of the Council
over “the gravity of the situation in the Middle East”
by emphasizing “the importance of achieving further
progress towards a just and lasting peace and
preventing a stalemate” in the area. In response to
that appeal, and as an additional gesture of peace
and goodwill, the Government of the Arab Republic
of Egypt informed the Council on 23 July that it
“accepts the further extension of the mandate of the
Force for three more months, that is, until 24 October
1975.” Because of the extreme importance
an
relevance of Egypt’s communication,
I shall read it
out to the Council:

19. In the light of such an attitude on the part of
Israel and its leaders, it was inevitable that Egypt
would reassess its position with regard to the renewal
of the mandate of UNEF. As indicated in the letter
dated 14 July 1975 addressed to the Secretary-General
by the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign
Affairs of the Arab Republic of Egypt [sre S/Z17571
it was then our opinion that
“In these circumstances, an extension of the
mandate of the Force by the Security Council would
defeat the very purposes the Council envisaged in
establishing
the Force, since the quiet is being
transformed into stagnation and, consequently, the
perpetuation of the occupation.”
The letter also emphasized that
“WhiIe Egypt does not consent to further renew
the mandate of UNEF, she is not against the ProPer
use of the Force. Egypt objects to the use of the
Force and its presence by Israel as a means to
maintain the state of ‘no war, no peace’ and the

23. The underlying message contained in this reply
reflects Egypt’s basic position with regard to the future.
I repeat: the underlying message contained in this
reply reflects Egypt’s basic position with regard to the
3

of my delegation to those extended to you by previous
speakers since your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council.

future. Egypt is ready to give peace efforts every
possible chance, but under no circumstances will
Egypt allow the perpetuation of Israel’s occupation’
of the territories occupied since June 1967. Likewise,
it will never permit a stalemate in the efforts aiming
at achieving a just and lasting peace.

30. I shouId also like to take this opportunity to
express the appreciation of my Government to UNEF,
its Commander, Lieutenant-General
Ensio SiiIasvuo,
and its personnel, as well as to the Secretary-General,
for the praiseworthy devotion to its duties displayed
by the Force.

24. The dangerous situation which prevails in the
Middle East today as a result of Israel’s intransigence
and procrastination has been emphasized in the latest
report of the Secretary-General on UNEF. In paragraph 26 of his report, the Secretary-General observes:

31. Now that a resolution to extend again the mandate
of UNEF has been adopted by the Security Council,
may I be permitted to say that what should have been
a perfectly simple and straightforward matter has been
gratuitously
complicated and nearly thrown out of
gear and that quite unnecessary trouble has been
caused to everybody concerned.

“Pending the conclusion of an over-all settlement,
the situation in the Middle East as a whole continues to be fundamentally unstable. The possibility
of maintaining the present quiet will depend on the
further progress of the search for a just and lasting
settlement of the Middle East problem, as called for
by the Security Council.”

32. It should be recalled that already in the month of
April of this year Egypt had violated the spirit of the
Disengagement Agreement when it restricted its agreement to an extension of the mandate of UNEF by
stipulating three months only. Egypt has now done the
same again. Egypt has engaged in irresponsible
manoeuvres in respect of the UNEF mandate which
have adversely affected the credibility of the United
Nations concerning its ability to preserve tranquillity
in the area.

25. Moreover, the gravity of the Middle East situation
prompted the appeal addressed by the Council to
President Sadat. In that appeal the Council, “taking
account of the gravity of the situation in the Middle
East”, explicitly states that it “follows the situation
very closely and emphasizes the importance
of
achieving further progress towards a just and lasting
peace and preventing a stalemate in the Middle East”.
26. In the light of this dangerous situation, Egypt
firmly believes that immediate concrete steps must be
taken in the process of peace. For its part, Egypt
has undertaken several initiatives and adopted many
constructive measures all aimed at paving the way to
achieving progress towards peace and creating an
atmosphere conducive to this end, It remains now
for Israel to take similar steps in that direction, But,
given its traditional policy of defiance, of procrastination, it also remains the responsibility of the Security
Council to call Israel to order, to demand and see to
it that the Council decisions are indeed respected and
implemented.

33. Yet, in spite of these facts,
and instead of
expressing criticism or at least Concern in respect of
Egypt’s attitude and actions, the resolution just
adopted by the Security Council takes into account the
letter of 14 July from the Egyptian Foreign Minister
which was the cause of all the present trouble and,
furthermore,
expresses its “satisfaction”
with the
subsequent Egyptian reply of 23 July to the Council’s
appeal, a reply which, whilst most grudgingly agreeing
to a limited extension, adds fuel to the controversy
sparked by that letter.
34. However,
the resolution
chooses to ignore
completely
the letter of 16 July [S/11759] addressed
by me to the President of the Council in which 1
invited his attention to an important and relevant
statement made by the Prime Minister of Israel on that
day. As indicated by the President at the last meeting
of the Council [1832nd nlceti~],
that letter was one of
the documents before the Council concerning the
matter under discussion, but no mention of it is made
in the resolution. Surely this is as blatant an example
of deliberate one-sidedness as can be imagined.

27. Without a change in the lsraeli attitude the
deadlock in the peace efforts will remain, and the
threat to international peace and security will continue
unabated. Israel must seize this opportunity if it is
earnest in its desire for peace. It must express this
desire not by word but by deed. In so doing, Israel
faces a ver’y grave responsibility, for it is only through
a fundamental change in its attitude that Israel can
live in peace. It is now up to Israel to prove its desire
and its willingness to live and let live in peace, but
it remains the primary responsibility of the Security
Council under its prerogatives to call a defiant and
recalcitrant member to task,
(int~rpr~tatinn
28. The PRESIDENT
1 call on the representative of Israel.

3.5. Furthermore, whilst on the subject of imbalance,
the resolution, which has the Council express its
satisfaction with the Egyptian reply to its appeal,
does not give vent to any such feelings in respect of
the immediate and positive reply given by Israel to the
Secretary-General
early on 16 July, before the letter
of the Egyptian Minister for Foreign Affairs had
become known and without the necessity of directing

./;nrn French):

29. Mr. DORON (Israel): Mr. President, may E first
of all add the sincere congratulations and best wishes
4

any dramatic
an extension
six months,

appeals to us, stating that we favoured
of the mandate of UNEF for another

36. In view of the-obvious and crass one-sidedness
of that text, which deliberately distorts the facts and
ignores the constructive attitude of Israel, I have been
instructed to voice the strongest protest of my Government against the resolution adopted by the Council
this afternoon.
37. Let me now recall that already on 8 April 1975
the position of Israel concerning the extension of the
mandate of UNEF was stated in a letter of that date
addressed by the then representative of my country,
Mr. Tekoah, to the Secretary-General,
which reads
as follows:
“UNEF is an integral part of the Egyptian-Israeli
Disengagement
Agreement of 18 January 1974,
which assigns to the Force specific tasks of supervision
of the implementation
of the Agreement’s provisions. Consequently, UNEF must be
maintained
throughout the maintenance of the
Agreement. Renewal of the mandate for a period of
three months only is thus contrary to the spirit of
the Agreement. Extension of the mandate for such
a brief duration creates tension. Israel favours, therefore, renewal of the mandate for a period of no less
than six months. UNEF was established by the
Security Council and the extension of the UNEF
mandate is under its authority. The Security Council
cannot agree that one side should unilaterally limit
the duration of the mandate or demand the right to
dismiss the Force altogether wheneverit so desires”.
38. I should like to stress again that an international
organ, such as the Security Council, which is charged
with the maintenance of international
peace and
security, must not accept dictates made by means of
unilateral pronouncements,
the object of which is to
create tension in the area.
39. The periodic extension of the UNEF mandate
should not be left to the whims of one of the parties
to the Disengagement Agreement which, apparently,
feels free to use the occasion of the renewal of the
mandate as an opportunity for promoting extraneous
and ulterior objectives. The representative of that
party then comes before the Council and makes his
usual baseless and totally uncalled-for diatribes and
allegations against Israel, all of which I emphatically
and categorically reject.
40. I could go into those allegations at some length
and show them up in detail for what they are but,
as I do not wish to prolong this debate, I shall confine
myself to a few observations in this respect.
41. We must not forget that it is Egypt which, ever
since the establishment of Israel, has systemalically
committed breaches of international law. It proclaimed

a blockade against Israel and engaged in belligerent
and aggressive actions, contrary to its international
obligations and the Charter of the United Nations.
We must also remember that Security Council reso-1ution 338 (1973) was adopted after Israel had successfully repulsed the Egyptian aggression of October
1973. Egypt unleashed that war in open defiance of
United Nations resolutions and Egypt is now trying
to evade its obligations under the fundamental provision of resofution 338 (1973) contained in paragraph 3
of that resolution, which reads:
“Decides that, immediately
and concurrently
with the cease-fire, negotiations shall start between
the parties concerned under appropriate auspices
aimed at establishing a just and durable peace in the
Middle East.”
42, As is well known, Israel has accepted resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). Israel rejects all threats
aimed at undermining
those resolutions. Israel will
continue to observe its international obligations on a
basis of reciprocity. I would stress once more that
Israel considers the continuation
of the existence of
UNEF and of its proper employment an integral part
of the Disengagement Agreement. Israel will continue
to strive towards understanding
and peace in our
region and will in any future settlement insist on its
right to have firm foundations ensured for peacekeeping arrangements on a basis of strictest reciprocity,
43. In conclusion, let me emphasize again that the
objective that Israel has at heart is to make progress
towards the attainment of peace in the region. Nothing
should be done that interferes, or is likely to interfere,
with that goal.
44.

Mr.

HUANG
Hua (China) (trordution fionz
Middle East question is a focus of
current international issues. The essence of the Middle
East question lies in Israeli Zionist aggression and
the contention between ,the IWO super-Powers for
hegemony versus the struggle of the Arab and
Palestinian
peoples against aggression and hegemonism. In the October 1973 war the Arab and
Palestinian peoples greatly deflated the aggressive
arrogance of Israeli Zionism. The Arab and Palestinian
peoples, constantly strengthening
their unity and
carrying out intensified struggles against Zionism and
hegemonism,
have won the ever-widening support
of the third world and all the justice-upholding
countries and peoples throughout the world.

Clzinesc): The

45. At present, the Zionists have found themselves
in great isolation. The general situation is increasingly
favourable to the just cause of the Arab and Palestinian
peoples. However, the Israeli Zionists arc still
adamantly clinging to their policy of aggression and
expansion, and the two super-Powers are engaged in
ever more intense rivalry in the Middle East.

last meeting. I wish also to assure you of my delegation’s fullest co-operation and support.

46. While talking about detente every day and
propagating their devotion to a settlement of the
Middle East question, the two super-Powers in fact
have each been doing their utmost to push out and
overpower the other so as to expand their own power
and influence. To tell the plain truth, their purpose
is to try to maintain the state of “no war, no peace”
in the Middle East, because that is most advantageous
to them in their contention for spheres of influence,
oil resources and important strategic points in the
Middle East. That super-Power which styles itself the
“natural ally” of the Arab peoples is even more
insidious in its intentions. While stepping up its flirtation with Israel, it is doing its utmost to bully and
blackmail Arab countries and is even trying to disintegrate and undermine the unity of Arab countries
and by hook or by crook to bring the just struggle
of the Palestinian and other Arab peoples into the
orbit of its contention for hegemony. However, its true
behaviour of giving sham support while actually
attempting to control others has increasingly been
brought to light.

50. When the Security Council voted on the extension
of the mandate of the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (UNDOF) last May, my delegation,
in explaining the reason for its non-participation in
the voting, stated the following:
“The continued extension of the mandate of the
United Nations forces in the area since 1967 has
unfortunately enabled the Zionists not only to
consolidate their annexation and colonization of the
territories occupied and coveted by the Israeli
imperialists, but also to persist in depriving the
peoples of those territories of their legitimate rights,
While the United Nations forces continue in their
tasks of observation of the cease-fire and disengagement, no parallel action is being taken by the United
Nations to ensure that the aggressor desists from
implementing his illegal actions and policies in the
occupied territories. In our view, such United
Nations action is imperative, for the Zionist policies
in the occupied territories are as dangerous and as
disruptive as a breakdown of the cease-tire.”

47. The Chinese Government and people have always
deeply sympathized with and firmly supported the
Arab and Palestinian peoples in their just struggle to
recover their lost territories, regain their national rights
and oppose hegemonism, and we resolutely oppose
and condemn the Israeli aggressors and their supporters. We have always held that to achieve a
fundamental solution of the Middle East question,
Israel must withdraw from all the Arab territories it
has occupied, the Palestinian people must regain their
national rights, and super-Power meddling and contention in the Middle East must be stopped. In the
absence of the foregoing, there can be no settlement of
the Middle East question, still less the so-called
“establishment
of just and durable peace”. In the
Middle East, it is the 100 million and more daily
awakening Arab people who are really powerful. The
ultimate soIution of the Middle East question can be
achieved only by relying on the close unity and unremitting struggle of the Arab and Palestinian peoples
with the support of the world people. Despite the
difficulties and twists and turns they may yet encounter
on their road of advance, the courageous Palestinian
and other Arab peoples will certainly further thwart
the various schemes of Zionism and hegemonism and
win final victory in their struggle for national liberation.

[1822rzd meeting, prm.

36.1

51. My delegation’s views on this question have not
changed. On the contrary, recent actions, statements
and facts have amply confirmed the fears which my
Government has regarding the issue. Iraq has always
maintained that the presence of the United Nations
forces in the area has been abused by the aggressor,
which has taken advantage of the ceasefire arrangements and launched a feverish and large-scale programme of annexation and colonization of the occupied
territories.
52. Now one of the parties directly affected by the
Zionist policy of expansionism-namely,
Egypt-has
formally brought the situation before the Council,
requesting it to take the proper and necessary action,
The Minister of Foreign Affairs of Egypt, in his letter
of 14July [S/11757] addressed to the Secretary-General
and distributed to the members of the Council, referred
to the fact that
“Israel has profited from the relative prevailing
‘quiet’ to further its occupation rather than to assist
the efforts aiming at achieving a lasting peace.”

48. In view of the consistent stand China has held
on the question of UNEF, the Chinese delegation did
not participate in the voting on the draft resolution.

53. The Zionists’ persistence in their policies of
expansion and colonization is clear beyond a shadow
of any doubt. The problem does not concern only
Egypt and the occupation of Egyptian territory: it
affects directly and most profoundly the whole question
of Palestine and the fate of the Palestinian people.

49. Mr. AL-SHAIKHLY
(Iraq): Mr. President,
permit me to express once more my delegation’s
satisfaction at seeing you presiding over the Council’s
meetings this month. We are sure that your well
known diplomatic experience, skills and dedication
will be a great asset to our deliberations. I should
like to avail myself of this opportunity to thank you
for the kind words which you addressed to me at our

54. The spokesmen of Zionism have repeatedly
proclaimed that, even if there were political settlements and a final peace in the area, the Golan Heights,
the Gaza Strip, Sharm El-Sheikh and parts of Sinai,
6

much of the Jordan valley and, above all, Arab
Jerusalem would remain within Israel.

operation of this Force. We consider UNEF to be
essential not only on the ground in the Middle East,
but also for what it contributes to the atmosphere
in which further negotiations are proceeding.

55. According to reports in [the Christian Science
Monitor of 3 June 1974, Yediot Akhuranot of 23 July
1974 and Ma’ariv of 16 February 1973, Mr. Rabin
had spoken of a long-term need to transfer the population of the Gaza Strip and the Palestinian refugees on
the West Bank to Jordan.

62. I should like also to express the admiration of
the United States for those who serve in UNEF and
those who lead it.
63. We are pleased to note in the latest report by the
Secretary-General that the area of UNEF has remained
quiet and there have been no significant violations of
the agreements by either party. That is a tribute to the
desire of the parties concerned-Israel
and Egypt-to
persevere in their search for peace, and to those who
are responsible for the maintenance and functioning
of the Force: the Secretary-General and his staff.

56. The Zionist aggressor is now seeking a long
extension of the mandate of the Force over a period
of several years in order to enable it to consolidate its
occupation of the Arab territories and to have enough
time to create new “facts”. The Zionists continue to
establish their colonies and settlements in those lands,
and are trying to obliterate the Arab presence from
the area and change its Arab character. The most
blatant example, of course, is the Holy City and
the recently planned industrial zone between Jerusalem
and Jericho.

64. The action of the Council today enables us to
continue our efforts on the basis of Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) towards the
just and lasting peace in the Middle East to which we
are all committed.

57. We believe that the Council’s mere extension of
the mandate of UNEF without a parallel insistence that
the aggressor withdraw completely and unconditionally
from the occupied Arab lands and relinquish the
fruits of his expansionist policies and designs can
only be interpreted as a dc facto recognition of that
occupation and will lead to the solidification by the
Zionists of their occupation.

65. It remains to be noted that the finest leadership
and the most selfless willingness to serve, important
as these are, require at the same time positive attitudes
on the part of the parties in seeking peace. My Government wishes to express its appreciation to President
Sadat and Prime Minister Rabin for the affirmative
actions which have made possible the renewal of the
mandate of UNEF, a Force which serves the mutual
interests of both sides.

58, Furthermore, we believe that the Council should
take careful note of these facts and act promptly
and effectively upon the Egyptian complaint. All the
necessary measures must be taken by the Council to
prevent the Zionist aggressor from taking further
actions to consolidate his illegal possession and
occupation of the Arab territories. This state of affairs
constitutes a threat to the peace and security not
only of the area but of the world as a whole.

66. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics)(i~zte,pretatiorz.fr.onl Russian): First I should
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the responsible post of President of the
Security Council. I should like also to express my
admiration of the ability you showed in conducting the
informal consultations that preceded this meeting.
We should like to make specific mention, too, of
Mr. Cavaglieri, your Deputy, who has done very
useful work. I would also express our gratitude to
your predecessor, the representative of Iraq, Mr. AlShaikhly, who very ably directed the Council’s work
during the month of June.

59. It is because of those undisputed facts that my
country reaffirms its policy of firm and full support
for the active struggle of the Arab people, including
the Palestinian people, to recover their occupied land
and usurped homes in any manner or form. For those
reasons, my delegation chose not to participate in the
voting on and the adoption of the draft resolution.

67. I should like to congratulate our new colleague,
the representative of the United States of America,
Mr. Moynihan, on his appointment to this post and to
welcome him to the Council table.

60. Mr. MOYNIHAN
(United States of America):
I should like first, Mr. President, to express my
gratitude for your warm words of welcome to me and
to state the sense of honour which I feel to have
begun my service on the Security Council under your
presidency. I should like particularly
to express
admiration and gratitude for your extraordinary leadership and that of your Deputy, which has brought us
through delicate and important consultations to this
agreement today on the extension of the UNEF
mandate.

68. The Security Council has met today not to hold
a routine discussion of the question of the extension
of the mandate of UNEF in the Egypt-Israel sector.
The tense situation in the Middle East has been caused
primarily by Israel’s attempts, under various pretexts,
to perpetuate its occupation of the Arab territory it
seized in 1967. While asserting its own right to an
independent existence and development, Israel at the
same time stubbornly disregards the lawful rights of

61. There is no need for me to underline the importance my Government attaches to the continued
7

74. The Soviet delegation has carefully studied the
Arab States and peoples. That is the root cause of the
report
of the Secretary-General on UNEF which was
periodic crises in the Middle East. ,The explosive,
situation cannot and will’ riot be eliminated by mere - submitted to the Security Council. The Soviet delegation would like first of all to draw attention to parapalliatives. What is required-and
the Soviet Union
graph
26 of that report, which contains a warning to
has consistently advocated this-is a solution to the
the effect that
cardinal question of a just and firm peace in that area,
on the basis of the full implementation
of the well“Pending the conclusion of an over-all settleknown decisions of the Security Council and the
ment, the situation in the Middle East as a whole
General Assembly.
continues to be fundamentally
unstable.
The
possibility of maintaining the present quiet will
69. A genuine political settlement in the Middle
depend on the further progress of the search for a
East can be achieved only on the basis of the liberation
just and lasting settlement of the Middle
East
of all the Arab territories seized by Israel in 1967
problem, as called for by the Security Council.”
and of guaranteeing the lawful rights of the Arab people
of Palestine, including its right to establish its own
State, as well as of guaranteeing the right of all the
We agree with this evaluation.
States of the Middle East to an independent existence
and development.
75. It is clear, in paragraph 12 of the SecretaryGeneral’s report, that, despite the decisions of the
70. Having in mind the achievement of those objecCouncil, Israel is stubbornly continuing its discrimitives, the Soviet Union favours the early resumption
nation against the majority of the contingents of UNEF
of and serious preparation for the Geneva Peace
and limiting their freedom of movement on Egyptian
Conference on the Middle East, with the participation
territory controlled by Israel. By these arbitrary actions
on an equal footing, and together with other interested
Israel is not only demonstrating its contempt for the
parties, of the representatives of the Palestine
well-known decisions of the Security Council but also
Liberation Organization (PLO). At that forum all
defying the Council. The continuing discrimination
questions can be solved, including those concerning a by Israel against a number of UNEF contingents is
definitive and comprehensive settlement of the Middle
one further proof that the entire practical policy of
East problem as well as those concerning individual
Israel is based on the fact that it considers itself
measures within the framework of a general settleabsolute master of the Arab territories it has seized
ment to ensure a firm and just peace in the area.
and entitled to decide which contingents it wishes
to admit to foreign territory and which contingents it
71. Further delays in achieving a cardinal settlement
does not wish to admit. This is still another proof of
can only still further complicate the situation in the the stubborn refusal of the Israeli Government to heed
Middle East. In this connexion we must emphasize
the will of the peoples of the world as expressed in
that the question of the presence of UNEF in the the
decisions of the United Nations and to move
Middle East is an inseparable part of the broader
towards
a just political settlement of the Middle
question concerning the need to achieve a just and
East
problem
on the basis of the lofty principles and
firm peace in the Middle East.
objectives of the Charter of the United Nations.
72. The Soviet delegation,considers that the disengagement of troops in the Middle East, including the
Egypt-Israeli sector, can only be a step towards a
comprehensive political settlement of the Middle East
problem. It would be a dangerous mistake to attempt
to utilize such a disengagement as a pretext for freezing
the situation existing at present in the Middle East,
for continuing the occupation by Israeli troops of the
Arab territories they seized in 1967 and for ignoring the
lawful national rights of the Arab people of Palestine,
including its rigth to create its own State.

76. The Soviet delegation notes with gratification the
assurance contained in the Secretary-General’s
report
to the effect that the expenditures for maintaining
UNEF will not exceed the authorized ‘appropriations.
The Soviet delegation once again draws tha attention
of the United Nations Secretariat and the UNEF
Command to the need for strict implementation
of the
well-known decisions of the Security Council calling
for maximum economies in maintaining UNEF.
77. As regards the usual anti-Soviet inventions of the
Chinese representative, Mr. Huang Hua, we consider
it beneath our dignity to reply to them. But the
unworthy role that delegation has assumed reminds us
of the time when in the royal court there was a jester,
and this jester amused people by telling all kinds of
fairy tales. The Security Council has now acquired
such a jester in the form of the representative of
China.

73. The further prolongation of the presence of
UNEF should be utilized for active efforts aimed at
the earliest achievement of a comprehensive political
settlement in the Middle East. The Soviet delegation
would like to emphasize most resolutely that the
United Nations troops should in no case be utilized
as a means for perpetuating Israel’s occupation of
Egyptian territory. This is our position with respect to
the draft resolution which was submitted to the
Security Council for its consideration.

[The speaker continued
8

in English.]

78. And last but not least, in labelling other countries,
without any distinction as to their actual policy, as
super-Powers, China for sure achieved one result. It
has won a unique label, that of the “super-&perPower”.

of UNEF must not be understood as being a substitute
for the will to negotiate and reach a compromise
which should guide the peoples involved in the present
situation. They must continue their deliberations and
achieve an agreement that will guarantee lasting peace
in the region.

79.

Mr. de1 CASTILLO
(Costa Rica) (interpretation
Mr. President, my delegation wishes
to express to you our happiness at seeing you preside
over’the Security Council during this month of July,
and we wish to congratulate you, because your wise
guidance has allowed this important body to arrive at
a decision on the subject before it. Your wise and skilful
hand on the helm has led us to the draft resolution
which we have just adopted, thanks to your valuable
initiative of appealing to President Anwar El-Sadat of
Egypt to review his position on this particular case.
May I express our appreciation to Mr. Cavaglieri of
the delegation of Italy, who with special skill directed
the work of the Council during the first days of this
month.

frvnz Spa,zish):

84. Three objective elements led my delegation to
support the resolution the Council has just adopted.
The first was that the precarious situation in the
Middle East called for calm analysis and renewed
effort on the part of the Council, since obviously the
conflict goes beyond the immediate interests of the
parties concerned and, like a dangerous shadow,
looms over the peace of the entire world. Furthermore, we consider that the presence of the Force has
manifestly contributed to the maintenance of the
atmosphere of calm necessary for negotiations to
continue-negotiations
that will, we trust,, lead to a
satisfactory and lasting solution. The third element I
have mentioned is the fact that we have found that
although the road travelled has been arduous and slow
and much remains to be done, both the Government
of Egypt and the Government of Israel have shown
their willingness to compromise and to make an effort
even to the point of sacrifice. We believe they should
both be supported by every kind of guarantee so that
their efforts will ultimately bear fruit in the form of a
permanent peace.

80. My delegation would like to echo the congratulations addressed to the representative of Iraq, Mr. AlShaikhly, who with outstanding skill presided over
our meetings during the month of June, That was a
period when the Council, under his wise leadership,
had to deal with matters of singular importance in
relation to the maintenance of international peace.
81. I should also like to join other members of the
Council in offering a formal welcome to Mr. Moynihan,
representative of the United States, whom we wish
much success. We know his high intellectual ability
and his background, as well as the positive activities
he carried out during the consultations that took place
prior to this meeting.

85. Despite the fact that UNEF is the indispensable
basis of a climate conducive to agreement, it is obvious
that only the will of Egypt and Israel can dictate an
active and permanent solution; we therefore address to
them an appeal that they carefully consider paragraph 1 of the draft resolution we have just adopted,
which refers to Council resolution 338 (1973), because
that paragraph, apart from giving leval and moral
support to the extension of the mandate of the Force,
lays down the framework within which this effort to
achieve peace can be successful. I trust that the
Governments of Israel and Egypt will accept our
encouragement and also heed our fervent appeal to
bring their talks to a successful conclusion as soon as
possible. My delegation awaits that day with optimism.

82. The Council has now pronounced itself upon the
extension of the mandate of UNEF for an additional
three months. This clearly demonstrates that the
assiduous and efficient activities of the guardians of
peace working under the banner of the United Nations
have been a determining factor in maintaining harmony
in the area OF dispute and conflict-so
much so that
the presence of the Force must be considered one of
the delermining
elements in the achievement of a
lasting and durable peace in the Middle East. Equally
important is the will of the parties and the objective
effort to be expended by the international community,
since we are carefully and concernedly watching
developments in that important area of he world. This
is a situation which, for reasons I need not elaborate now, tends to perpetuate itself and thus seriously
jeopardizes the possibility of a peaceful and stable
settlement.

86. My delegation wishes to express to the SecretaryGeneral our admiration and appreciation, for we
understand full well that the efforts he has made have
also to a large extent been a determining factor in
creating and maintaining the atmosphere of harmony
called for by the delicate negotiations taking place.
All this becomes evident in the very complete report
he has submitted to the Council, which, apart from
indicating and defining the exact situation in the region,
makes a very wise and realistic appeal that cannot
fall on deaf ears since it is an appeal to that concern
for peace that is the highest duty of this body.

83. However, my delegation considers it timely to
point out that we believe that the constant renewal of
the mandate cannot but be dangerous, because its
systematic extension could become a routine Practice,
which would be most inadvisable since the presence

87. In conclusion, my delegation wishes to express
its appreciation to Lieutenant-General Ensio Siilasvuo,
Commander of UNEF, and the contingents of the
9

ment that they have performed their difficult and
duties with exemplary
devotion and
efficiency.

different countries composing the Force, for without
their efficiency and dedication we could not have
achieved the success we have achieved thus far along
the road to peace.

important

88. Mr. SAITO (Japan): Mr. President, I should like
to begin by extending my warm congratulations to You
upon your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council. We look forward with much satisfaction to
working under your wise guidance during the
remainder of July, and we pledge to YOU our full
support and co-operation. I wish also to express the
appreciation of my delegation for the effective leadership given us by Mr. Cavaglieri during our informal
consultations.

95. Mr. SUNDBERG
(Sweden): First of all,
Mr. President, I should like to congratulate you on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council and
on the outstanding skill and great patience and energy
with which you have guided us to the important
decision that we have just taken. In our congratulations I should like also to include Mr. Cavaglieri,
who presided over the initial phase of the consultations
with great diplomatic skill and determination,
Our
thanks are also due to Mr. Al-Shaikhly
of Iraq for
the excellent manner in which he presided over the
Council during our busy month of June.

89, My delegation wishes also to express its great
appreciation for the skill and able leadership displayed
by our colleague Mr. Al-Shaikhly of Iraq during his
presidency last month.

96. Mr. President, my delegation would like to join
you in very warmly welcoming Mr. Moynihan of the
United States to the Council.
97. Three months ago, when the Security council
adopted resolution 368 (1975) [182/st rrwrting],
the
Swedish delegation voiced the hope that at the end of
that three-month period, which has now just elapsed,
it would be possible to register more substantial
progress than had been achieved in the three earlier
periods of six months. During these last three months
there has been a resumption of talks. The process is
naturally an arduous one. No further agreement has
yet been reached. It seems, however, in view of
present information, that guarded optimism may be
justified.

90. I wish to take this opportunity also to extend a
warm welcome to our new colleague, Mr. Moynihan
of the United States.
91. The Council has just adopted, almost at the
eleventh hour, a draft resolution extending the mandate
of UNEF. My delegation welcomes the Council’s
decision because we agree with the comment of the
Secretary-General-as
expressed in paragraph 27 of
his report of 16 July that the continued presence of
UNEF is essential not only to maintain quiet in the
Egyptian-Israeli
sector but also to provide an
atmosphere conducive to further efforts towards the
achievement of a just and lasting peace in the Middle
East and to assist, if required, in such further efforts.

98. In whatever way one might regard the progress
of the last three months, the presence of the Force
in the area has not been in vain. As can be seen in
the Secretary-General’s latest report, which as always
gives us an excellent background for our work, the
situation in the UNEF area of operation has, in spite
of underlying tensions, remained quiet, a fact for which
the Force should be given credit in no small measure.
In this context it gives me great pleasure to convey
my Government’s deep appreciation to the Secretary
General, to his staff and to the Force Commander
for their efforts in the cause of peace.

92. Indeed, since the Council’s last extensive debate
on this important issue, in February, we can congratulate ourselves on events, such as the reopening
of the Suez Canal, which were demonstrations of
goodwill by the parties concerned and have greatly
contributed to the maintenance of calm in the area.
93. My delegation is, however, compelled to bring
to the Council’s attention its concern over the fact that
for more than a year there has been little meaningful
progress towards a just and lasting peace in the area.
The extension of the mandate of UNEF is only one
of the components required for achieving the overall settlement in the Middle East for which the Council
has been working. A continuous effort is still needed
to follow up our action of today and achieve the results
we all hope for.

99. My delegation is in complete agreement with the
Secretary-General’s view that the continued presence
of UNEF is essential not only to maintain quiet in the
Egypt-Israel sector but also to provide an atmosphere
conducive to further efforts towards the achievement
of a just and lasting peace in the Middle East and to
assist, if required, in such further efforts, In this
context we again emphasize how vitally important it
is, in the interest of efficiency as well as for reasons
of Principle, that the Force should be able to function
as one integrated unit within the total area of operation,

94. In conclusion, my delegation wishes to express
its appreciation to the Secretary-General,
to the
Commander of the Force, Lieutenant-General
Ensio
Siilasvuo, and to all UNEF personnel for the efforts
they have made to fulfil the responsibility
which
rests upon them. The members of the Force can
take satisfaction from the Secretary-General’s state-

100. It was with appreciation that my delegation
took note of the reply of the Egyptian Government to
the appeal that the President, on behalf of the Council,
10

addressed to the President of Egypt. Without the
consent of the parties concerned, the peace-keeping
force in the Sinai could not have been maintained.

create a propitious atmosphere for negotiations which
would be serious and fruitful. It would be illusory to
seek peace in that region if this condition, which we
consider to be one of priority, is not given the thorough
and comprehensive attention it deserves by the
Israeli Government. We regard as inalienable and
imprescriptible the rights of the Palestinian people
recognized by the overwhelming majority of the
Peoples of the world, and those rights must henceforth be confirmed in practice in the light of the
relevant proposals made by the Chairman of the PLO
during the twenty-ninth session of the General
Assembly.

101. My delegation has voted in favour of the resolution just adopted. We did so in the firm belief that
the new three-month extension of the mandate of
UNEF would facilitate the ongoing negotiations. This
prolongation must, however,be fully utilized by the
parties. It must not be considered a matter of routine.
The presence of UNEF must not be allowed to have the
effect of causing the quiet now prevailing in the area
to degenerate into stagnation. The chief justification
for the continued presence of UNEF is, in fact, to serve
as a means of helping further negotiations by providing time and ensuring calm in the area. The negotiations must now be pressed with resumed energy
and resolution.

108. Never have the forces favourable to a negotiated
solution of the Arab-Israeli conflict appeared as clearly
and strongly as they do at present. We must grasp
this moment, for such an opportunity may not present
itself again. All States concerned must seize this
occasion to limit their divergencies and even solve
their problems once and for all through negotiations
carried out in an atmosphere of good faith and mutual
concessions. This is the earnest hope of my delegation-a hope which led us to vote in favour of the
draft resolution.

102. Mr. OYONO (United Republic of Cameroon)
(inferpretrrtion from French): First of all, Mr. President, I should like to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council.
My delegation knows and acknowledges your outstanding qualities. We are sure that you will lead our
discussions successfully and we wish to assure you
of our support and co-operation.

109. In conclusion, I should like once again to express
the sincere appreciation of my delegation to the
Secretary-General for his unflagging contribution to the
search for a just and lasting peace in the Middle East
and for his outstanding report on the activities of
UNEF which, for all of us, has served as a source
of invaluable inspiration in our recent consultations.

103. I should like also to congratulate your eminent
predecessor, the representative
of Iraq, Mr. AlShaikhly, on the authority, tact and competence with
which he presided over the work of the Council during
the month of June.
104. I should also like to take this opportunity to
offer a warm and cordial welcome to our new colleague, Mr. Moynihan,
the representative of the
United States.

110. Mr. JACKSON (Guyana): Mr. President, it is
with a mixture of pleasure and regret that I address
my opening remarks to you: pleasure at seeing you
occupying the chair, and regret that, because of your
impending departure for home, this in all likelihood
is the last occasion that the members of the Council
will be able to benefit from the exercise of your
many skills. I might say that those skills have been
particularly evident in recent days, as you have worked
assiduously and with dedication to effect a satisfactory
outcome to our several deliberations concerning
aspects of the Middle East situation. You can take
great satisfaction at this outstanding contribution
which crowns your period of service at the United
Nations.

105. In giving an affirmative reply to the appeal that
the Security Council addressed to him on 21 July and
accepting a new extension of the mandate of UNEF,
the President of the Arab Republic of Egypt, together
with the Egyptian people, expects in return for this
new act of good will that the Council will draw up a
series of urgent and constructive measures likely to
give decisive impetus to the over-all negotiations
called for in resolution 338 (1973) and will, to begin
with, make UNEF play its true role of peace-maker
as laid down in resolution 340 (1973).

111. My delegation would also like to recall the
sterling services rendered to the work of the Council
during the month of June by your predecessor, Mr. AlShaikhly of Iraq. Our deepest gratitude goes to him
for the able, effective and constructive manner in
which he presided over and guided our deliberations.

106. With such a procedure in mind, my delegation
continues to believe that resolution 242 (1967) contains
the reasonable elements that are likely to hasten the
achievement of a just and stable peace, which is
the sole way of ensuring the territorial inviolability and
independence of all States of the Middle East.

112. May I also take this opportunity to welcome
formally to the Council, and to the United Nations, the
new representative of the United States of America,
Mr. Daniel Patrick Moynihan. His achievements are a
matter of public record. Mr. Moynihan comes to US at

107. The inadmissibility
of acquiring territory by war
in this context of necessity implies that Israel must
without delay withdraw from the Arab territories it
has occupied for eight years. This in’ itself would
11

a time when the global society, of which the Organization is an integral part, is engaged in the critical task
of establishing ordered and equitable relations between
its constituent parts. We look forward to a fruitful
co-operative association with him, and to his constructive contributions to those efforts.

hoped for, and it is in this context that my delegation
places the letter of 14 July from the Deputy Prime
Minister and Foreign Minister of Egypt addressed to
the Secretary-General.
118. The draft resolution which has just been adopted
provides yet another opportunity for the Council and
the international
community to work towards the
objective of peace in the Middle East. My delegation,
along with the other non-aligned members of the
Council, was actively associated in the processes of
consultation which led to its production. The resolution
is simple in its language and self-explanatory in its
terms. In large measure, it meets the requirements of
the situation with which we are faced. My delegation
is, however, conscious of the resolution’s limitations;
for given the prolonged occupation of Egyptian territory by Israel, and having regard to the purposes
for which UNEF was established, additional positive
action might have been appropriate.

113. It is also with a mixture of pleasure and regret
that my delegation approaches the substance of the
matter which brought us here today. For we are
eminently pleased that the Security Council, by taking
the timely initiative in issuing an appeal to the President
of Egypt, has responded in a manner befitting the
gravity of the situation, By so doing, the Council
has reasserted its active role in the search for a solution to the problems of the Middle East.
114. We applaud the many actions taken by the
Government of Egypt, such as the reopening of the
Suez Canal, actions which demonstrate a sincere desire
to create conditions which would facilitate
the
processes leading to peace. In particular, we highly
appreciate the positive response which President Sadat
gave to the appeal you made on 21 July on behalf of
the members of the CounciI. That a further opportunity
has thus been given to explore the capabilities of the
negotiating process to establish a just and lasting peace
in the Middle East owes much to President Sadat’s
sagacity, patience and commitment to peace, and to the
implacable faith of the Egyplian people in the justice
of their cause.

119. Be that as it may, the resolution, inter nlin,
extends the mandate of UNEF for a further period of
three months. But the Council and the international
community must recognize the special circumstances
surrounding the extension, which indicate that the
renewal of the mandate is not a matter of automatic
acquiescence. It is thus my delegation’s hope that the
opportunity for constructive action and statesmanlike
conduct which this further period provides will not
be squandered.

115. But patience cannot be invested with the quality
of timelessness. There is thus an imperative need for
a major impetus to be given to the negotiating process.
Above all, there is a clear requirement for resolute
efforts-and,
indeed, courageous decisions-which
will serve to induce those who have made an investment in procrastination and in maintaining the statlfs
qr/o to shed the mantle
of intransigence
and
inflexibility.

120. The Government of Guyana has stated on
many occasions-and it can bear repeating here-that
the critical elements for durable peace in the Middle
East are: the complete and urgent withdrawal of Israel
from al1 Arab territories occupied since the June I967
war; the establishment of a national home for the
dispossessed Palestinian people and full recognition of
their legitimate rights; and the right of all States in the
area to exist within secure and recognized boundaries.

116. Speaking in the Council on 17 April 1975, on the
last occasion when the mandate of UNEF was
extended, I said:

121. The mere repetition of those elements, however,
has not led and will not lead to their implementation.
What is called for is a commitment by Israel to whal
is legally and morally expected of it, a commitment
that must be matched by urgent action.

“When the Force was established, it was thought
of as being an instrument which would contribute
to the efforts to achieve a just and lasting peace in
the Middle East. It was never contemplated, however, that the Force should assume a quasi-permanent character so that its presence could be used
as an excuse to perpetuate a no-peace, no-war situation which can only be to the advantage of the
bcCupying Power.”
WJid.,

pwn.

122. I wish to take this opportunity to express my
delegation’s thanks and gratitude to the SecretaryGeneral and his staff for their tireless and devoted
efforts in the cause of peace in the Middle East. The
Secretary-General’s
report is a most valuable document and attests to the care and dedication which
he and his officers give to this question. I do not
intend to comment extensively on the report, but I
should like to make one observation.

93.1

117. While we acknowledge that many genuine efforts
have been made since April to use the period constructively, it is nevertheless the sad fact that such
efforts have not led to the results some of us had

123. In paragraph 24 of the report the SecretaryGeneral states that “high-level meetings among those
concerned, including the Co-Chairmen of the Geneva
Peace Conference on the Middle East, were held
12

recently. I am not in a position, at this stage, to inform
the Security Council of the results of these efforts”.
That the Secretary-General is unable so to inform the
Security Council is, in my delegation’s view, unfortunate, more particularly since the Geneva Conference
is held under the auspices of the United Nations and
the Secretary-General is specifically requested to keep
the Council informed of developments in relation to it.
Resolution 344 (1973) is relevant in this regard. It is
my delegation’s hope, therefore, that appropriate
modalities can be found to remove that disability
from the Secretary-General,
and indeed from the
Council itself.
124. Finally, I wish to pay a tribute to the men who
comprise the Force, for, by their actions, they continue
to serve as messengers of peace.
125. Mr. KANE

(Mauritania)
(irzterpr’etntion
jbm
I should like to express my
delegation’s satisfaction at seeing you presiding over
the Security Council this month. That satisfaction is
all the more justified because you have assumed these
lofty responsibilities at a time when there are developments in the Middle East seriously threatening international peace and security. Once again your great
qualities as a statesman and a diplomat, as well as
the wisdom you have always demonstrated, have
made it possible to overcome the difficulties facing
the Council.

128. I cannot fail to take this opportunity to express
to the Egyptian delegation my delegation’s thanks and
congratulations for its positive contribution
to the
Security Council’s work, a contribution
which is a
credit to the people and Government of Egypt. In
agreeing to renew the mandate of UNEF, the Government of the Arab Republic of Egypt has given us a
lesson in political courage, moderation and wisdom
and, at the same time, has once again confronted the
Council with its responsibilities.
129. The Security Council cannot tolerate the renewal
of the mandate of UNEF being used as an occasion
for Israel to intensify its occupation rather than
assisting in the efforts to achieve a just and lasting
peace. It is the Security Council’s duty to see that its
resolutions are respected and, therefore, to ensure that
Israel set in motion again the process designed to
achieve a solution to the Middle East crisis.

French): Mr. President,

130. Mr. RICHARD (United Kingdom): May I first
congratulate you personally, Sir, on your assumption
of the office of President of the Security Council. I
do not know whether the presidency of the Security
Council and of the European Economic Community
has ever before been held by one country. I suspect
not, and I congratulate you on this double achievement.
May I say also that the skilful way in which you and
your Deputy, Mr. Cavaglieri,
have handled our
informal consultations during this debate and during
the meeting held on 21 July [i&?.?/1d meeting] demonstrates how fortunate we are that the presidency
is in such experienced hands. 1 should like also to
congratulate your predecessor, Mr. Al-Shaikhly
of
Iraq, on the way in which he dealt with discussions
during the month of June. Some of them were, as we
remember, indeed difficult ones, and he dealt with them
skilfully and expeditiously.

126. We have met here once again to consider a
problem whose gravity is obvious to everyone and
whose repercussions could at any moment have incalculable consequences for the international balance.
In its resolution 340 (1973), the Security Council, by
deciding to set up under its authority a United Nations
emergency force, whose initial mandate was for six
months, had the aim of using that period to reach a
just and lasting settlement of the conflict in the Middle
East. Since that date two years have elapsed, during
which the Force’s mandate has been renewed more
than five times. It should be remembered that the
mandate given the Force at that time was to maintain
quiet and contribute if possible to the efforts to
establish ajust and lasting peace in the region. Hence,
because of the very role and objectives given the
Force, which were to avoid at any cost stagnation
and the perpetuation of Israel’s occupation of Egyptian
territory, the Force should not and could not constitute.
a zone of permanent demarcation between Israel and
J%mt.

13I. My delegation was pleased to vote in favour of
the draft resolution that the Council has just adopted
to renew the mandate of UNEF for a further three
months. The continued presence of that Force is, in
our view, essential at this time. Indeed, the SecretaryGenreal puts it well in his report when he says that
the Force’s continued presence is essential not only
to maintain quiet but also to provide an atmosphere
conducive to further progress.
132. We have made clear at previous meetings of the
Council that have been held tu extend the mandate
our general view on the purposes of the Force. Lest
there should be any misunderstanding,
however, may
1 reiterate that we do not consider that the cdntinued
presence of UNEF should become a substitute for a
proper settlement in the Middle East, nor should its
presence be allowed to become a disincentive
to
negotiations. Quite the contrary. In our view, its
purpose is to provide an opportunity,
a pause within
which effective discussions can be held. But the
Force nevertheless remains essential to provide the
confidence necessary if negotiations are to go forward.

127. 3ut, despite the praiseworthy efforts made by
the people and Government of Egypt to defuse the
situation and enable the efforts undertaken in the region
to achieve a solution to the conflict, Israel has
continued to display intransigence and to use delaying
tactics. It is therefore easy to understand the legitimate
reasons behind the Egyptian Government’s refusal to
renew the Force’s mandate for a further period.
13

133. There should therefore be no illusion as to what
our attitude is on this point. UNEF is where it is
to promote a settlement, not to impede one. It is in
this context, therefore, that my Government
has
welcomed the indications from both the IsraeIi and the
Egyptian Governments that they were prepared to
consent to the renewal of the mandate.

Russian): Mr. President, allow me, on behalf of my
delegation, to congratulate you, the representative of
Italy, on assuming the high post of President of the
Security Council. I should also like to congratulate
Mr. Cavaglieri, who carried out the functions of
President of the Council during a number of meetings.
Furthermore, we should like to express our gratitude
and warm feelings to the representative of Iraq,
Mr. Al-Shaikhly, who presided over the Council in
June.

134. Moreover, the presence of the Force has in our
view never been more necessary than it is at the present
time when negotiations are reaching a very important
stage. One has only to imagine how much more
difficult the situation in the area would now be without
UNEF there to appreciate yet again the importance
of this United Nations venture.

139. In connexion with the decision taken today by
the Security Council calling for a renewal of the
mandate of UNEF for another three-month period-for
which our delegation and others voted-we should like
to state the following. First of all, we must say that
this resolution quite rightly notes that a tense situation
still prevails in the Middle East and that there is no
progress towards a just and lasting peace. At the
same time, we view the extension of the mandate of
UNEF as a step towards creating an atmosphere in
which it will be possible to achieve a political settlement in the Middle East and to ensure a just and lasting
peace.

13.5. It is therefore a source of great satisfaction to
us that despite some difficulties it has proved possible
to renew the mandate for this further three months.
We appreciate this demonstration
by both the parties
of their determination to press on with the discussions.
136. The events of the last few days have underlined
once again the fragility and the precariousness of the
present situation in the Middle East. As I have already
pointed out in previous meetings of the Council, this
situation will inevitably continue so long as a just and
lasting settlement in the Middle East has not been
reached. My Government has been following with keen
interest the negotiations which have been going on
over the past few months and which are still continuing
with the assistance of the United States Secretary
of State, Mr. Kissinger, for a further interim agreement between Egypt and Israel. While we are very
fully conscious of the difficulties involved, we hope
and indeed urge that these negotiations should now be
pressed on with the greatest energy and speed. My
Government therefore calls upon the parties, and
indeed all who are concerned, to redouble their efforts
to ensure that those negotiations are brought to an
early and successful conclusion. A successful outcome
to those negotiations not only would be of great value
in itself but would represent a very valuable step
on the road to the just and lasting settlement in the
Middle East as a whole which we all seek, a settlement
which would be based upon the full implementation
of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973).

140. The Byelorussian delegation has already stated,
and we wish again to emphasize, that the United
Nations troops should not be used as a pretext for
perpetuating Israel’s occupation of Arab territories
or for freezing the existing situation there. The
extension of the presence of UNEF should not and
cannot be substituted for a solution to the Middle
East problem.
141. To achieve ajust and lasting peace in the Middle
East, the well-known decisions of the Security Council
and the General Assembly on the Middle East must be
implemented.
A solution to this acute international
problem is possible only through prompt withdrawal
of Israeli troops from all Arab territories occupied
since 1967 and the guaranteeing of the lawful rights of
the Arab people of Palestine, including its right to set
up its own State, and also through reliable guarantees
of the existence of all States and peoples of this
area.
142. A solution to the entire problem of a just and
lasting peace in the Middle East, as well as the attainment of results within the framework of a general
settlement, should be found by means of the Geneva
Peace Conference on the Middle East, which has been
especially convened for this. Our delegation favours
the resumption of the work of that Conference with the
participation of the PLO on an equal footing with othel
participants. There must be serious efforts undertaken
towards an early resumption of the work of the
Conference.

137. Finally, I should like once again to congratulate
the Secretary-General, General Siilasvuo and all the
members of UNEF for the way in which they have
continued to conduct themselves in carrying out their
tasks in sometimes difficult circumstances during the
last three months. That the Secretary-General
can
report that the situation in the area has remained
quiet during the last three months in perhaps a tribute
to their work. Their contribution to the progress of the
negotiations is something in which we in the Council
should all take pride.

143. The delegation of the Byelorussian SSR shares
the view expressed concerning the fact that the renewal
of the mandate of UNEF for another three-month
period, in other words, until 24 October, provides Yet

138. Mr. TCHERNOUCHTCHENKO
(Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist
Republic)
(itzfc~rpwtarim
fkm
14

another .opportunity
to those who are responsible
for delaying a settlement of the Middle East problem to
change their position SO that a solution and a political
settlement of the problem will become possible. As
we see it, this is the purport of the decision adopted
today by the Council.
144, Furthermore, we must point out that Israel is
fully and entirely responsible for the fact that agreement on a general political
settlement has not yet
been reached.
145. With regard to the report of the SecretaryGenreal, and referring more directly to UNEF operations, our delegation would like to draw attention to
the unjustifiable delay in settling the problem of the
freedom of movement of the United Nations troops in
the Egypt-Israel sector which is mentioned in paragraph 12 of the report. Israel continues to apply
discrimination
against certain contingents of UNEF
and to limit their freedom of movement in the Arab
territories occupied by Israeli troops. By these actions
the well-known fundamental decisions of the Security
Council are being undermined
and also Israel is
seriously jeopardizing
the effectiveness of UNEF
operations. An end should be put to such actions.

new representative of that country to the Council.
We are delighted to enter into a working relationship
with Mr. Moynihan, whose lofty principles and whose
competence we have already had reason to appreciate.
149. Two years practically to the day have passed
since Mr. El-Zayyat, then Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Egypt [1717th mrcting], brought to a close
a very important substantive debate that the Council,
in accordance with an initiative of Egypt, had devoted
to the question of the Middle East. In his statement
he asked us what message we wanted him to take
back to his people. Would the Council give his people
reason to trust a world founded on order, sovereignty
and the territorial integrity of the Members of the
Organization? Or would we offer it the proof of a world
in which only force and the result of its use were
recognized? We know what happened to that appeal.
We know too where Egypt turned after having in vain
tried again within the United Nations to find a peacefu1
settlement to the problem based on the implementation
of resolution 242 (1967).
150. Two years have elapsed and many events have
taken place. Each in turn has achieved a clearer view
of the threats flowing from continuation of the status
quo. Very laudable efforts have been undertaken on
all sides, both separately and jointly, in order to tackle
the problem and maintain a movement towards the
peace to which the peoples and States of the region
aspire and which the international community as a
whole requires of us. We are, however, constrained to
recognize that the gap between the accepted principles
of a settlement as defined by the Council and the
implementation of those principles has not noticeably
diminished. Why then should we be surprised if
impatience is growing. How are we do not to note that
recourse to the Security Council in order to avoid
stagnation still is the most reasonable way for that
impatience to translate itself into action? How can we
not admit, as the Minister of Foreign Affairs of France
recently declared, that time is not the alIy of peace?

146, Mr. LECOMPT
(France) (intopctcrtiou from
I;iclnch): Mr. President, first of all may I offer you the
congratulations of my delegation on your assumption
of your high post. The representative of France is
second to none in rejoicing at seeing the presidency
of the Security Council entrusted to a representative
of Italy, a country to which we are linked by innumerable ties that date far back in history and that
persist and are being multiplied to this day, Our two
nations, Latin and Mediterranean, act and react as one
in the great currents now flowing through the world.
Imbued with the same spirit, both spontaneously and
at the will of our leaders, we tackle the problems of
the moment and propose solutions that are based on
respect and understanding for the concerns of others.
That you, Sir, are being entrusted with the presidency
of the Council at a moment when Italy is assuming
the presidency of the European Economic Community,
of which our two countries are founding members,
only increases our certainty that the Council, in dealing
with a matter of particular delicacy, will be guided
competently and authoritatively.
We pay a tribute to
your alternate, Mr. Cavaglieri, who in your absence
presided over difficult consultations with remarkable
skill. My delegation wishes to express its appreciation
and admiration to him.

1.51. We cannot but regret the fact that the provisions
of Security Council resolution 338 (1973) have not thus
far been fully implemented. We fervently hope that
the negotiations for a peaceful settlement, regardless
of the procedure or the stages involved, will progress
as rapidly as possible. That is why we understand
that Egypt rightly is disturbed over the delays that
could interfere with negotiations and therefore delay
even longer the evacuation of the territories occupied
by Israel.

147. Our appreciation is also addressed to the rep=
sentative of Iraq, who had to tackle one of the hardest
months the Council has faced since the beginning of
the year. He presided over our work with great distinction, and I wish to express to him our appreciation for

152. But if the Security Council is to take into account
the legitimate desire of the Egyptians to see negotiations progress rapidly, it cannot overlook the efforts
that are being made, since they. to all intents and
purposes, are directed towards those goals set forth
in the provisions of resolution 338 (1973), since theil
aim is primarily to achieve a new withdrawal in
Sinai. A result, albeit partial, would undoubtedly

this.

148. I wish to address to the United States delegation
a request that they transmit our best wishes to the
15

excellent working relations with YOU the call of duty
requires you to leave New York. YOU have not only
been an able and valued colleague; above all, you have
been an honoured friend.

create an atmosphere conducive to a continuation of
the negotiations that could lead to the over-all solution
we all desire, a solution that, we repeat, must rest not
on the evacuation of the occupied territories alone but
on acknowledgement
of the right of the Palestinian
people to a homeland and on recognition of the right
of all the States of the region to live in peace within
recognized, secure and guaranteed frontiers.

156. I also wish to extend to Mr. Al-Shaikhly of Iraq
the appreciation of my delegation for his successful
discharge of his duties during the very hectic month
of June.

153. It is on the basis of such an analysis that, while
taking note of the position of the Israeli Government
on the question the Council is now discussing, we
supported the appeal made by the President of the
Security Council to the President of Egypt. The latter,
aware of the concern expressed by the Council, and
giving new evidence of that willingness to seek peace,
which is the mainspring of his actions, was wise
enough to give a positive reply, thus allowing us to
renew the mandate of the Force.

157. Speaking also for the first time since ollr
colleague, the representative of the United States,
Mr. Moynihan, has joined us in the Council, I should
like to welcome him warmly to our midst and to
express my confidence that we shall maintain a warm
and friendly working relationship.
158. The Council has taken a decision to extend for
the fourth time the mandate of UNEF. While my
delegation deems it necessary, under the circumstances, to support this further extension, it has cast
its favourable vote with the greatest concern over the
possible utilization of the presence of UNEF in the
Egyptian territory to maintain the SIN~IIS t/(10.

154. In approving this new renewal, my country does
not intend to compromise the efforts to establish a just
and lasting peace in the Middle East. It is obvious
t.hat we do not want to maintain the S~U~USql/o. On
the contrary, in the present circumstances we want to
avoid the risk that the current momentum for a peace
meeting will encounter obstacles with unforeseeable
results. We must not allow the time thus gained to
be wasted; otherwise, the yet fragile hope we still
entertain
will yield to’ bitter disillusionment,
to
intransigence and even to the threat of a renewal of
hostilities. The encouraging indications we have noted
in the last few days, which explain our decision,
cannot erase from our minds the fact that, as the
French Minister of Foreign Affairs stated to the
National Assembly on 27 June 197.5, the situation in
the Middle East is and will remain explosive until
the substance of the problem is tackled.

159. This will be the fourth extension of the mandate
of UNEF. Egypt, whose territory is under occupation
and, it must be emphasized, on whose territory UNEF
is deployed, has been agreeing to that extension,
sharing the hope of the Council that the Force would
be used to accelerate the march towards a just and
lasting peace. Certainly neither Egypt nor the Council
could conceivably have accepted the utilization of the
Force to serve the expansionist designs of Israel. But
there is no doubt that Israel has not approached the
role of UNEF in a similar vein, for since the establishment of UNEF, Israel has shown no serious intention
of implementing the decisions of the Security Council,

155. Mr. SALIM (United Republic of Tanzania):
Mr. President, since we are speaking for the first
time since you assumed the presidency of the Council,
my delegation wishes to take this opportunity to
compliment
you on the important role you have
assumed in the Council and to pay a tribute to you
for the skilI and efficiency you have displayed in guiding
the deliberations of this highly regarded body. We
have noted with great satisfaction your conscientiousness and diligence, and in spite of the difficult and
sensitive nature of your responsibilities which do not
always allow one to maintain one’s good humour,
you have always maintained your calm. We have
always been touched by your friendliness and warmth.
Your outstanding talents as a diplomat have been
eloquently displayed in the efficient and effective way
you have conducted the negotiations leading to the
Council’s agreement on the resolution just adopted.
I should also like to pay a tribute to your effective
deputy for the significant role he played in undertaking
the important consultations during your absence. If
you will allow me to be rather personal, Sir, I should
like to say how sorry I am that after we have established

160. Although the word “stagnation”
has OCCRsionally been used, either privately or in the Council,
to characterize the situation in the area, anybody
who follows the Middle East problem, even peripherally, cannot escape seeing the understatement
that word carries. In its true meaning, “stagnation”
would mean not only lack of progress but also absence
of negative activity. It would mean tension which does
not mount. Yet this is far from being the case. Nobody
can be expected to watch with equanimity his territories being occupied by a foreign country and his
rights viciously denied. The longer such inequities
continue to be perpetrated the more, naturally, bitterness is heightened. There cannot but exist mounling
tension; and provocative utterances hardly help to
cool down the inflicted emotions of the aggrieved
party.
161. I should like to add my voice to those of our
colleagues who have expresser1 deell appreciation fa
and satisfaction with the positive response to the
Council’s appeal given by the Government of Egypt.
We pay tribute to President Anwar El-Sadat and the
16

b

Government of the Arab Republic of Egypt for their
unfailing faith in the efforts of the Security Council
and for the Egyptian commitment to peace and justice,
as once more demonstrated
by this favourable
response to the Council’s appeal. At the same time,
I should like to make it known that we fully share the
concern expressed by the Egyptian Government ovel
the role improperly attached to the Force by Israel.

circumstances in which the Council found itself this
time in renewing the mandate of UNEF. Therefore I
shall limit my remarks to summarizing
how the Italian
delegation has envisaged the situation with which the
Council has had to deal.
168. In brief, 1 would say that the letter addressed by
the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign
Affairs of Egypt to the Secretary-General
has put the
question of the renewal of the mandate of UNEF in
a different form with respect to the past, in view of
the fact that the presence of the Force, under its
terms of reference in accordance with the Charter,
requires the continuing consent of the parties. This
situation has placed on the Council the responsibility
of finding the most appropriate
way of reaching a
solution.

162. We understand Egypt’s justifiable indignation at
such an abuse of the Force. It must be unequivocally
stated that UNEF is not a substitute for peace. UNEF
is not a camouflage for maintaining an illusory calm
to the satisfaction of the occupying force. The role of
UNEF should be, and can only be, an instrument to
create conditions conducive to the acceleration of the
march towards peace and justice which ipso f~~:fo
presupposes the total withdrawal of Israeli forces from
Egyptian territory to the position as it exist.ed prior to
the June 1967 war,

169. In so doing, the Council has been working in
close contact with the Secretary-General,
who is
himself particularly involved because of the responsibilities entrusted to him in relation to UNEF. Thanks
also to his advice-for
which I as President am
extremely grateful-the
Council
was eventually
able to take an unusual step to face an unusual
situation, by deciding to send an appeal to the President
of the Arab Republic of Egypt. The positive response
of the Egyptian Government to this appeal has paved
the way to today’s resolution, and my delegation has
welcomed it as a new demonstration
of the Egyptian
desire to proceed on the road towards peaceful
solutions.

163. My delegation’s vote for the further extension
of the mandate should be viewed in the context only
of the positive role that we ascribe to UNEF. It is our
hope, therefore, that the next three months will be
fully utilized to facilitate a serious and definitive
movement toward’s ‘peace and justice, the goals for
which provide the raison d’gtre of UNEF. Under no
circumstances should the Council acquiesce in procrastinating
tactics on the part of the forces of
occupa.tion.
164. The PRESIDENT:
I should like, before calling
on those representatives who wish to speak in exercise
of the right of reply, to address a few words to the
Council. Some members have kindly referred to the
results which the President was able to obtain in dealing
with the delicate question that we have been considering in the past few days. I warmly thank them,
but let me add that, if what the President has done
has gratifyingly met with some success, this is due
primarily
to the help and co-operation of all the
members of the Council-for
which I am very grateful.

170. The peculiar circumstances which I have just
mentioned emphasize more than ever some fundamental aspects of the question we are dealing with.
The possibility-rather,
the danger-that
the Force
might be withdrawn from the area should lead us once
again to ponder both the limitations
and the importance
of the Force.
171. It must be first of all reaffirmed, even though
it has been said repeatedly in the past-and X myself
stated it on 17 April in the debate in the Council
[182/st nzeetingl-that
UNEF,
as well as all other
peace-keeping forces, is not a solution in itself. It is
certainly not aimed at perpetuating
the separation
between the parties, nor at covering a stalemate in
the search for a solution of the basic problem which
necessitated the creation of the Force itself. The
limited function of the Force is to provide time and
opportunity for negotiations by maintaining
an atmosphere that will allow the parties to translate into facts
the intentions to progress along tile road of peace they
continue to express.

165. I should like now to make a short statement in
my capacity as representative of ITALY.
166, The Italian delegation has examined with the
utmost attention all the elements which were provided
to the Council, that is to say, the report of the
Secretary-General, the letter addressed on 14 July 1975
by the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign
Affairs of the Arab Republic of Egypt to the SecretaryGeneral, and the letter of the representative of Israel
of 16 July 1975 confirming the consent of his Government to the renewal of the mandate of UNEF. I have
also followed with special interest the statements of the
represent.atives of Egypt and Israel and of the members
of the Council.

172. Needless to say. Italy does whatever it can to
encourage these intentions. Both Egypt and Israel can
be sure that any constructive contribution
from either
side will continue to be received by my Government,
as in the past, with satisfaction and appreciation.

167. Some of the members who preceded me in this
debate have already underlined the peculiarity of the
17

173. However, the situation which the Council has
faced on this occasion underlines how grave and
dangerous the situation in the Middle East continues
to be. The report of the Secretary-General
stresses
again that without the presence of the Force peace
in the area would run serious risks.
174. These considerations inspired the Italian delegation in the consultations which took place in the past
few days, as we have always kept in mind as a firm
point the desirability of extending the mandate. For
this reason my delegation has cast its vote in favour
of the resolution.
The recent events profoundly
intensify our sense of urgency. The renewal of the
mandate offers a new opportunity to all the parties
engaged in the search for progress towards peace.
All those who can contribute must make a new effort
to encourage and help the parties involved to overcome
their differences and get over a situation which is
basically contrary, first of all, to their own interests.
In this framework, Italy follows with the greatest
interest and hope the renewed effort of the Government of the United States to obtain progress towards
an agreement, as well as all other efforts leading,
eventually in the framework of the Geneva Conference,
to the negotiation of the basis of a just and lasting
peace in the area.
17.5. I should like to conclude my brief remarks with
a tribute to UNEF. The present debate has reminded
us how delicate and important their duty is. I would
therefore express once again the gratitude of the Italian
delegation to the contingents which constitute the
Force, as well as to all the countries and individuals
that are participating in the operation.

176. Speaking now as PRESIDENT,
I shall now call
on those representatives who have asked to be allowed
to exercise their right of reply. I now give the floor
to the representative of Egypt.
177. Mr. ABDEL MEGUID (Egypt): In spite of the
fact that it is rather late and tbat I had no intention
of asking for the floor again, I find myself compelled
to do so, for I can hardly be expected to remain silent
in the face of such a mockery of the truth as that to
which the Council has been subjeCted by the representative of Israel.
178. It is strange that the draft resolution just adopted
by the Council should be described as being “unbalanced”. Unbalanced according to what norms, rules
or morality? Surely, no one can possibly conceive of
equating an aggressor with the victim of aggression.
The components of such an unequal equation are
are doomed to fall apart; it is a non-starter.
179. Israel has critized the Council’s resolution. This
is its customary attitude towards the Council and its
resolutions,
which obviously
go against Israel’s

policies of perpetuating occupation. This is a balanced
resolution because, indeed it has ignored the letter of
the Israeli representative. And Israel seems to forget
that it is on Egyptian territory illegally occupied by
its forces.
180. Israel should be the last Member of the Organization to talk about respect for international law: no
other Member has ever been so often condemned by
the United Nations for the breach of international
law. And just to illustrate the attitude of Israel in trying
to gain time, I would put before the Council what an
Egyptian official said very recently: “It has taken eight
years for the Israelis to withdraw 10 miles in Sinai,
At this rate it will take them 50 years to get out of
Sinai”.
181. We cannot accept that; we will never accept
it. By playing with time, I think Israel is playing with
fire that is what Israel is doing now.
182. As to the worn-out Israeli argument concerning
the mandate of UNEF, is an integral part of resolution 338 (1973) and not of any other agreement. Let
that be quite understood. I think I gave ample elaboration of that point at the last meeting of the Council
on 17 April. I need not repeat what I said then, I
invite the Council to consult the record of the 1821st
meeting, where there is an answer to this Israeli
allegation. Israel talks about its objective of peace but,
as I have said in my statement, we need deeds, not
words.
I83. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (trunslation .#?ont
Chinese): The Soviet representative dared not touch
at all on the substance of the Chinese delegation’s
statement in which we exposed the hegemonic policy
being pursued by the Soviet Union in the Middle East.
Instead, he attempted to obliterate the facts with a
vulgar jest. How can he succeed? In fact, the leaders
of a number of Arab countries have exposed these
facts on many occasions. This is well known to the
world public.
184. The Soviet representative tried also to rid the
Soviet Union of the label of a super-Power and has
even ingeniously invented the term of a so-called
‘Lsuper-super-Power”, which he tried to pin on China.
This, of course, is all the more futile.
185. What is a super-Power‘? It is an imperialist Powel
that everywhere subjects other countries to aggression,
interference, control, subversion and plunder and
seeks world hegemony. Is not the Soviet Union of
today precisely such a Power? China has not a single
soldier or military base abroad. Our policy is to dig
tunnels deep, store grain everywhere and never
seek hegemony. To dig tunnels deep is for defence.
Obviously, tunnels, however deep, will never encroach
upon another country. To store grain everywhere is
to be prepared against war and natural disasters. Never
to seek hegemony is one of our fundamental principles.

What we are doing now is exactly in accord with that.
China is still a developing country and has not the
qualifications for becoming a super-Power. It will not
seek to be one even when it becomes strong. We shall
educate our future generations to keep this always in
mind.
186. As for the Soviet revisionist leading clique,
neither today nor tomorrow will it ever abandon its
super-Power hegemonic policy of its own accord. But
the day will certainly come when the Soviet people
will rise to take their destiny into their own hands,
thus channeling the Soviet Union back onto the track
of socialism. And we have confidence that that will
happen.

189. Generally speaking, the statements made by
the Egyptian representative this evening showed no
improvement whatsoever in his attitude in respect of
Israel. Here we are in the midst of serious discussions
on a new interim agreement between Israel and
Egypt, and yet the representative of Egypt speaks as
if nothing of the kind had been taking place outside
this Council chamber. He says his Government wishes
peace. But Israel is consistently referred to as “the
enemy” in the Egyptian press, and bellicose threats
against Israel are constantly being voiced, coupled
with pejorative terms about us. Little wonder then that,
in view of such an attitude, my country has to proceed
with some circumspection. And the Egyptian representative should be the last one to complain about that.

187, Mr. DORON (Israel): On an occasion such as
this, when the Security Council has just extended
-albeit
for a very limited period-the
mandate of
UNEF, the representative
of Egypt, both in his
prepared statement and in his statement in right of
reply, embarked on his usual attack against my country
and repeated his arguments, which have no basis in
law or in fact.

190. Indeed, nothing the Egyptian representative has
said here this evening is likely to induce any change
in our position. It is rather despite, and not because
of, statements such as the ones made here this evening
by the representative of Egypt that my country will
persevere in its efforts to achieve a just and lasting
peace in our region.
191. Let us hope that in spite of statements made in
Egypt relegating a true peace an d normal relations
with Israel to future generations, the present generation may live to see the coming of peace and a normal
life to the Middle East.

188, To give but one example: the representative of
Egypt has just said that UNEF is an integral part of
resolution 338 (1973) alone and of no other document
whatsoever. We all heard him say that. But I have
before me document S/l 1198 of 18 January 1974, which
contains in its annex the Egyptian-Israeli
Agreement
on Disengagement of Forces in pursuance of the
Geneva Peace Conference. When one looks at this
document, one sees that UNEF
is an absolutely
integral part of it. Take UNEF out of this document
and very little will remain of it. Yet we are told here
that UNEF is not an integral part of anything but
resolution 338 (1973). Of course, we accept resolution 338 (1973); we have said that quite often. But, in
the same way, it is absolutely clear and cannot be
denied-indeed
this has been repeated at every Council
meeting on this subject-that
UNEF is an integral
part of document S/11198, containing the text of the
Agreement on Disengagement of Forces.

192. Mr, OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics): Just to dispel any misunderstanding, the
label that China has won is not “super-super-Power”
-although
that seems to be the dream of Mr. Huang
Hua. What I said was that China is a super-duperPower-that
is, the only power which specializes in
cheating. I ask that that be properly reflected in the
verbatim record.

Notes
I See resolution

19

371 (1975).

HOW

TO OBTAIN

Ilnitcd
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

UNITED

publication<
pour bookstore

NATIONS

may he obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
or write to: United
Nations.
Sales Section.
New York or Geneva.

SE PROCURER

LES

Lc? publications
dcs Nations
Units
mondc cnticr.
Informez-vous
aup&
dcs ventrs,
New York ou Gcnevc.

COMO

C’ONSECUIR

in United

Nations,

New

York

PURLICATIONS

DES

NATIONS

sent en vcnte darts les librairies
de votre librnirc
ou adrosez-vous

PlJBLICACIONES

Las publicacioncs
de las Nncioncs
todas partes del mundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York o Gmebra.

Lifhc

PURLICA-I’IONS

DE

LAS

NACIONES

IJnidaa est;jn en vcnta en librerias
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones

00400

UNIES

et Its agcnccs
a : Nations

depositaires
du
Unies. Section

UNIDAS
y casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas.
Seccidn de Vcntas.

82-6

1202-November

1983-2,200
