Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

2829 (XXVI). Establishment, within the framework of the International Atomie Energy
Ageney, of an international serviee for nuclear explosione for peaeeful purposes under
appropriate international control

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2665 (XXV) of 7 December 1970,
Having considered the report of the Intemational
Atomic Energy Agency on the establishment, within
its framework, of an international service for nuclear
~xplosi~ns for peaceful purposes under appropriate
mtemat1onal control, 21
Noting with satisfaction that the Intemational Atomic
Energy Agency has demonstrated its efficiency with
regard to promoting co-operation in the peaceful uses
of nuclear energy,
Noting further that the Intemational Atomic Energy
Agency, in accordance with its statute, is an appropriate
organ to exercise the functions of an intemational
se~ice !or nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes,
takmg mto account the relevant provisions of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
1. Com"!efZfls t~e International Atomic Energy
Agency for 1ts mtens1ve work on problems in connexion
with nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes;
2. Requests the lnternational Atomic Energy
Agency to continue its activities in this field and to
study ways_ and m~ans of establishing, within its framework, an mtemational service for nuclear explosions
for peaceful purposes under appropriate international
control;
3. Invites the Director-General of the Intemational
Atomic Energy Agency to submit, in bis annual report
to the General Assembly, information on further developments and on the progress made in this regard.
2022nd plenary meeting,
16 December 1971.
2830 (XXVI). Status of the implementation of
General Assembly resolution 2666 (XXV)
coneerning the signature and ratifieation of
Additional Protoeol II of the Treaty for the
Prohibition of Nuclear W eapons in Latin
America (Treaty of Tlatelolco)

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1911 (XVIII) of 27 November 1963, 2286 (XXII) of 5 December 1967,
2456 B (XXIII) of 20 December 1968 and 2666
(XXV) of 7 December 1970,
Recalling in particular that in its resolution 2286
(XXII) it declared that the Treaty for the Prohibition
of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (Treaty of
patelolco ) 22 constituted an event of historie significance
m the efforts to prevent the proliferation of nuclear
weapons and to promote international peace and security and that in its resolution 2666 (XXV) it repeated
the appeals which on two previous occasions it had
addressed to the nuclear-weapon States to sign and
2 1 See International Atomic Energy Agency, Annual Report
1 July 1970-30 June 1971 (Vienna, July 1971), paras. 94 and
9S; transmitted to the members of the General Assembly by
a note of the Secretary-General (A/8384).
22 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 634 (1968), No. 9068.

35

ratify Additional Protocol II of the Treaty as soon as
possible and urged them to avoid further delay in the
fulfilment of such appeals,
1. Reaffirms its conviction that, for the maximum
effectiveness of any treaty establishing a nuclearweapon-free zone, the co-operation of the nuclearweapon States is necessary and that such co-operation
should take the forro of commitments likewise undertaken in a formal intemational instrument which is
legally binding, such as a treaty, convention or protocol;
2. Notes with satisfaction that the United States
of America deposited its instrument of ratification of
Additional Protocol II of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America on 12 May
1971, thus becoming a State party to the Protocol, as
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northem
Ireland has been since 11 December 1969;
3. Deplores the fact that the other nuclear-weapon
States have not yet heeded the urgent appeals which
the General Assembly has made in three different resolutions and urges them once again to sign and ratify
without further delay Additional Protocol II of the
Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in
Latín America;
. 4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
1ts tw~ty-seventh session an itero entitled "lmplementatlon of General Assembly resolution 2830
(XXVI) concerning the signature and ratification of
Additional Protocol II of the Treaty for the Prohibition
of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (Treaty of
Tlatelolco) ";
5. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
present resolution to the nuclear-weapon States and to
mfo:111 the General Assembly at its twenty-seventh
~ess1on of '.111Y measure adopted by them in order to
1mplement 1t.
2022nd plenary meeting,
16 December 1971.
2831 (XXVI). Eeonomic and social eonsequences
of the armaments race and its extremely
harmful effects on world peace and seeurity

The General Assembly,
Concerned about the ever spiralling arms race and
military expenditures, which constitute a heavy burden
for all peoples and have extremely harmful effects on
world peace and security,
Deeply convinced that the common aspirations of
mankind for peace, security and progress require the
urgent cessation of the arms race, particularly of the
n~clear arms race, and the r~uction of military expend1tures, as well as the adopt1on of effective measures
leading towards general and complete disarmament,
Considering that a halt in the arms race and a significant reduction of military expenditures would promote the economic and social development of all countrie~ _and would increase the possibilities of providing
add1t1onal resources to developing countries,
Recalling its resolution 2667 (XXV) of 7 December
1970, in w!tich it req1:1ested the Secretary-General to
prepare, w1th the ass1stance of qualified consultant
experts appointed by him, a report on the economic
and social consequences of the arms race and of military expenditures,
