Resolutions adopted without reference to a Commiltee

Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to Malta, 9
Noting that constitutional progress has been achieved
in the Territory of Malta,
1. Notes with satisfaction that Malta will attain
independence not later than 31 May 1964;
2. Expresses the hope that no new obstacle will
hinder Malta's accession to independence and that the
Territory will become an independent State not later
than the date referred to in paragraph 1 above ;
3. Invites the administering Power to take the necessary measures for the transfer of powers, not later
than 31 May 1964, to the people of Malta, in accordance
with their will and desire ;
4. Congratulates the Governments of Malta and the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
on the steps taken towards the achievement of the aims
set out in the Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples.
1277th plenary meeting,
11 December 1963.

1951 (XVIII). Question of Fiji
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, 1654 (XVI) of 27 November 1961 and 1810
(XVII) of 17 December 1962, and in particular paragraph 5 of the Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples, contained
in resolution 1514 (XV), which provides that:
"Immediate steps shall be taken, in Trust and NonSelf-Governing Territories or all other territories
which have not yet attained independence, to transfer
all powers to the peoples of those territories, without
any conditions or reservations, in accordance with
their freely expressed will and desire, without any
distinction as to race, creed or colour, in order to
enable them to enjoy complete independence and
freedom",
Having considered the part of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to Fiji, 10
Having heard a statement by the representative of the
administering Power,
Noting with regret that the administering Power has
still taken no effective steps to transfer all powers to
the people of Fiji in conformity with paragraph 5 of
resolution 1514 (XV),
Noting further that the Constitution of Fiji, in particular those sections governing the electoral system
and the composition and functions of the Legislative
and Executive Councils of Fiji, is not based on generally
accepted democratic principles,
1. Affirms the inalienable right of the people of Fiji
to self-determination and national independence in conformity with the provisions of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
2. Invites the administering Power :
(a) To work out, together with the representatives
of the people of Fiji, a new constitution providing for
t Ibid., chapter VI.
10 Ibid.,

chapter VII.

7

free elections conducted on the principle of "one man,
one vote" and the creation of representative institutions;
( b) To take immediate steps for the transfer of all
power to the people of the Territory, in accordance with
their freely expressed will and desire and without any
conditions or reservations;
( c) To endeavour, with the co-operation of the
people of Fiji, to achieve the political, economic and
social integration of the various communities.
1277th plenary meeting,
11 December 1963.

1952 (XVIll). Question of Northern Rhodesia
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960,
Having considered the part of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to Northern Rhodesia, 11
Noting the statement on recent constitutional developments in Northern Rhodesia made by the administering
Power on 4 December 1963,12
l. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Northern Rhodesia to self-determination and independence;
·
2. Notes with satisfaction that elections for the new
Legislative Council will be held in January 1964;
3. Expresses the hope that Northern Rhodesia will
achieve its independence in the nearest possible future,
a~d requests the administering Power, in consultation
with the newly elected Government of Northern Rhodesia, to fix a date for the independence of the Territory;
4. Expresses the hope that no new obstacle will
hinder Northern Rhodesia's accession to independence
and that the Territory will become an independent
State not later than thP. date referred to in paragraph 3
above.
1277th plenary meeting,
11 December 1963.

1953 (XVIll). Question of Nyasaland
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960,
Having considered the part of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to Nyasaland, 13
Noting that constitutional progress has been achieved
in Nyasaland,
1. Notes with satisfaction that Nyasaland will attain
independence not later than 6 July 1964;
2. Expresses the hope that no new obstacle will
hinder Nyasaland's accession to independence and that
the Territory will become an independent State not
later than the date referred to in paragraph 1 above;
11 lbid.,

12 !bid.,

chapter VIII, section A.
Eighteenth Session, Plenary

Meetings, 1273rd
meetmg.
. 13 Ibid., Eighteenth Session, Annexes, addendum to agenda
item 23, document A/5446/Rev.1, chapter VIII, section B.
