General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

20

2. Welcomes the important steps taken during t~e
year by the International Atomic Ei:iergy Agency 1~
concluding safeguards agreements with many States,
3. Urges all States to continue to co-operate with
the International Atomic Energy Agency and to take
all necessary measures to enhance the r~cognized _efforts
of the Agency in the fulfilment of its tas~s m the
various fields of the peaceful uses of atonuc energy,
in accordance with its statute;
4. Commends the International Atomic Energy
Agency on the role it played in the preparatio!1 of the
latest survey of uranium resources, product10n and
demand and urges that this survey should be kept
under constant review;
5 Notes with appreciation the efforts of the Internati~nal Atomic Energy Agency in connexion with its
work regarding the physical protection of nuclear 1!1aterials and its detailed study of the concept of regional
fuel cycle centres;
6. Requests the International Atomic_ En~rgy
Agency to inform the General Assembly at its th1rtysecond session of the results of the Salzburg conference;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to trans~it to
the Director General of the International Atomic Energy Agency the records of the thirty-first se~sion _of
the General Assembly relating to the Agency s activities.
61st plenary meeting
JO November 1976

31/12.

Question of Cyprus 32

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Cyprus,
Deeply concerned over the prolongation of the Cyprus crisis, which endangers international peace and
security,
Reiterating its full support for the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity a~d non-align~ent of the
Republic of Cyprus, and callmg once agam for the
cessation of all foreign interference in its affairs,
Deeply regretting that the United Nations resolutions
on Cyprus have not yet been implemented,
Mindful of the need to solve the problem of Cyprus
without further delay by peaceful means in accordance
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations,
1. Reaffirms its resolutions 3212 (XXIX) of 1 November 1974 and 3395 (XXX) of 20 November 1975;
2. Demands the urgent implementation of the
above-mentioned resolutions;
3. Calls upon all parties concerned to co-operate
fully with the Secretary-General in this regard;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
provide his good offices for the negotiations between
the representatives of the two communities;
5. Expresses the hope that the Security Council will
consider appropriate steps for the implementation of
its resolution 365 (1974) of 13 December 1974;

6. Requests the Secretary-General to follow up the
implementation of the present resolution and report
thereon to the Gcncr:ll Assembly at its thirty-second
SeSSH>n;

7. Decides to include the item entitled "Question of
Cyprus" in the provisional agenda of its thirty-second
session.

65th plenary meeting
12 November 1976

:{ I 13.

Co.operation hetwcen the United Nation!I
and thP Or~anization of African Unity

The General Asse,n/;/y,
Recalling all its previous resolutions on co-operation
between the United Nations and the Organization of
African Unity, including in particular resolution 3280
(XXIX) of 10 December 1974,
Taking note of the relevant resolutions adopted by
the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of
the Organization of African Unity at its thirteenth
ordinary session, held at Port Louis from 2 to 6 July
1976,
Taking into account the statement made by the current Chairman of the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the Organization of African Unity at
the 31 st plenary meeting of the General Assembly on
14 October 1976,:1~
A ware of the important role which the Organization
of African Unity is playing in helping to achieve the
objectives of the United Nations in the world in general
and on the African continent in particular,
Noting with smisfaction the continued efforts of the
Organization of African Unity and the United Nations,
the specialized agencies and other organizations within
the United Nations system to help solve the serious
problems which principally affect southern Africa,
A ware of the urgent need to give increased assistance
to the victims of colonialism, racial discrimination and
apartheid resulting from the intensified acts of repression against the African peoples by the Government
of South Africa and the illegal racist minority regime
in Southern Rhodesia (Zimbabwe),
Conscious of the need to take effective steps for the
widest possible dissemination of information relating to
the struggle of the African peoples concerned for their
liberation from colonialism, racial discrimination and
apartheid,
Bearing in mind the positive results achieved in the
work of the United Nations bodies concerned as a
direct consequence of the participation of representatives of the national liberation movements recognized
by the Organization of African Unity in the relevant
proceedings of these bodies in an observer capacity,
I . Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
on co-operation between the United Nations and the
Organization of African UnityH and commends his efforts in promoting such co-operation;
2. Again expresses its appreciation of the outstanding contribution made hy the Organization of African
:::: Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first Scs-

2.lso sect. I above, foot-note 7, and sect. X.B.2 below,
decision 311403.
32 See

·°'io11. P/cnarv Meetings. 31 st meeting, paras. 74-97.
:ii

A/31/217.
