General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

92

Reaffirming the desirability of the Scientific Committee
continuing its work,
Concerned about the potentially harmful effects on present and future generations, resulting from the levels of radiation to which man is exposed,
Conscious of the continued need to examine and compile
information about atomic and ionizing radiation and to analyse its effects on man and his environment,
1. Commends the United Nations Scientific Committee
on the Effects of Atomic Radiation for its excellent substantive report and for the valuable contribution it has 1?een
making in the course of the past twenty-seven years, smce
its inception, to wider knowledge and understanding of the
levels, effects and risks of atomic radiation and for fulfilling
its original mandate with scientific authority and independence of judgement;
2. Notes with satisfaction the continued and growing
scientific co-operation between the Scientific Committee and
the United Nations Environment Programme;
3. Requests the Scientific Committee to continue its
work, including its important co-ordinating activities, to
increase knowledge of the levels, effects and risks of ionizing radiation from all sources;
4. Welcomes and endorses the Scientific Committee's
intentions and plans for its future activities of scientific
review and assessment on behalf of the General Assembly;
5. Requests the Scientific Committee to review at its
next session the important problems in the field of radiation
and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its thirtyeighth session;
6. Requests the United Nations Environment Programme to continue providing support for the effective conduct of the Scientific Committee's work and for the
dissemination of its findings to the General Assembly, the
scientific community and the public;
7. Expresses its appreciation for the assistance rendered
to the Scientific Committee by Member States, the specialized agencies, the International Atomic Energy Agency
and non-governmental organizations, and invites them to
increase their co-operation in this field;
8. Invites Member States and the United Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations concerned to provide further relevant data about doses, effects and risks from
various sources of radiation, which would greatly help in
the preparation of the Scientific Committee's future reports
to the General Assembly.
100th plenary meeting
/0 December 1982
37/88.

Report of the-Special Committee to Investigate
Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of
the Population of the Occupied Territories
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3092 A (XXVIII) of 7 December
1973, 3240 B (XXIX)of29 November 1974, 3525 B (XXX)
of 15 December 1975, 31/106 B of 16 December 1976,
32/91 A of 13 December 1977, 33/113 A of 18 December
1978, 34/90 B of 12 December 1979, 35/ 122 A of 1l December 1980 and 36/147 A of 16 December 1981,
Recalling also Security Council resolution 465 ( 1980) of
l March 1980 in which, inter alia, the Council affirmed
that the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949, 4 is
4

United Nations, Treatv Series. vol. 75. No. 973. p. 287.

applicable to the Arab territories occupied by Israel since
1967, including Jerusalem,
Considering that the promotion of respect for the obligations arising from the Charte~ of the ~Jnited Na~ions and
other instruments and rules of mternattonal law 1s among
the basic purposes and principles of the United Nations,
Bearing in mind the provisions of the Geneva Convention,
Noting that Israel and those Arab States whose territories
have been occupied by Israel since June 1967 are parties to
that Convention,
Taking into account that States parties to that Convention
undertake, in accordance with article l thereof, not only to
respect but also to ensure respect for the Convention in all
circumstances,
l . Reaffirms that the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August
1949, is applicable to Palestinian and other Arab territories
occupied by Israel since 1967, including Jerusalem;
2. Condemns once again the failure of Israel as the
occupying Power to acknowledge the applicability of that
Convention to the territories it has occupied since 1967,
including Jerusalem;
3. Strongly demands that Israel acknowledge and comply with the provisions of that Convention in Palestinian
and other Arab territories it has occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem;
4. Urgently calls upon all States parties to that Convention to exert all efforts in order to ensure respect for and
compliance with its provisions in Palestinian and other Arab
territories occupied by Israel since 1967, including Jerusalem.
100th plenary meeting
/0 December /982
B
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 32/5 of 28 October 1977,
33/113 B of 18 December 1978, 34/90 C of 12 December
1979, 35/122 B of 11 December 1980 and 36/147 B of
16 December 1981 ,
Recalling also Security Council resolution 465 ( 1980) of
l March 1980,
Expressing grave anxiety and concern at the present serious situation in the occupied Palestinian and other Arab
territories, including Jerusalem, as a result of the continued
Israeli occupation and the measures and actions taken by
the Government of Israel, the occupying Power, designed
to change the legal status, geographical nature and demographic composition of those territories,
Considering that the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August
1949, 4 is applicable to all Arab territories occupied since
5 June 1967, including Jerusalem,
l. Determines that all such measures and actions taken
by Israel in the Palestinian and other Arab territories occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem, are in violation of
the relevant provisions of the Geneva Convention relative
to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12
August 1949, and constitute a serious obstruction of efforts
to achieve a just and lasting peace in the Middle East and
therefore have no legal validity;
2. Strongly deplores the persistence of Israel in carrying
out such measures, in particular the establishment of settlements in the Palestinian and other occupied Arab territories, including Jerusalem;
3. Demands that Israel comply strictly with its international obligations in accordance with the principles of

IV.

Resolutions adopted on the reports or the Special Political Committee

international law and the provisions of the Geneva
Convention;
4. Demands once more that the Government of Israel,
the occupying Power, desist forthwith from taking any action which would result in changing the legal status, geographical nature or demographic composition of the
Palestini• and other Arab territories occupied since 1967,
includintferusalem;
5. U'f'jently calls upon all States parties to the Geneva
Conventian to respect and to exert all efforts in order to
ensure respect for and compliance with its provisions in all
Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967, including
Jerusalem.
100th plenary meeting
JO December 1982
C
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and by the principles and provisions of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 5
Bearing in mind the provisions of the Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War, of 12 August 1949,4 as well as of other relevant conventions and regulations,
Recalling all its resolutions on the subject, in particular
resolutions 32/91 B and C of 13 December 1977, 33/113
C of 18 December 1978, 34/90 A of 12 December 1979,
35/122 C of 11 December 1980 and 36/147 C of 16 December 1981, and also those adopted by the Security Council, the Commission on Human Rights and other United
Nations organs concerned and by the specialized agencies,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee
to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights
of the Population of the Occupied Territories, 6 which contains, inter alia, public statements made by the leaders of
the Government of Israel,
1. Commends the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Population
of the Occupied Territories for its efforts in performing the
tasks assigned to it by the General Assembly and for its
thoroughness and impartiality;
2. Deplores the continued refusal by Israel to allow the
Special Committee access to the occupied territories;
3. Demands that Israel allow the Special Committee
access to the occupied territories;
4. Reaffirms the fact that occupation itself constitutes a
grave violation of the human rights of the civilian population
of the occupied Arab territories;
5. Condemns the continued and persistent violation by
Israel of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection
of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949,
and other applicable international instruments, and condemns in particular those violations which that Convention
designates as "grave breaches" thereof;
6. Declares once more that Israel's grave breaches of
that Convention are war crimes and an affront to humanity;
7. Strongly condemns the following Israeli policies and
practices:
(a) Annexation of parts of the occupied territories, including Jerusalem;
(b) Imposition of Israeli laws, jurisdiction and administration on the Syrian Golan Heights, which has resulted
in the effective annexation of the Syrian Golan Heights;
5 Resolution 217 A (III).
6

See A/37/485.

93

(c) Establishment of new Israeli settlements and expansion of the existing settlements on private and public Arab
lands, and transfer of an alien population thereto;
(d) Evacuation, deportation, expulsion, displacement
and transfer of Arab inhabitants of the occupied territories
and denial of their right to return;
( e) Confiscation and expropriation of private and public
Arab property in the occupied territories and all other transactions for the acquisition of land involv1ng the lsraefi authorities, institutions or nationals on the one hand and the
inhabitants or institutions of the occupied territories on the
other;
(f) Excavations and transformations of the landscape
and the historical, cultural and religious sites, especially at
Jerusalem;
(g) Destruction and demolition of Arab houses;
(h) Collective punishment, mass arrests, administrative
detention and ill-treatment of the Arab population;
(i) Ill-treatment and torture of persons under detention;
(J) Pillaging of archaeological and cultural property;
(k) Interference with religious freedoms and practices
as well as family rights and customs;
(1) Interference with the system of education and with
the social and economic development of the population in
the occupied Palestinian and other Arab territories;
(m) Interference with the freedom of movement of individuals within the occupied Palestinian and other Arab
territories;
(n) Illegal exploitation of the natural wealth, resources
and population of the occupied territories;
8. Reaffirms that all measures taken by Israel to change
the physical character, demographic composition, institutional structure or status of the occupied territories, or any
part thereof, including Jerusalem, are null and void, and
that Israel's policy of settling parts of its population and
new immigrants in the occupied territories constitutes a flagrant violation of the Geneva Convention and of the relevant
resolutions of the United Nations;
9. Demands that Israel desist forthwith from the policies
and practices referred to in paragraphs 7 and 8 above;
10. Urges the international organizations and the specialized agencies, in particular the International Labour Organisation, to examine the conditions of Arab workers in
the occupied Palestinian and other Arab territories, including Jerusalem;
l l. Reiterates its call upon all States, in particular those
States parties to the Geneva Convention, in accordance with
article I of that Convention, and upon international organizations and the specialized agencies not to recognize any
changes carried out by Israel in the occupied territories and
to avoid actions, including those in the field of aid, which
might be used by Israel in its pursuit of the policies of
annexation and colonization or any of the other policies and
practices referred to in the present resolution;
12. Requests the Special Committee, pending the early
termination of Israeli occupation, to continue to investigate
Israeli policies and practices in the Arab territories occupied
by Israel since 1967, to consult, as appropriate, with the
International Committee of the Red Cross in order to ensure
the safeguarding of the welfare and human rights of the
population of the occupied territories and to report to the
Secretary-General as soon as possible and whenever the
need arises thereafter;
13. Requests the Special Committee to continue to investigate the treatment of civilians in detention in the Arab
territories occupied by Israel since 1967;

General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

M

14. Condemns Israel's refusal to permit persons from
the occupied territories to appear as witnesses before the
Special Committee;
15. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To provide all necessary facilities to the Special
Committee, including those required for its visits to the
occupied territories, with a view to investigating the Israeli
policies and practices referred to in the present resolution;
(b) To continue to make available additional staff as
may be necessary to assist the Special Committee in the
performance of its tasks;
(c) To ensure the widest circulation of the reports of
the Special Committee, and of information regarding its
activities and findings, by all means available through the
Department of Public Information of the Secretariat and,
where necessary, to reprint those reports of the Special
Committee which are no longer available;
(d) To report to the General Assembly at its thirtyeighth session on the tasks entrusted to him in the present
paragraph;
16. Requests the Security Council to ensure Israel's respect for and compliance with all the provisions of the
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949, in Palestinian
and other Arab territories occupied since 1967, including
Jerusalem, and to initiate measures to halt Israeli policies
and practices in those territories;
17. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-eighth session the item entitled "Report of the Special
Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Population of the Occupied Territories''.

100th plenary meeting
JO December 1982

D
The General Assembly,
Recalling Security Council resolutions 468 ( 1980) of
8 May 1980, 469 (1980) of 20 May 1980 and 484 (1980)
of 19 December 1980 and General Assembly resolution
36/147 D of 16 December 1981,
Deeply concerned at the expulsion by the Israeli military
occupation authorities of the Mayors of Hebron and Halhul
and of the Sharla Judge of Hebron,
Recalling the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949, 4
in particular article 1 and the first paragraph of article 49.
which read as follows:
"Article 1
''The High Contracting Parties undertake to respect
and to ensure respect for the present Convention in all
circumstances."

"Article 49
"Individual or mass forcible transfers, as well as deportations of protected persons from occupied territory to
the territory of the occupying Power or to that of any
other country, occupied or not, are prohibited, regardless
of their motive . . . ",

Reaffirming the applicability of the Geneva Convention
to the Palestinian and other Arab territories occupied by
Israel since 1967, including Jerusalem,
1. Demands once more that the Government of Israel,
the occupyin~ Power, rescind the illegal measures taken by
the Israeli mtlitary occupation authorities in expelling and
imprisoning the Mayors of Hebron and Halhul and in ex pelling the Sharla Judge of Hebron and that it facilitate the

immediate return of the expelled Palestinian leaders so that
they can resume the functions for which they were elected
and appointed;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly as soon as possible on the implementation
of the present resolution.
100th plenary meeting
10 December 1982

E
The General Assembly,
Deeply concerned that the Arab territories occupied since
1967 have been under continued Israeli military occupation,
Recalling Security Council resolution 497 (1981) of 17
December 1981 and General Assembly resolutions 36/226
B of 17 December 1981 and ES-9/1 of 5 February 1982,
Recalling its previous resolutions, in particular resolutions 3414 (XXX) of 5 December 1975, 31/61 of9 December 1976, 32/20 of 25 November 1977, 33/28 and 33/29 of
7 December 1978, 34/70 of 6 December 1979 and 35/122
E of 11 December 1980, in which it, inter alia, called upon
Israel to put an end to its occupation of the Arab territories
and to withdraw from all those territories,
Reaffirming once more the illegality of Israel's decision
of 14 December 1981 to impose its laws, jurisdiction and
administration on the occupied Syrian Golan Heights, which
has resulted in the effective annexation of that territory,
Reaffirming that the acquisition of territory by force is
inadmissible under the Charter of the United Nations and
that all territories thus occupied by Israel must be returned,
Recalling the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949, 4
l. Strongly condemns Israel, the occupying Power, for
its refusal to comply with the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Security Council, particularly
Council resolution 497 (1981), in which the Council, inter
alia, decided that the Israeli decision to impose its laws,
jurisdiction and administration in the occupied Syrian Golan
Heights was null and void and without international legal
effect and demanded that Israel, the occupying Power, should
rescind forthwith its decision;
2. Condemns the persistence of Israel in changing the
physical character, demographic composition, institutional
structure and legal status of the occupied Syrian Arab Golan
Heights;
3. Determines that all legislative and administrative
measures and actions taken or to be taken by Israel, the
occupying Power, that purport to alter the character and
legal status of the Syrian Arab Golan Heights are null and
void and constitute a flagrant violation of international law
and of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949, and
have no legal effect;
4. Strongly condemns Israel for its attempts and measures to impose forcibly Israeli citizenship and Israeli identity
cards on the Syrian citizens in the occupied Syrian Arab
Golan Heights and calls upon it to desist from its repressive
measures against the population of the Syrian Arab Golan
Heights;
5. Calls upon Member States not to recognize any of
the legislative or administrative measures and actions referred to above;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session on the implementation of the present resolution.
100th plenary meeting
JO December 1982

IV.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Spedal Political Commillrt

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -·--·-------- - - - -

F
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August
1949, 4
Deeply shocked by the most recent atrocities committed
by Israel, the occupying Power, against educational institutions in the occupied Palestinian territories,
1. Reaffirms the applicability of the Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War, of 12 August 1949, to the Palestinian and other Arab
territories occupied by Israel since 1967, including Jerusalem;
2. Condemns Israeli policies and practices against Palestinian students and faculties in schools, universities and
other educational institutions in the occupied Palestinian
territories, especially the policy of opening fire on defenceless students, causing many casualties;
3. Condemns the systematic Israeli campaign of repression against and closing of universities in the occupied Palestinian territories, restricting and impeding academic
activities of Palestinian universities by subjecting the selection of courses, textbooks and educational programmes,
the admission of students and the appointment of faculty
members to the control and supervision of the military occupation authorities, in clear contravention of the Geneva
Convention;
4. Demands that Israel, the occupying Power, comply
with the provisions of that Convention, rescind all actions
and measures against all educational institutions, ensure the
freedom of these institutions and refrain forthwith from hindering the effective operation of the universities and other
educational institutions;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report on the implementation of the present resolution before the end of
1983.

100th plenary meeting
JO December 1982
G

The General Assembly,
Recalling Security Council resolution 471 (1980) of 5
June 1980, in which the Council condemned the assassination attempts against the Mayors of Nablus, Ramallah and
Al Bireh and called for the immediate apprehension and
prosecution of the perpetrators of those crimes,
Recalling also General Assembly resolution 36/147 G of
16 December 198 l ,
Recalling once again the Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12
August 1949, 4 in particular article 27, which states, inter
alia:
"Protected persons are entitled, in all circumstances,
to respect for their persons. . . . They shall at all times
be humanely treated, and shall be protected especially
against all acts of violence or threats thereof . . . '',
Reaffirming the applicability of that Convention to the
Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967, including
Jerusalem,

1. Expresses deep concern that Israel, the occupying
Power, has failed for two years to apprehend and prosecute
the_perpetrators of the assassination attempts;
2. Demands once more that Israel, the occupying Power,
inform the Secretary-General of the results of the investigations relevant to the assassination attempts;

95

3. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session on the implementation of the present resolution.
100th plenary meeting
/0 Decemha /982

37/89.

International co-operation in the peaceful uses
of outer space

The General Assemhlv.
Recalling its resolution 16/15 of 18 November 1981 ,
Bearing in mind the fact that twenty-five years have passed
since the beginning of international co-operation in the
peaceful uses of outer space in the United Nations,
Deeply convinced of the common interest of mankind in
promoting the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes and in continuing efforts to extend to all States
the benefits derived therefrom, and of the importance of
international co-operation in this field, for which the United
Nations should continue to provide a focal point,
Reaffirming the importance of international co-operation
in developing the rule of law for the advancement and preservation of the exploration and peaceful uses of outer space,
Taking note with sati!.faction of the progress achieved in
the further development of peaceful space exploration and
application as well as in various national and co-operative
space projects, which contribute to international co-operation in this field,
Having considered the report of the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space on the work of its twentyfifth session,7
I. Endorses the report of the Committee on the Peaceful
Uses of Outer Space;
2. Invites States that have not yet become parties to the
international treaties governing the use of outer space 8 to
give consideration to ratifying or acceding to those treaties;
3. Takes note with appreciation of the successful conclusion of the Second United Nations Conference on the
Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, 9
4. Notes that the Legal Sub-Committee of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space at its twentyfirst session:
(a) Continued its efforts to fommlate draft principles
relating to the legal implications of remote sensing of the
earth from space;
(b) Considered the possibility of supplementing the
norms of international law relevant to the use of nuclear
power sources in outer space through its working group;
(c J Continued its discussion of matters relating to the
definition and/or delimitation of outer space and outer space
activities, b.:aring in mind, inter alia, questions relating to
the geostationary orbit;
7
Official Records of the Gn,eml A.rn'mhlr. Thirty-sel'enth Session,
Supplement No. 20 (A/37/20)
• Treaty on Principles Governing the Al'livities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space. including the Moon and Other Celestial
Bodies (resolution 2222 (XXI), annex); Agreement on the Rescue of Astronauts, the Return of Astronauts and the Return of Objects Launched
into Outer Space (resolution 2345 (XXII). annex); Convention on International Liability for Damage Caused by Space Objects (resolution 2777
(XXVI), annex); Convention on Registration of Objects Launched into
Outer Space (resolution 1215 tXXIX). annex); Agreement Governing the
Activities of State, on the Moon .rnd Other Celestial Bo<11e~ (resolution
34/68, annex)
9
Sec Report of the Second United Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Use., of 011/a \'pace, Vienna, 9-21 Au11us1 /982
(A/CONF IOl/10 and Corr. I ,md 2)
