United Nations

S/PV.6471

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6471st meeting
Thursday, 20 January 2011, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Barbalić . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Bosnia and Herzegovina)

Members:

Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Araud
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Ms. Ziade
Mr. Lolo
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Sangqu
Mr. Parham
Ms. Rice

Agenda
The question concerning Haiti

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-21162 (E)

*1121162*

S/PV.6471

evaluation of the practices and procedures used during
the presidential elections of 28 November 2010, in
particular the tabulation of votes, and to issue
recommendations aimed at correcting the irregularities
that had marred the first round of elections.

The meeting was called to order at 11.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The question concerning Haiti
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I should like to invite
the Permanent Representative of Haiti to participate in
this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Alain Le Roy, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, and
Ms. Valerie Amos, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian
Affairs
and
Emergency
Relief
Coordinator.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Alain Le Roy, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations.
Mr. Le Roy (spoke in French): I thank you, Sir,
for this opportunity to brief the Council on the
situation in Haiti just over a year after the devastating
earthquake of 12 January 2010. I would, of course, like
to begin by once again paying tribute to the memory of
the victims of the earthquake, who numbered more
than 220,000, and especially to the 102 United Nations
staff members who lost their lives.
A few significant developments have taken place
since my last briefing on 10 December. Council
members will recall that the announcement of the
preliminary results of the first round of presidential
elections by the Provisional Electoral Council (CEP)
on 7 December sparked demonstrations in a number of
areas throughout the country. The demonstrators and
many political and civil society actors denounced what
they presumed to be massive fraud in favour of the
candidate of the presidential camp.
On 14 December, the President of the Republic
decided to invite a mission of electoral experts from
the Organization of American States (OAS) to assess
the electoral process. On 29 December, the Haitian
Government, the CEP and the Joint OAS-Caribbean
Community Electoral Observation Mission signed an
agreement defining the terms of reference of that
mission, the objectives of which included the

2

The OAS mission submitted its report to the
Haitian Government on 13 January. On 17 January,
during a visit to Port-au-Prince by the SecretaryGeneral of the OAS, Mr. José Miguel Insulza, the
Government committed itself to submitting the OAS
report to the CEP in order to ensure that it would take
its recommendations into account during the dispute
procedure leading to the announcement of the
definitive results of the first round. The report was then
distributed to the member States of the OAS and
published yesterday, 19 January.
The dispute procedure should resume tomorrow,
21 January. It is now up to the CEP to continue its
work and bring the process to fruition, in accordance
with the provisions of the Haitian Constitution and the
Electoral Law. Only then will the CEP be in a position
to announce the final results of the first round.
According to the terms of the agreement between
the Government, the CEP and the OAS, a second OAS
mission will soon be deployed to provide the CEP with
technical and legal assistance for this contentious
phase of the electoral process. According to the latest
information we possess, the CEP intends to announce
the final results of the first round on 31 January so as
to be in a position to organize the second round of
voting around mid-February. This is of course
preliminary information.
In the meantime, it is now well known that on
16 January former President Jean-Claude Duvalier
arrived in Port-au-Prince. On 18 January, he was
brought before the Prosecutor’s Office and questioned
by the Public Prosecutor, who had filed a complaint
against him. He was then released, but must remain
available to the court. A number of other complaints
have been filed against him since then, in particular
yesterday.
(spoke in English)
Since the announcement of the preliminary results
of the presidential elections in December, Haiti has
been paralysed by political uncertainty. After a year
marked by the devastating earthquake of 12 January
2010 and the ongoing cholera epidemic, it is of

11-21162

S/PV.6471

paramount importance that the current political crisis be
brought to a swift conclusion so that the Government
and the people of Haiti can focus on the challenges of
reconstruction and recovery.
President Préval’s decision to invite the OAS to
undertake an assessment of the first round of the
28 November elections was an important first step
towards finding a peaceful way out of the current
impasse. Having officially received the report of the
OAS technical mission, the CEP must now honour its
commitment to fully take into account the report’s
recommendations with a view to ensuring that the
results of the elections truly reflect the will of the
Haitian people.
Should the CEP decide otherwise, Haiti may well
be faced with a constitutional crisis and the possibility
of considerable unrest and insecurity. At this critical
juncture, it is vital that the CEP be allowed to carry out
its work without political interference and in full
accordance with Haiti’s Constitution and laws. I urge
Member States to continue working with all parties to
ensure that the CEP is able to steer the electoral
process towards an outcome that is both credible and
legitimate.
The Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Haiti, Mr. Edmond Mulet, and his team
have remained in close and constant contact with all
key stakeholders on the ground, including President
Préval, the main presidential candidates, the private
sector, civil society and key members of the
international community. Last week, I myself travelled
to Haiti to participate in the one-year commemoration
of the 12 January earthquake, where I also met with
President Préval, Prime Minister Bellerive, the core
group of ambassadors and other key stakeholders. In
the critical days and weeks ahead, it is vital that the
international community stand united in impressing
upon all relevant actors in Haiti the need to set aside
their narrow partisan interests and work towards a
better future for their country.
For the time being, the overall security situation
remains calm, although there have been some sporadic
instances of violence related to the tense political
climate. The United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH) continues to work closely with the
Haitian National Police to maintain public order and
protect the civilian population, as well as key
installations. Throughout this difficult period, the

11-21162

Haitian National Police have continued to conduct
themselves in a highly professional manner, for which
they should be commended. Nevertheless, the risk of
further violence and unrest is ever-present, especially
in this particular climate and in the coming weeks, and
MINUSTAH will of course continue to monitor the
situation very closely.
Under-Secretary-General Amos
will
brief
members on the current efforts to combat the ongoing
cholera epidemic. As Council members are aware,
MINUSTAH continues to play an active role in the
international response to the epidemic, in close
cooperation with the members of the United Nations
country team. While United Nations efforts remain
focused on stemming the spread of the disease and
limiting the death rate, we are also committed to
shedding further light on the origins of the epidemic.
To that end, on 6 January, the Secretary-General
announced the creation of an independent panel
composed of four world-class medical experts to
investigate the cause of the cholera epidemic in Haiti.
It is our hope that the panel will help to find the truth
and put to rest the issue of the origins of the outbreak.
In conclusion, Haiti is at a crossroads. The
choices made in coming days will determine whether
the country continues to move forward along the path
to stability and long-term development. The
recommendations of the OAS technical mission
provide the elements of a path out of the current crisis
and merit our full support. We intend to continue to
work with the Government, the CEP and all parties to
ensure that dialogue and respect for the country’s laws
and institutions ultimately prevail.
The President: I thank Under-Secretary-General
Le Roy for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Under-Secretary-General
Valerie Amos.
Ms. Amos: Thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to speak about the still extremely grave
humanitarian conditions in Haiti and for your
continued attention to the situation there.
The one year anniversary of the earthquake was
an occasion on which we remembered the terrible
tragedy that took the lives of more than 200,000
people, among them so many of our colleagues. We
will never forget them or their sacrifices.

3

S/PV.6471

Those of us who are involved in the humanitarian
response have also been taking stock of what has been
done to help earthquake-affected people over the past
year and charting the course for the next 12 months
and beyond. Looking back at the humanitarian work
done over the past 12 months, and taking into account
the devastation that the earthquake caused and the preexisting difficult conditions in Haiti, a great deal has
been accomplished. The United Nations humanitarian
agencies, the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH), which gave unwavering support
to humanitarian work even before the earthquake,
without which far less would have been accomplished,
the Red Cross and the non-governmental organizations
we work with in Haiti have all played their part.
Since 12 January 2010, some 1.5 million people
have received help with shelter. Of those, about
800,000 are still in camps. The rest have been able to
return home or have been provided transitional shelters
or other arrangements. At least five litres of drinking
water per person are being delivered to 1.2 million
people daily. Over 11,000 latrines have been
constructed, providing many people with the first
modern sanitation they have experienced in their lives.
And over 1.1 million children are receiving daily meals
through the national school feeding programme,
supported by the World Food Programme. Sixty-eight
per cent of damaged schools have been cleared of
debris, allowing more than 2 million children to return
to school.
Over the past months, Haiti has been tested
further by two shocks that required a major
international response. In October, everyone working
in Haiti pulled together to prepare the country for
Hurricane Tomas. Thankfully, the hurricane did not
have the devastating effect that had been feared. But
the exercise highlighted the extremely serious
vulnerabilities that exist for many of Haiti’s poorest
people, earthquake survivors and others.
Also in October, the cholera outbreak was
confirmed. The outbreak has spread nation-wide and
affected almost 200,000 people, with over 3,700 deaths
so far. Haiti has ideal conditions for cholera’s spread:
poor and non-existing water, sanitation and health care
infrastructure in many urban and rural areas and the
density of population, especially in the slums of urban
cities. And because cholera has not been present in
Haiti for over 40 years, knowledge of how to prevent

4

infections was non-existent, and still is, especially in
the remote parts of the country.
Nonetheless, today the overall case fatality rate
has declined from a peak of 9 per cent to around 2 per
cent overall, although there are still spikes in some
regions. This indicates that while the infection is still
spreading around the country, the treatment facilities
and the intensive public information campaigns
launched to educate people about how to protect
themselves are working. In Port-au-Prince the
mortality rate has dropped to 1.2 per cent. Continuing
this work requires stability in the country. If aid
supplies and aid workers cannot move around freely, or
if sick people cannot reach help in time, the fatality
rate will quickly rise again. There is still an urgent
need for massive mobilization activities to promote
prevention and early treatment.
Malnutrition, chronically weak health systems,
appallingly low literacy rates and widespread lack of
access to clean water, sanitation and other basic services
mean that humanitarian assistance is still an essential
lifeline for hundreds of thousands of Haitians. Aid
agencies are still providing water to more than 1 million
people every day and food to 2 million people every
month, as well as helping to keep over 2 million
children in schools. These efforts need to continue at
least through this year, which is why we have launched
another humanitarian appeal for 2011, this time for
$906 million — about 50 per cent less than we required
in 2010. From that, $174 million is for the cholera
response, only 27 per cent of which has been provided
to date. We therefore need to scale up and do more, and
do it quickly. Much more attention to the cholera
response is needed if the improved response of the past
weeks is to be sustained.
The relief effort has helped millions of people,
but it has not, and will not, provide the long-term
solutions that are desperately needed. Accelerating
recovery efforts must be the absolute priority for 2011.
For humanitarian assistance to phase down, recovery
and reconstruction need to pick up. The Interim Haiti
Reconstruction Commission is central to this effort. We
welcome the increased strategic role of the
Commission and its support to technical ministries and
partners in defining national plans in key areas, such as
housing, debris removal and health. But even with that
happening, it is important to still be realistic about how
long it is going to take to get everybody to where they
want to be and need to be.

11-21162

S/PV.6471

We cannot expect that Haiti, the poorest and least
developed country in the western hemisphere before
the earthquake, will be rebuilt in one year, or even two.
Humanitarian agencies are prepared to stand beside the
poorest and most vulnerable Haitian people for as long
as it takes to recover from this terrible past year, and
through whatever the years ahead might hold. I thank
the Council for its continued support.
The President: I thank Ms. Amos for her
briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Haiti.
Mr. Cazeau (Haiti) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
the holding of this informational meeting concerning
my country one year and eight days following the
12 January 2010 disaster, which is seared into the
minds of the Haitian people and its brothers, sisters and
friends throughout the world. I would like, through you
Sir, to commend and thank Under-Secretary-General
Alain Le Roy and his colleagues in the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations for their efforts, which have
greatly benefited my country thanks to the work of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH). We would also like to thank UnderSecretary-General Valerie Amos and all the staff of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) for their apt response to the situation in Haiti,
which in less than one year suffered three disasters
requiring emergency response. I would like to tell
Ms. Amos that my delegation is aware that OCHA’s
experience in Haiti over the past year was in many
respects not easy. Fortunately, however, under her
asserted leadership, major challenges have been
addressed to the extent possible.
At 4.53 p.m. on 12 January 2010 Haiti
experienced the saddest moment in its history. To recall
the remarks of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon in
marking the first anniversary of that fateful day:
(spoke in English)
“Forty-seven seconds. It is not a long time. But
the earthquake in Haiti was an eternity of sorrow.
One year is not long either.”
(spoke in French)
Indeed, a large swathe of our country was lost,
resulting in more than a quarter of a million deaths
among Haitians and foreigners alike; thousands left

11-21162

injured, orphaned or homeless; emotional and physical
devastation, desolation and despair. The Government
had just put in place its national development plan
when this scourge struck the country and everything
suddenly changed: priorities had to be reevaluated, and
in most cases refocused and/or modified.
My delegation will always remember how the
international community rallied to the aid of the
Haitian people in less than 24 hours after the
earthquake. Help arrived from all continents and air,
sea and land was opened for the provision of
humanitarian aid to Haiti. We will never forget these
acts, which reinforce the bonds of friendship and
understanding among peoples. We appreciate the
gestures from all parts of the world and the generosity
of the international community which, at the meeting
on 31 March 2010, opened its wallet to pledge
contributions that went beyond our expectations. Many
donors have already made good on those promises, but
not all funds have yet arrived. We nonetheless continue
to believe that they will not fail to do so in due time.
We must recognize that Haiti needs to be rebuilt,
not just patched up. This is an immense undertaking
that will take time and call for human, financial and
material resources. Well before 12 January 2010, Haiti
was already struggling with major problems, which
have only become worse. We must bear in mind that
many of our colleagues in both the public and private
sectors perished under the rubble, while others were
handicapped or traumatized or have simply left the
country. Services are therefore functioning with greatly
reduced capacity and staff. The country faces a great
variety of challenges every day, all of them urgent.
These challenges are without a doubt difficult to
overcome, but they are not insurmountable, with the
help of the international community. Those who have
taken the floor before me have spoken quite frankly to
paint an accurate picture of the situation. There is so
much to do that at time we get the impression that
nothing has been done.
Since its establishment in June 2010, the Interim
Haiti Reconstruction Commission, led jointly by
Haitian Prime Minister Jean-Max Bellerive and former
President of the United States Bill Clinton, has
approved 74 projects in various sectors such as
education, health, development, agriculture and
technical and professional assistance for the public and
private sectors. Construction will soon begin on an

5

S/PV.6471

industrial park in the north of the country, which, when
fully operational, will provide jobs to more than 20,000
citizens. A 350-bed teaching hospital is currently under
construction in the centre of the country, thanks to
cooperation between the Ministry of Health and
Partners in Health. A central market has just been
restored in Port-au-Prince for the traders of the capital.
Commercial activities have resumed and most schools
have begun to function again. Public and private
services are up and running. The Haitian National
Police has started training new officers and the courts
are working. We can report that there has been a return
to normality, to a certain degree.
However, as has already been said, a great deal
remains to be done. More than 1 million people are still
living in tents that are no longer strong enough to
withstand the onslaught of tropical winds and rains.
The hurricane season is already upon us and we can no
longer afford to hesitate or make mistakes.
In addition, there are the devastating effects of
the cholera epidemic, which in less than five months
has officially claimed more than 3,500 lives and led to
almost 90,000 hospitalizations. Fortunately, the
response has been appropriate and we can hope that in
the near future the health agencies will, with the help
of the population, have this scourge under control. We
hope that the panel of five experts established by the
Secretary-General to investigate the origin of this
problem will make its conclusions known soon in order
to end speculation.
Finally, my delegation would like to recall that,
while the day of 12 January 2010 was devastating for
Haiti, it also provided a unique opportunity for a new
vision of what a modern country should look like: a
State focused on development, democracy and respect
for human rights that is able to provide basic services
to the population, which it must serve and protect. To
achieve that goal, we are counting firmly on the
continued full, frank and respectful cooperation of the
international
community.
Patience,
mutual
understanding and continued dialogue are the
principles by which we must all be guided.
The President: I thank the representative of Haiti
for his statement.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretaries-General Le Roy and Amos for their
very useful briefings. I also thank our Haitian
colleague for his update.

6

We are meeting today a little more than a
year after Haiti was struck by a truly devastating
earthquake — a blow that lasted just 47 seconds but
killed more than 220,000 human beings and left
countless more wounded and desperate. The human
and economic cost, as we all know, has been
staggering, the worst of any natural disaster ever
recorded in the western hemisphere.
In this Chamber, let me also recall the terrible toll
that the quake took on the Organization, claiming the
lives of 102 United Nations agency staff and
peacekeepers, who had been working together with the
Haitian people to bring about a brighter future.
A year later, Haiti’s road to recovery is still long
and difficult, but we must walk it together. We must
rededicate ourselves to an enduring partnership with
the Haitian people to help a suffering land rebuild and
renew itself, strengthening Haiti’s institutions and
increasing its capacity so it can bind up the wounds of
the past and build a better, more secure and more
prosperous future for its people.
I would like to touch on four main topics today:
elections, security, the humanitarian situation and
reconstruction. First, with regard to elections, the
United States welcomes the report of the Organization
of American States (OAS) verification mission. Its
findings offer a way forward towards improving
credibility and public confidence in the presidential
electoral process in Haiti. We urge the Provisional
Electoral Council to implement the OAS report’s
recommendations. Sustained support from the
international community, including the United States,
requires a credible process that represents the will of
the Haitian people, as expressed by their votes.
The United States strongly supports the SecretaryGeneral’s statement of 8 December, which expressed
the United Nations commitment to free and fair
elections that reflect the will of the Haitian people. We
urge the Haitian authorities to outline a very clear way
forward that will lead promptly to the inauguration of a
legitimate and democratically elected Government. This
must include issuing a timely and public electoral
calendar. It must include announcing first-round results
and conducting second-round elections in a manner
consistent with the recommendations and findings of
the OAS technical review. And it must include enacting
measures that will increase public confidence in future
electoral processes.

11-21162

S/PV.6471

Let me also say a few words about the return this
week of former President Jean-Claude Duvalier. Given
the continuing turmoil surrounding the November 2010
election, the United States is concerned about the
unpredictable impact that Duvalier’s return may have
on Haiti’s political situation. My Government is clear
about Duvalier’s notorious record of human rights
abuses and corruption. The situation on the ground is
obviously fluid, but the Government of Haiti seems to
be taking initial steps to hold Duvalier accountable for
his actions during his time ruling Haiti.
Secondly, let me turn to security. My Government
again thanks the dedicated men and women of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) for their invaluable work in helping the
Haitian National Police uphold the rule of law and in
promoting overall security and stability in Haiti.
We ask that MINUSTAH continue to work to
provide a secure environment throughout this period of
uncertainty, even as it supports a credible elections
process. Haiti cannot have hope if it does not have
security. Without security, Haiti will be hamstrung in
its attempts to tackle many of its most critical
challenges, including rebuilding areas devastated by
the earthquake and saving lives at risk in the cholera
outbreak. During these challenging and uncertain days,
we call on all actors to proceed in a calm and peaceful
manner and to understand that violence and unrest can
only thwart the will of the Haitian people, not express
it.
Thirdly, let me say a few words about the
humanitarian situation. A credible, peaceful and timely
transfer of power is essential to Haiti’s response to the
cholera crisis. Unfortunately, cholera will be present in
Haiti for years to come. Working with Haitian partners,
the international community must continue to address
short-term needs while working to lessen the disease’s
long-term impact. The United States welcomes the
coordination and leadership role played throughout the
crisis by Haiti’s Ministry of Public Health and
Population. The United States will continue to work
with the Ministry and with the United Nations,
non-governmental organization partners and other
donors in the multilateral relief effort to help fill
programmatic and funding gaps in the Government of
Haiti’s anti-cholera strategy. We encourage other
donors and partners to do the same.

11-21162

We continue to see encouraging signs that
Haitians are heeding the Ministry of Public Health and
Population’s messages about chlorinating water and
other hygiene procedures. But these gains in hygiene,
as we have just heard, could easily vanish without
sustained efforts. Through the United States Agency
for International Development and the United States
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, we
support these efforts to get the word out to all Haitians.
Finally, let me turn to reconstruction and
recovery. Lasting security in Haiti will not be achieved
by police and troops alone. It will also take jobs and
economic opportunity. The prospects for rebuilding
Haiti depend upon maintaining a secure environment
and creating jobs for Haitians. Many of the countries
represented here today pledged assistance to Haiti
during the March 2010 donors’ conference. We must all
remain committed to Haiti’s recovery, deliver on those
pledges and work in a coordinated and strategic
fashion through the Interim Haiti Recovery
Commission.
Haiti’s supporters have shown unprecedented
bilateral and multilateral cooperation, yet we must all
deepen our commitment to progress and sustainable
development in Haiti, led by its people. The United
States has so far spent $332 million of our $1.15 billion
recovery pledge over two years. These disbursements
of our pledged funds come in addition to the more than
$1 billion the United States has already provided in
post-earthquake humanitarian funds, the more than
$400 million we have reprogrammed to help support
the recovery, and the more than $40 million we have
spent on the cholera response. The collective
commitment that we have made to Haiti’s recovery
must be sustained. For our part, United States spending
against our pledge will continue to ramp up, not scale
back.
Despite these enormous challenges, progress has
been made since the earthquake struck. The recovery
effort will take years. It will take partnership. It will
take commitment. But Haiti’s Government and its
strong and resilient people had been making impressive
progress towards greater stability and greater
prosperity before calamity struck. We are determined
to work together with them and with the international
community over the long term to restore hope in the
years to come.

7

S/PV.6471

Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I thank Under-SecretariesGeneral Alan Le Roy and Valerie Amos for their
comprehensive briefings today.
One year after the earthquake and its devastating
toll, compounded by the tragic loss of lives to the
cholera epidemic, the situation in Haiti continues to be
extremely difficult. We are closely following the latest
developments in Haiti, in particular those related to the
political process and the humanitarian situation.
The current political crisis demands a solution
that is both legally sound and politically viable, the
ultimate goal being the consolidation of democracy,
stability and institutions in Haiti. To this end, it is
crucial that the electoral process be allowed to run its
course in a transparent and effective manner, with full
respect for the pertinent legislation.
Equally important, it is up to Haiti itself and its
leaders to ensure that the will of the people expressed
in the polls is fully respected. It is also incumbent on
them to help maintain calm, including by refraining
from all acts of provocation or violence, regardless of
political developments. It is the collective
responsibility of all Haitian political actors to preserve
the stability achieved in recent years.
The international community has supported Haiti
in all these areas and, Brazil believes, is ready to
continue to do so. In this regard, we commend the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH), the Organization of American States
(OAS) and bilateral and multilateral partners for their
invaluable contribution, especially at the current stage
of the electoral process. The OAS has been particularly
active in its efforts to assist the Haitians throughout the
electoral process and, at this moment, with the
verification stage. We are confident that the report
prepared by its verification mission, which has now
been officially submitted to the Provisional Electoral
Council, will prove useful in its deliberations regarding
the future of the electoral process.
The role of MINUSTAH will also remain critical.
We commend the Mission’s support for the electoral
process and its continued engagement with the
authorities, particularly the Haitian National Police, to
ensure a stable environment in the difficult
circumstances that followed the announcement of the
preliminary results of the first round. We are confident
that the Mission will continue to play its part.

8

Electing a new President and installing a new
Parliament are important, not only to democracy in
Haiti, but also to the reconstruction of the country.
Recovery is under way, and we commend partners,
donors and the Interim Haiti Recovery Commission for
their commitment to achieving concrete results sooner
rather than later.
More is needed, however. Disbursements
continue to be insufficient and adequate funding for
critical activities, such as cash-for-work programmes,
is lacking. Partners will have to step up their support if
we are to achieve the Commission’s strategic targets in
key areas in 2011. Humanitarian assistance also
remains a priority while efforts continue to effectively
address the political crisis.
Regarding the cholera epidemic, Brazil has
contributed $2 million to the Pan American Health
Organization to enable the procurement of medical
supplies and equipment. We have also shipped nearly
2.5 tons of medical and non-medical supplies and sent
medical teams to help provide treatment to people
affected by cholera and training to local staff. We
welcome the Secretary-General’s decision to set up an
independent panel of experts to look into the cholera
outbreak in Haiti. Transparency in all contexts is key to
the ability of the United Nations to address security
and humanitarian concerns.
We are pleased to note the significant decrease in
the population living in camps. That is a positive fact,
but one that renders cooperation with Haitian
authorities even more urgent in order to overcome
existing obstacles to the safe and dignified return of
internally displaced persons. It is crucial that the needs
of the displaced and the returnees with regard to food,
water, sanitation, housing, protection and health be
met.
In all these areas — elections, recovery, security
and humanitarian assistance — the importance of
national ownership can hardly be overemphasized.
Haiti’s future prosperity and peace depend on the
strengthening of the national State and national
institutions. In all our collective and individual efforts,
this imperative must guide our action.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Alain Le Roy, Valerie Amos and the chargé d’affaires
of Haiti for their statements.

11-21162

S/PV.6471

Since the earthquake in January 2010, Haiti has
been shaken by other trials — Hurricane Tomas and the
cholera epidemic. This series of disasters explains why
there is still a need for urgent humanitarian aid. We are
therefore keenly aware of the importance of
coordination, especially given the exceptionally high
number
of
agencies
and
non-governmental
organizations at work in Haiti.
Against this backdrop, the role of the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs is crucial to
ensuring aid effectiveness. However, unless Haiti has
strong and stable institutions, all these efforts will be in
vain. By agreement with the Haitian Government, the
Organization of American States sent a mission to
evaluate the results of the first round. It exposed
numerous acts of fraud and, as expected, has produced
a series of recommendations.
France calls on the Haitian authorities to stand by
their commitments to the international community and
to take action on the recommendations. The country
cannot be allowed to remain mired in paralysis or to
sink back into violence. The will of the people must be
respected, and new authorities must quickly take
control of the country’s future, with the support of the
international community. In this difficult situation, I
would like to commend the unwavering commitment of
the staff of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti, starting with Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Edmond Mulet.
France continues to lend its support, both through
the United Nations and bilaterally. Thanks to French
support, the main hospital in Port-au-Prince has been
able to keep its doors open. It will be rebuilt through a
French-American partnership with the Haitian Ministry
of Health and Population. We have expanded our
technical cooperation in various areas, particularly
education, governance and policing. Looking to the
future, our educational institutions have been training
almost 500 Haitian students as future magistrates or
officials. We have allocated financial aid amounting to
€326 million for 2010-2011.
France will maintain its commitment to the
people and Government of Haiti, in coordination with
the United Nations. We hope that, for their part, the
Haitian authorities will take the decisions necessary to
offer their country and their people a better future.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): Like other
speakers, I would like first to renew our condolences to

11-21162

the people and Government of Haiti and to the United
Nations for the losses they suffered during the
devastating earthquake 12 months ago. Many thanks,
too, are due to Under-Secretaries-General Le Roy and
Amos and to the representative of Haiti for their
briefings today.
Our continued gratitude also goes to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Mulet,
and the personnel of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) for their dedicated work
there. Events of recent weeks have shown again their
crucial role in maintaining a secure environment. The
United Kingdom continues to give its full support to
MINUSTAH and looks forward to its continuing efforts
to help build the capacity of the Haitian authorities and
people. It is important for Haiti’s long-term security
that the people themselves, not United Nations
peacekeepers, take the lead in reconstruction efforts,
with the support of the international community.
The people of Haiti, along with the international
community working in their support, have faced many
challenges over the past 12 months, as previous
speakers have said: the impact of Hurricane Tomas; the
ongoing cholera epidemic, which has affected almost
200,000 Haitians; concerns about secure shelter for
those displaced by the earthquake; and a safe
environment for those living in camps.
Some progress has been made. It is good that the
number of Haitians living in camps has halved.
Effective public education campaigns have contributed
to a decline in the cholera fatality rate. The Office of
the United Nations Special Envoy for Haiti has
reported that 64 per cent of funds pledged last March
have been disbursed. However, the challenges remain
immense, and the international community must
remain committed to supporting Haiti. The United
Kingdom has played its part in the humanitarian effort,
with more than a million people benefiting from
British help. We have targeted our aid to providing
people with food, shelter, clean water and medical
care, and we have now supplied medical staff to run
cholera treatment centres.
Turning to recent events, we welcome the Haitian
Government’s invitation to the Organization of
American States (OAS) to conduct an inquiry into the
first round of the presidential elections. We now look
to the Haitian authorities to act on the
recommendations of the OAS report in order to allow

9

S/PV.6471

the process to move forward with credibility. We urge
all presidential candidates to share the collective
responsibility for maintaining a peaceful environment
in order to ensure conditions conducive to holding the
second round. It is vital that the new Haitian
Government be seen to have been elected
democratically and legitimately in order to allow it to
lead the reconstruction process in the name of its
people. Free, fair and transparent elections are the only
way to achieve this.
The way forward for Haiti will not be easy, but it
will be tackled with the support of the international
community, MINUSTAH, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the other
United Nations agencies. We hope that Haiti’s progress
towards a stable environment will not be lost, and we
will continue to give our full support to its people.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank Mr. Alain Le Roy and Ms. Valerie
Amos for their briefings on recent developments in
Haiti. I also welcome the representative of Haiti.
Colombia and Haiti share not only maritime
borders and a historic past, but also a deep concern for
the welfare of Haiti’s people. Our country has
expressed and reiterated, on many occasions and at the
highest level, its desire to be involved in and support
humanitarian efforts and reconstruction in Haiti. On
24 September in the General Assembly, President Juan
Manuel Santos Calderón of Colombia called on the
Council to “consider transforming the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti into a true development
operation” (A/65/PV.15, p. 5) for the nation.
Today, we reaffirm that conviction, because it is
clear that Haiti is in need of sound institutions, a
stronger
democracy
and
infrastructure
for
development. To achieve that, it needs foreign
investment to generate employment and create wealth.
All of this must be undertaken with respect for the
principles of non-interference in Haiti’s internal affairs,
its independence, national sovereignty, cultural identity
and diversity in order to put it on the road to
development and reconstruction.
Colombia, like many countries, has joined in
providing humanitarian aid to Haiti, but we feel no
need to go into details in that respect. We are certain,
however, that all the cooperation given so far is not
enough to meet the needs of a people to whom the
world owes a historical debt that must be repaid. In the

10

anguish, pain and sadness we see on Haitians’ faces,
we see not only hope but also the opportunity to
become better human beings, to ennoble the meaning
of the word “life” and, above all, to join with them in
solidarity from the bottom of our hearts, with no
expectation of reward other than answering the call of
our consciences.
We know that with its mandate for maintaining
security, facilitating the creation of a stable
Government,
disarming,
demobilizing
and
reintegrating all armed groups, and helping to reform
the police and justice systems, the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) still has
major challenges ahead. It is time to focus the scope of
the tasks that the Security Council has assigned it, so
that, together with the Organization of American States
and other regional organizations, we can achieve the
rapid stabilization and reconstruction in Haiti.
We share Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon’s
concerns about Haiti, in particular on the need to
complete the election process successfully. In our view,
the completion of the second round of elections is a
critical element of Haiti’s recovery, reconstruction and
development. We must focus all our efforts on this end
and support the Haitian Government, its authorities and
the Organization of American States.
MINUSTAH’s mandates include fostering the
principles of democratic governance and institutional
development. To that end, the consolidation of the
electoral system, the strengthening of justice and the
establishment of a legislature that responds to the needs
of its people are critical priorities. Colombia supports
the call on MINUSTAH to continue supporting projects
that contribute to a climate of trust. International
financial institutions and donors worldwide have a
central role in the future of Haiti. Development and
welfare must go hand in hand with social awareness on
the part of those institutions, so that the dividends are
accompanied by progress, security and peace.
Finally, we are fully convinced that all action for
Haiti’s recovery and strengthening of Haiti, through
sectoral and coordinated planning that allows the
participation of all Haitian political and social actors in
the process of national reconstruction, is an
indispensable prerequisite. Likewise, we call on the
countries and organizations that made offers of
cooperation to ensure the prompt realization of such
assistance so that efforts under way are not in vain.

11-21162

S/PV.6471

Ms. Ziade (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to extend my thanks to Mr. Alain
Le Roy and Ms. Valerie Amos for their briefings on the
recent political and humanitarian developments in
Haiti. On this first anniversary of the earthquake, we
would like to reiterate our condolences to the
Government and people of Haiti and to the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti.
My delegation views with great concern the
repercussions that took place following the
announcement of the results of the presidential
elections on 7 December 2010. We would like to stress
that any observations or objections with regard to the
election results must be addressed by the constitutional
institutions and in accordance with due process,
without any recourse to violence. We would also like to
appeal to political parties to take into account the
contents of the report prepared by the mission of the
Organization of American States.
In that context, we would like to stress the need
to conduct the second round of the presidential
elections in full respect for the standards of fairness
and transparency and in such a way as to promote
democracy and make it possible to continue the
constitutional reforms and reconstruction efforts. We
also call on all political groups to remain calm at this
critical juncture in Haiti’s history. We reiterate that the
elections must reflect the true will of the people of
Haiti.
We would also like to express our concern about
the continuing spread of the cholera epidemic. We call
on the international community to provide immediate
assistance to control the epidemic. As the SecretaryGeneral said, “Without a massive and immediate
international response, we will not be able to overcome
this crisis. The lives of hundreds of thousands of
people are at risk.” In that regard, my delegation
welcomes the Secretary-General’s establishment of a
panel of experts to determine the cause of the
epidemic.
Finally, we would like to stress that every
possible effort must be made to promote the work of
Haiti’s judicial institutions in order to prevent impunity
and ensure the proper functioning of the courts, prisons
and police, in full respect for human rights laws and
rules. We would also like to emphasize the need to
respect the will of the people of Haiti in determining
its future and building its national institutions.

11-21162

Finally, we call on donors to fulfil the pledges
made at the donor conference without delay, since
development and reconstruction pave the way for
security and stability.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Like others, I too
wish to thank Under-Secretaries-General Alain Le Roy
and Valerie Amos for their reports and the very
relevant information that they provided the Council
today. I also wish to thank our colleague from Haiti for
his statement.
One year after the earthquake, our thoughts of
course go to the hundreds of thousands of Haitians who
perished and to the civilian and military men and
women of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH) who lost their lives. We should
also be grateful to the United Nations staff on the
ground who, disregarding their own safety, worked to
save lives in the following hours and days.
It is obvious that humanitarian relief will
continue to be the main priority as long as the basic
needs of the Haitian population — be it access to
water, food, shelter, sanitation or health care — are not
ensured. Hurricane Tomas and cholera have
compounded the situation. Millions still depend on
humanitarian aid on a daily basis, even if,
encouragingly, some progress has been made, such as
the decrease in the number of internally displaced
persons, the reduction of the mortality rate and the
stabilization of the cholera outbreak. However, much
more needs to be done, and the international
community can do more, namely, at the structural
level.
The transparency and credibility of the electoral
process that will lead to the installation of a democratic
Administration are paramount. The paralysis that we
have seen during the past two months needs to be
quickly overcome. We commend the work carried out
by the Organization of the American States (OAS) and
the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) and its expert
mission on the presidential election of last November.
We hope that their findings will help to restore
credibility and the confidence of the Haitian people in
their political system.
In that sense, a free, fair and transparent second
round of the presidential election is essential. To
pursue
that
objective,
effective
international
observation of those elections is crucial, minimizing
the potential for irregularities and providing

11

S/PV.6471

meaningful support for that process. We thank the OAS
and CARICOM for their valuable cooperation in the
next decisive phase of that process. MINUSTAH can
also play an important role, not only by providing
logistical support and ensuring safety throughout the
process, but also by promoting political dialogue.
The earthquake brought Haiti’s woes to us under
a sharper light. Social and economic conditions in Haiti
were already very difficult prior to it. Respect for
human rights, the rule of law and the democratic
process were not entrenched. What we are currently
addressing is not only the turmoil created by the
cataclysm, but also the structural deficiencies and
imbalances that have existed for many years. That
aspect must be taken into account in designing our
response to political and social developments in the
country.
The hard road to recovery and sustainable
development
requires
stability,
democratically
legitimized authorities and political leadership. We
must recognize that those conditions have never been
fully met. We are concerned about new elements that
may further increase the present instability in the
country, such as the return of Mr. Duvalier, even if he
is brought to justice.
Ensuring security in all its dimensions is an
essential requirement for the full recovery of Haiti. It
must be felt in urban and rural communities all over
the country. Furthermore, it is a prerequisite for
efficient distribution of aid. MINUSTAH’s efforts in
that area are highly laudable, and we are well aware of
the immense challenges that it faces on a daily basis.
Regarding relief and recovery, Portugal stresses
the need to reinforce coordination among MINUSTAH,
United Nations agencies and programmes, national and
international non-governmental organizations and the
various donors. The ability to absorb the necessary
resources for reconstruction is a vital issue for Haiti
and for international donors. Our efforts in capacitybuilding should aim at solving the present situation.
Finally, Portugal joins others in expressing
concern over the fragile and unstable situation in Haiti
and the continued plight of the population. While
giving our full support to MINUSTAH in fulfilling its
mandate, we also stress the importance of calling upon
the parties to abide by democratic rules, the
Constitution and the laws of Haiti and to allow

12

MINUSTAH and humanitarian workers full and
unhindered access to all people in need.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Under-Secretaries-General
Le Roy and Amos for their informative briefings on
developments in Haiti. We also listened with interest to
the statement by Mr. Cazeau, Haiti’s Deputy Permanent
Representative to the United Nations.
The situation in Haiti remains difficult. The
devastating earthquake was followed by an outbreak of
cholera and the political crisis that erupted following
the holding of the presidential and parliamentary
elections. The international community is providing
humanitarian assistance of unprecedented scale and
solidarity to the community of Port-au-Prince.
The Russian Federation has disbursed $8 million
for the reconstruction of Haiti through the intermediary
of various international organizations, first and
foremost the United Nations system. At the same time,
not all donor pledges have actually reached Haiti. We
share the Secretary-General’s concern regarding the
fact that Haiti’s reconstruction is progressing very
slowly. Over 1 million Haitians are still housed in tent
camps.
The main responsibility for the reconstruction of
Haiti is borne by the people of that country. The
Haitian Government must play a leading role in
coordinating humanitarian and reconstruction activity.
To resolve the problems facing Haiti, Port-au-Prince
must be helped above all in strengthening the
structures of State authority, thus enabling Haitians to
resolve the issues of reconstruction and national
development themselves.
The parliamentary and presidential elections held
on 28 November 2010 were a serious challenge to
Haiti. This new elections-related area of tension must
be prevented from complicating international
reconstruction efforts in the country. We urge all
political forces in Haiti to demonstrate calm and
restraint and to resolve contentious issues exclusively
through legal mechanisms.
We welcome the efforts of the Organization of
American States and the United Nations to resolve the
situation. We believe that the Haitian Government,
which bears the primary responsibility for the situation
in the country, will take all necessary steps to
successfully complete the elections process in line with

11-21162

S/PV.6471

its domestic legislation and democratic standards, with
the assistance of the international community,
including regional organizations.
We express our support for the activities of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti. We are
grateful to the Mission leader and staff for their work
in trying conditions.
We welcome the comprehensive support being
provided to Haiti by regional States. We note the
efforts of the United Nations Special Envoy for Haiti,
Bill Clinton, aimed at mobilizing donor support for the
country. Given the scale of the problems afflicting
Haiti, the international community must continue its
comprehensive support to the Government of that
country in order to fully restore Haiti’s national
potential.
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in
French): Allow me in turn to thank Under-SecretariesGeneral Mr. Le Roy and Ms. Amos, as well as the
representative of Haiti, for their briefings.
My delegation remains concerned by the fact that,
two and a half months after the announcement of the
results of the first round of the presidential election,
the second round has not yet taken place. The
Government of Haiti, despite its efforts, is not yet in a
position to conclude the review of disputed issues by
the relevant Haitian entities. We pay tribute to the
Organization of American States (OAS) for its
assessment report on the electoral process, and hope
that the Provisional Electoral Council, in line with the
agreement reached between the Government and the
OAS, will professionally, transparently and impartially
consider the recommendations contained in the report
and bring the electoral process to its conclusion.
We urge the political class in Haiti, for its part, to
accept in good faith the results of that review. We hope
for a successful conclusion to the electoral process in
order to ensure that Haiti has a Government that will
be in a position to tackle — with the support of the
international community, of course — the various
hardships afflicting the country, including the lack of
security.
With respect to the lack of security in particular,
we are alarmed by the reports of recent acts of sexual
violence. We are, however, encouraged by the efforts
of the Haitian Government to rebuild the judiciary and

11-21162

train security forces, with the assistance of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
The recovery and reconstruction of Haiti require
national mobilization, which has largely taken place. It
also requires coordinated efforts and a rational use of
the assistance provided. We are convinced that this will
all take place and that the assistance promised by the
various donors will indeed be disbursed. We also
welcome the progress achieved in the delivery of
humanitarian assistance since the terrible earthquake of
January 2010 and the outbreak of the cholera epidemic.
In conclusion, Gabon will continue to support the
efforts of MINUSTAH in Haiti to rebuild and
reconstruct the country.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): One year after the
devastating earthquake in Haiti, our thoughts are with
the victims and their families. We recall the
extraordinary sacrifice made by the personnel of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH).
I would also like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Valerie Amos and Under-Secretary-General
Alain Le Roy and their teams, as well as the countries
contributing to MINUSTAH for their great
commitment to tackling the multitude of challenges we
are facing in Haiti. We are grateful for today’s
comprehensive briefings and analysis of the situation
in Haiti, which continues to be complex and
challenging. I also thank Mr. Cazeau for his remarks.
Haiti has suffered beyond imagination. Please
allow me to share some of our views, mainly on two
aspects: the humanitarian tragedy and the international
efforts to assist the people of Haiti; and ways to
overcome the current political crisis.
First, we are grateful to all the aid workers from
the United Nations and hundreds of non-governmental
organizations in Haiti for their tireless efforts in very
difficult circumstances. They did not falter when faced
with the magnitude of the catastrophe. We
acknowledge the important role and contribution of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) and appreciate the efforts undertaken to date.
OCHA is working in a very complex and difficult
environment, with hundreds of non-governmental
organizations working in the field. We would like to
encourage OCHA to continue its efforts with a view to

13

S/PV.6471

further improving coordination
stakeholders involved.

among

all

the

We also recall that millions of private donors
demonstrated their solidarity with the hard-hit people
of Haiti in a truly unprecedented manner. These donors
expect our best efforts to ensure that their aid reaches
the people in need.
In 2011, the focus of international assistance will
continue to shift from humanitarian towards
reconstruction efforts. We commend the constructive
work of the Interim Haiti Recovery Commission.
Germany, like others, has contributed substantially
from the outset to the relief and reconstruction efforts
conducted by the United Nations and other
humanitarian organizations.
Let me mention a point of concern to us — the
protection of people from sexual violence, in particular
girls and women living in camps. We welcome ongoing
efforts to address this situation.
We should not forget the central role of the
people of Haiti in rebuilding their country. The
strength, the determination and the spirit of millions of
Haitians command our respect.
Let me turn to the second key aspect. If the
ongoing recovery, reconstruction and development are
to succeed, political stability is indispensable. The
current political crisis surrounding the first round of
the presidential elections is a cause of serious concern
to us. The Council has consistently underlined the
immense importance of free and fair elections in Haiti
to laying the political foundations on which to rebuild
the country. We welcome the continued efforts of
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Mulet
and Under-Secretary-General Le Roy to engage the
political leadership in Haiti in a dialogue aimed at
enhancing political stability and national unity.
The decision of the Government of Haiti to call
upon the Organization of American States (OAS) to
send an expert verification mission for the first round
of the presidential elections was a good one. We fully
support the recommendations of the OAS expert
verification mission contained in its report. We
commend the Provisional Electoral Council for having
provided access to information for the OAS mission.
We now urge the Provisional Electoral Council to take
the logical second step and base its decisions on the
OAS recommendations regarding the second round of

14

the presidential elections. Credible elections are crucial
for political stability and ongoing reconstruction efforts
in Haiti. Germany joins the call on all political leaders
in Haiti to assume their responsibilities and work
together in order to bring the electoral process to a
successful conclusion.
In conclusion, Germany remains committed to
supporting Haiti’s critical needs. Together, we can
make 2011 a better year for Haiti.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): My delegation
wishes to express its appreciation to Under-SecretariesGeneral Le Roy and Amos for their informative
briefings to the Security Council on the situation in
Haiti. We also thank our Haitian colleague for his
briefing.
Last week we in the United Nations family joined
with the people of Haiti when we commemorated the
one year anniversary of the devastating earthquake that
claimed the lives of nearly a quarter of a million people
and displaced over 1 million more. It was also a day
that saw the biggest single-day loss of life among the
men and women who serve the Organization through
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti.
South Africa again expresses its deepest condolences
and sympathy to all who were affected by that
devastating event. Human suffering was further
exacerbated in the aftermath of the earthquake by the
effects of hurricane Tomas and the outbreak of the
deadly cholera epidemic, further compounding the
humanitarian challenges in Haiti.
Our delegation remains concerned about the
political and humanitarian situation in Haiti. In that
regard, we reiterate our commitment to the ongoing
recovery and reconstruction efforts in the country. We
concur with the assessment that Haiti’s recovery will
require a multi-year effort, and therefore that the
acceleration of recovery efforts for Haiti must be an
absolute priority for 2011.
We are concerned about the slow pace of
recovery. We call on the international community to
redouble its efforts in supporting the Government of
Haiti in leading the recovery. In that regard, we have
noted the call in resolution 1944 (2010), adopted by the
Council in October, for the international community to
coordinate its efforts with the Interim Haiti Recovery
Commission. It is also essential that the Government
lead all recovery efforts and that those efforts be
closely coordinated so as to ensure that they are

11-21162

S/PV.6471

efficient and transparent and meet the needs of the
most vulnerable.
The cholera epidemic undermines the recovery
efforts further. We have taken note of the improved
manner in which the epidemic has been addressed and
of the decline in the mortality rate. But more needs to
be done. We are especially concerned about the impact
of the epidemic on the most vulnerable. We welcome
the appointment by the Secretary-General of a panel of
experts on the cholera outbreak.
South Africa, individually and as a partner in the
India-Brazil-South Africa (IBSA) trilateral mechanism,
will continue to contribute to the recovery efforts and
to the sustainable development of the country. We have
already provided humanitarian aid through the United
Nations humanitarian system, facilitated by the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. We are
committed to allocating more support in the near
future. We call on all Member States that made pledges
during the Haiti pledging conference to fulfil their
commitments.
We have noted with serious concern the stalemate
in Haiti over the elections held on 28 November 2010.
The current impasse will only further worsen the
already fragile political, socio-economic and
Government systems in Haiti. Credible elections are
essential for stability in Haiti, which in turn will
contribute to the recovery process and the achievement
of development. We are also concerned about the
recurrent violence. We call on all parties to be cautious
in their actions, so as to avoid plunging the country
into further turmoil.
We have taken note of the report of the expert
verification mission of the Organization of American
States, including its conclusions and recommendations.
We have also taken note of the communiqué issued by
the Provisional Electoral Council of Haiti on 19 January
2011 on the report. We note as well that the appeals
process is still under way. It is crucial that the current
situation be resolved within the established legal
process and in a manner that will accurately reflect the
will of the Haitian people.
Members of the international community have a
responsibility to stand by the people of Haiti, whether
bilaterally or through the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations. All efforts should
provide the Government and the people of Haiti with
the requisite support. In that regard, we express our

11-21162

support and appreciation to the Organization of
American States and the Caribbean Community for
their commitment to Haiti. We also commend all the
bilateral efforts of many countries in addressing the
multiple needs of the country.
Moreover, the Security Council’s continued
engagement and focus on Haiti is very important at this
critical stage. It is essential that the Council continue to
support the electoral process in Haiti by demanding
that all the parties — individual candidates as well as
the population of Haiti — refrain from violence and
address the current situation through the legal
processes provided for by the Constitution and the
electoral law.
In addressing all these pressing needs my
delegation stands ready to work with partners in the
Council to ensure that we remain seized on the matter
and serve the interests of the Haitians.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): I join other
colleagues in thanking Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations Alain Le Roy and UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs Valerie
Amos for their comprehensive and useful briefings on
the situation in Haiti. I would also like to thank the
representative of Haiti for sharing his perspective on
the state of play there.
It has been a very difficult year for the people of
Haiti. Just as stability was beginning to be witnessed in
the country and the indicators of economic development
were showing an upward trend, the country was struck
by a massive earthquake on 12 January 2010. The
disaster took the lives of nearly 300,000 persons and
injured an equal number. An earthquake of such
devastation — the worst in the region in more than 200
years — demanded relief operations of a huge
magnitude. The international community rose to the
occasion and undertook the challenge to help the people
of Haiti. Our work continues, and should continue as
long as the Haitian people require our assistance in their
efforts at reconstruction.
Last week, the Council issued a press statement
on the anniversary of the earthquake in Haiti. We wish
to convey our sincere sympathies to the people and
Government of Haiti and to the families of the United
Nations personnel who lost their lives. We assure them
of our continued support.

15

S/PV.6471

In the immediate aftermath of the earthquake,
India made a cash contribution of $5 million to the
Government of Haiti towards relief measures, as a
token of our solidarity with the people of Haiti. I
would also like to recall that the Central Emergency
Response Fund was put to good use in the earliest
stages of recovery work in Haiti. India attaches
importance to that facility, to which we have made
significant contributions since its inception and to
which we have contributed $500,000 each year over
the three-year period since 2009. Furthermore,
recognizing the need to provide basic amenities —
shelter, drinking water and sanitation — to the Haitian
people, we have joined Brazil and South Africa in
expanding the India-Brazil-South Africa (IBSA) Trust
Fund’s waste management project in Haiti, in both its
area of coverage and its scope in handling different
types of waste. IBSA is spending over $2 million in
that effort and for the reconstruction of a community
health centre in Haiti.
As we progress towards reconstruction and
rehabilitation in Haiti, we think there is an urgent need
for better coordination among aid agencies, donors and
the Government of Haiti. This would not only avoid
duplication but also direct aid to sectors considered
most necessary by Haiti. The various United Nations
agencies have to work hard on improving Haiti’s
technical capacity to fully and properly utilize
assistance. For our part, India has pledged to
reconstruct one of the Government ministries, to be
identified by the Government of Haiti. In that context,
I must share with the Council that, in spite of several
efforts that I personally made, it is perhaps the lack of
coordination that is making it very difficult for us even
to identify where our offer could be best utilized.
We highly commend and support the role played
by the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) in humanitarian and recovery efforts in
the aid of the local authorities. We are proud of their
sterling efforts, both on the civilian and police sides, in
the immediate aftermath of the disastrous earthquake,
in spite of the tremendous losses that the Mission itself
faced. I also recall the contributions made by the
Indian police officers deployed with MINUSTAH,
which presently number 470 in three contingents, two
of which were deployed by India after the earthquake
at the request of the United Nations. MINUSTAH
peacekeepers continue to provide full support to the
local authorities. We therefore urge all stakeholders

16

that any action that impedes the work of MINUSTAH
peacekeepers should be avoided.
Even as Haiti battled to overcome the disaster
caused by the earthquake, it was struck by an outbreak
of cholera, which further aggravated the already grim
situation. In the midst of all that, the country has
become embroiled in a political crisis following the
presidential elections. As far as the cholera epidemic is
concerned, we hope that the recent appointment by the
Secretary-General of an independent panel of experts
to determine the source of the epidemic will submit its
report based on scientific studies and that this will
adequately address the allegations that have been
made. I am sure that Doctor Balakrish Nair, Director of
the National Institute of Cholera and Enteric Diseases
in Kolkata, who is a member of the panel, will make a
valuable contribution to the panel’s work.
We think that concerted reconstruction and
rehabilitation work demands stable political and
administrative conditions. We therefore call upon all
political actors in Haiti to exercise restraint and avoid
actions that cause violence and distract focus from the
urgently needed reconstruction and rehabilitation work.
The focus of the United Nations should of course
remain on humanitarian and infrastructure work. It
should not get too deeply involved in the domestic
political process, which is better handled by regional
organizations in cooperation with the local political
establishment.
Mr. Lolo (Nigeria): Let me join others who have
spoken before me in thanking Mr. Alain Le Roy and
Ms. Valerie Amos for their very useful briefings.
We are pleased that our meeting today to mark
the first anniversary of the devastating earthquake in
Haiti on 12 January 2010 has not ignored the overall
challenges that still exist in the country, which have
been made worse by the outbreak of the cholera
epidemic. The earthquake and the epidemic have
resulted in the deaths of more than 203,000 people,
including United Nations personnel, and has rolled
back many years of development gains achieved in the
areas of infrastructure, health, shelter and education in
Haiti, the poorest and least developed country in the
western hemisphere, as Ms. Amos reminded us this
morning.
I would like to convey Nigeria’s gratitude to all
those who responded positively and stood shoulder to
shoulder with the Government and people of Haiti in

11-21162

S/PV.6471

their darkest hour of need. The generosity of the
international community in providing assistance for
relief, recovery and reconstruction in the aftermath of
the tragedy has no doubt made a tremendous difference
in Haiti. Nigeria was among the many contributors that
provided assistance in cash and in kind. Our assistance
to Haiti in the past year exceeded $10 million,
including cash and relief materials. I should note also
that, under a bilateral agreement, Nigerian Technical
Aid Corps volunteers had been providing assistance in
Haiti in diverse fields for several years prior to the
earthquake.
The role of the United Nations — in particular
that of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH), the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) — in leading the
international efforts in Haiti is most commendable.
Nigeria is pleased that its police contingent is part of
MINUSTAH, which has continued to carry out its
mandate with distinction under very trying
circumstances. May I therefore salute the courage,
dedication and sacrifice of the gallant men and women
of MINUSTAH, led by Mr. Edmond Mulet, as well as
of all humanitarian workers in Haiti.
Much remains to be done to restore Haiti to its
pre-earthquake state. As we have been reminded,
800,000 Haitians still live in makeshift camps. Other
challenges include malnutrition, poor sanitation and
weak health systems and basic services. In the face of
those challenges, the international community must not
take its focus from Haiti. We must continue in our
bilateral and multilateral efforts to assist Haiti to grow
better and faster from the devastating effects of the
earthquake and the cholera epidemic. It is our hope that
donors will not only fulfil outstanding pledges but also
respond favourably to OCHA’s 2011 consolidated
appeal for $906 million to address the humanitarian
needs in Haiti. We urge the United Nations to continue
to enhance its coordination efforts with other
humanitarian actors.
The political uncertainty in Haiti is a matter of
serious concern. We recognize the important role and
contribution that the Organization of American States
(OAS) can make in helping to resolve the ongoing
electoral crisis in Haiti. We encourage the Provisional
Electoral Commission to take into account the report
submitted by the OAS verification mission in
determining the candidates for the run-off election. In

11-21162

that connection, we call on the Provisional Electoral
Council and all of Haiti’s political leaders to fully
respect the will of the people and refrain from any
action that will derail or undermine Haiti’s march
towards democracy and legitimate governance. There
is an urgent need for a date and candidates to be
announced for the run-off elections. The longer it takes
to resolve the political crisis, the longer Haiti will
remain mired in its myriad problems.
Nigeria hopes that Haiti’s leaders, past and
present, will see the need to put the interests of their
people above personal and partisan interests in order to
move their country forward, with the international
community providing continuous support and
encouragement.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Under-Secretaries-General Le Roy
and Amos for the briefings they have given us. I also
wish to thank the representative of Haiti for the
statement he has made.
The earthquake of 12 January 2010 produced
unprecedented devastation in Haiti. The United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) also
suffered heavy losses. Eight Chinese peacekeeping
police officers were killed. China would again like to
extend its deep condolences to the families of the
victims of the earthquake in Haiti. We hope that, with
the support of the international community, the people
of Haiti will come together and rebuild their homes at
an early date.
The current situation in Haiti is serious and
fragile. The process of consolidating security and
achieving sustainable peace and stability faces many
challenges. We believe that the United Nations and the
international community should focus in the short term
on providing support and assistance in the following
three aspects.
First, they should promote an appropriate solution
to Haiti’s presidential election crisis. Holding free, fair
and credible elections in Haiti will be of great
significance to lasting peace and stability and postdisaster reconstruction in the country. We call on all
sides in Haiti to focus on the peace and stability of the
country and the well-being of the people; uphold unity,
renounce violence, avoid provocations; resolve
disputes through consultations within the framework of
Haiti’s Constitution and laws; and ensure that the
elections truly reflect the will of the Haitian people.

17

S/PV.6471

We appreciate the active role played by
Organization of American States in this regard.

the

Secondly, support to Haiti’s post-disaster
reconstruction efforts should be stepped up. Rebuilding
Haiti will take years of hard work, there will be many
challenges, and the long-term support and assistance of
the international community will be needed. We call on
all relevant actors to provide the assistance they
committed to Haiti as soon as possible.
United Nations agencies, international financial
instructions and regional organizations should further
enhance coordination, clarify the division of labour,
improve aid effectiveness, and avoid duplication and
the wasting of resources. We support the United
Nations in playing a more effective coordinating role
in the process of Haiti’s post-disaster reconstruction.
Thirdly, we must help Haiti to deal with the
cholera epidemic, which has brought further suffering
to its people. The international community should
continue to provide assistance to Haiti in preventing
and controlling the cholera epidemic so as to prevent
any further spread.
MINUSTAH has played an important role in
maintaining security and stability in Haiti. We
appreciate the contributions made by the Special
Representative
of
the
Secretary-General
and
MINUSTAH under difficult conditions. In the current
situation, MINUSTAH should concentrate on helping
Haiti maintain security and stability, promote the
political process and support Haiti’s capacity-building
in the security and judicial sectors. We also hope that
the United Nations will enhance its comprehensive
evaluation of the situation in Haiti, improve its
security, early warning and crisis management
capacities, and effectively respond to various security
threats and challenges.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
I thank Under-Secretaries-General Ms. Valerie
Amos and Mr. Alain Le Roy for their informative
briefings. We welcome the participation of the Deputy
Permanent Representative of Haiti.
Last year was one of the harshest in recent
Haitian history. Nature showed no mercy to the
country, as one disaster followed another. A devastating
earthquake, hurricane and cholera outbreak took their

18

toll and left deep scars on that proud nation. This
meeting of the Security Council offers the opportunity
to send the Haitian people a message of support and
encouragement and to assure them that the United
Nations and the international community will not let
them down.
Now, let me address some issues related to the
current situation in Haiti. We believe that the Haitian
people, with the support of the international
community, will be able to bring the electoral process
to a successful end. Concluding the electoral process in
a peaceful and credible manner is a critical component
of Haiti’s ongoing recovery and reconstruction efforts.
The establishment of a legitimate Government is a
basic precondition for long-term stability and
development.
At this politically sensitive moment, it is vital
that the population and all political actors show
maximum restraint in order to avoid any deterioration
of the security situation in the country. We call upon
the Haitian authorities to ensure a calm and secure
environment for the second round of presidential
elections. It is imperative that the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) extend its
indispensable support to national authorities.
We welcome the assistance of the Organization of
American States (OAS) in the voting verification
process. This should be seen as a significant element in
ensuring the credibility of the electoral process. The
OAS recommendations should be taken into account by
the electoral authorities and Haitian political parties.
The new Government in Haiti will not have an
easy task before it. Along with reconstruction, the
Government will have to address outstanding
challenges in the areas of security, the rule of law and
institutional reform. Special attention should be given
to security sector reform. Enhancing the capacity of the
Haitian National Police must be a priority. The
international community and MINUSTAH must
continue to assist national authorities in that regard.
Bosnia
and
Herzegovina
attaches
great
importance to the social and economic conditions of
internally displaced persons in Haiti. It is crucial that
the ad hoc Presidential Commission on Resettlement
closely monitor and coordinate activities related to the
relocation and resettlement of internally displaced
persons. All activities related to those delicate issues
must be carried out with due sensitivity.

11-21162

S/PV.6471

We welcome the roles of the Interim Haiti
Recovery Commission and the Haiti Reconstruction
Fund and their pivotal role in long-term reconstruction.
It is essential that donors continue to fulfil their
commitments to Haiti and provide the resources
necessary for reconstruction and development.
International donors must closely coordinate their
activities with the Interim Haiti Recovery Commission
in order to make international assistance more
efficient.
We commend former President of the United
States William Clinton for his efforts as the United
Nations Special Envoy for Haiti to enhance
international support to Haiti and to improve
cooperation with the Haitian authorities in facilitating
and coordinating assistance.
During these painful times for Haiti, the United
Nations and MINUSTAH have played a critical role. It
is important that partnership between the Haitian
people and the United Nations be further strengthened
to maintain positive developments and meet the
remaining challenges.
Bosnia and Herzegovina fully supports the efforts
of MINUSTAH and its assistance to the national
authorities in the protection of civilians, in particular
internally displaced persons and other vulnerable
groups. We underscore the importance for MINUSTAH
to continue to work towards its full deployment as
outlined in resolution 1944 (2010).

In conclusion, on behalf of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, I would like to commend the United
Nations and MINUSTAH staff for their tireless efforts
and the important work they are carrying out in Haiti.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to Ms. Valerie Amos to make a
further statement.
Ms. Amos: I want to take this opportunity to
thank Member States for the contribution they have
made to the overall aid effort in Haiti and for their
focus on the importance of coordination. In that
respect, we in the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs are strengthening our operation
in Haiti and our focus on the importance of
coordination among the United Nations, its agencies
and national authorities, with particular stress on
national ownership.
Member States have also focused on the
importance of stable institutions and overall security to
facilitate the aid effort and longer-term development. It
is also important to continue paying attention to the
protection of people from sexual violence. All of these
remain important aspects not only of the humanitarian
response but also of the ongoing development efforts.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.50 p.m.

11-21162

19
