TWENTY-THIRD

YEAR

MEETING: 16 AUGUST 1968
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
,.,,..,..................

Page
1

Adoption of the agenda . , . . . . . . . , . . . . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
(al Letter dated 5 June 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/8616);
(b) Letter dated 5 June 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Israel ’
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/8617);
(cl Letter dated 5 August 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/8721);
Cd) Letter dated 5 August 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Israel
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/8,724) . . . . . . . . . . .

1_

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1440/Rev. 1)

S/PV. 1440

NOTE
Symbols of united Nations documents are composed of cadtal letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a U&ted Nutions docl-nent.
‘.

1BocWnent$ of the.Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records qf the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yexly volu,nes of Resolutions und Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN

HUNDRED

AND FORTIETH

MEETING

Held in New York on Friday, 16 August 1968, at 4 p.m.
1

t
President: Mr. Jo”ao August0 DE ARAUJO CASTRO.
(Brazil).

At the invitation of the President, Mr. M. El-Farra
(Jordan) and Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel) took places at the
Security Council table, and Mr, M. El Kony (United Arab
Republic), Mr. A. Pachachi (Iraq), Mr. G. Tomeh (Syria)
Prewt:
The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
and Mr, J. Baroody (Saudi Arabia) tobk the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber.
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
/
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America. c/t(‘The
PRESIDENT: As the result of consultations. a
draft resolution has emerged which, it is my understanding,
reflects the views of the members of the Security Council
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l440/Rev.l)
on the course to be adopted by the Security Council on the
item under consideration. I shall request the Deputy to the
1. Adoption of the agenda.
Under-Secretary-General kindly to read out the text which
is before UE.
2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 5 June 1968 from the Permanent
3. Mr. VELLODI (Deputy to the Under-Secretary-General
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President
for Political and Security Council Affairs): I shall read the
of the Security Council (S/8616);
text of the draft resolution:
Letter dated 5 June 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel addressed to the President
“The Security Council,
of the Security Council (S/8617);
Letter dated 5 August 1968 from the Permanent
“‘Having heard the statements of the representatives of
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President
Jordan and Israel,
of the Security Council (S/8721);
Letter dated 5 August 1968 from the Permanent
“Having noted the contents of the letters of the
Representative of Israel addressed to the President
representatives of Jordan and Israel in documents S/8616,
of the Security Council (S/8724).
S/8617, S/8721, and S/8724,
“Recalling its previous resolution 248 (1968) condemning the military action launched by Israel in flagrant
violation of the United Nations Charter and the cease-fire
resolutions and deploring all violent incidents in violation
of the cease-fire,

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 5 June 1968 from the Permanent Representative af Jordan addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/861 6);
1b1 Letter dated 5 June 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Israel addressed ta the President of the
Security Council (S/861 7);
/cl Letter dated 5 August 1966 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/8721);
ldl Letter dated 5 August 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/8724).

“Considering that all violations of the cease-fire should
be prevented,
“Observing that both massive air attacks by Israel on
Jordanian territory were of a large scale and carefully
planned nature in violation of resolution 248 (1968),
‘<Gravely concerned about the deteriorating situation
resulting therefrom,
“1. Reaffirms its resolution 248 (1968) which inter
aZia declares that grave violations of the cease-fire cannot
be tolerated and that the Council would have to consider
further and more effective steps as envisaged in the
Charter to ensure against repetition of such acts;

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions
previously taken by the Security Council, I propose to
invite the representatives of Jordan, Israel, the United Arab
Republic, Iraq, Syria and Saudi Arabia to participate in the
discussion, without the ri&t to vote.

“2. Deplores
property;
I

the loss of life and heavy damage to

“3. Considers that premeditated and repeated military
attacks endanger the maintenance of the peace;

10. The Council meets here today as it has so often, to
consider complaints against further incidents of violence.
Outrages have been committed against the Israeli popula.
tion by terrorists operating from Jordan. These acts, in our
view, are clear violations of the cease-fire which th,e
Jordanian Government is pledged to uphold, and w&le 1
can appreciate the difficulties of restraining terrorist
elements in the unnatural circumstances and in the miasma
of fierce emotion that prevails in the area, it is the
responsibility of every Government to do all that it canto
maintain the cease-fire. That, however, is by no means the
whole story, for in the long and lamentable annals of
human violence terror has inevitably given rise to retaliation
and repression, all too often to excessive acts, in whjch
innocent people are killed or maimed or injured, throu.&
no fault of theirs other than that they live in an area where
the shell drops or the bombs fall.

“4. Condemns the further military attacks launched
by Israel in flagrant violation of the United Nations
Charter and resolution 248 (1968) and warns that if such
attacks were to be repeated the Council would duly take
account of the failure to comply with the present
resolution.”
4. The PRESIDENT: I have on my list several speakers
who have signified their intention to address the Council
after the vote is taken, but it is my understanding, after
informal consultations, that the members of the Security
Council are prepared to vote. Therefore, if there is no
objection, I shall put the draft resolution which has just
been read out by the Deputy to the Under-Secretary
General to the vote of the Security Council.

11. The main thrust of this resolution is directed at such
excessive acts of retaliation undertaken in disregard of the
emphatic admonitory language of resolution 248 (1968)
which this Council adopted on 24 March 1968. My
Government strongly deploresthe air attacks 1Runched
by
the Government of Israel againstJordanian territory as1
have stated before. Not only does the Council makethis
explicitly clear in its present resolution, but it also
considers that acts of violence and specifically such
repeated air attacks endangerthe maintenanceof peace
in
the Middle East. This is of coursean expressionof concern
couched in the language of Chapter VI of the United
NationsCharter.

5. Since I dear no objection, we shall now proceed to the
votk.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour: Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark,
Ethiopia, France, Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paqguay,
Senegal, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America.
The draft resolution was adopted unanimously.1
6. The PRESIDENT: With the consent of the Council, the
President takes note of the widespread support that has
been expressed for the efforts of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Gunnar Jarring, in the mission
entrusted to him, and requests the Secretary-General to
convey to him this expression of support.

12. It is the fervent hope of my Government that the
resolution we have just adopted will be taken to hea?by
the Governments concerned, that the Jordanian Govern.
ment will increaseits efforts to control terrorist elements
operating from its territory and that the Governmentor
Israel will launch no more excessiveand repressivemilitary
attacks such as the brutal air operations againstJrbid arid
Salt. Incidents of that kind have a cumulative andinsidious
effect. They heighten the climate of terror and violence
which is the enemy of understanding.They exacerbatethe
hatred that feeds upon itself and constantly threatensa
chain reaction of killing that could againinflame the whole
Middle East. They frustrate the most earnestefforts lo
restore peaceto this area which has beenin turbulencefor
so many years. As AmbassadorMakonnen so ably said
yesterday, thesepast few days have tragically deflectedthe
attention of all parties from the central and critical matters
on which they should be concentrated. How unfortunate it
is that this Councilhashad to devote its proceedings
to acts
on each side that have marred the climate in which peace
can be pursued. For in addressingourselvesto theseactslet
us not deceive ourselves.We are dealing only with the
symptoms, not the causes.History tells us‘gadly that SO
long asthe conditionsof peacearenot agreedandaccepted,
violence and counter-violencewill continue to threatenfle
matter how strongly the rest of humankind may wishpn
end of it. Thus the time is long past when we shoulda&
ourselves:why has it been so difficult tb achievepeace
ia
the Middle East? It is not shameful that we shouldbe
meeting here more than a year after the June war and
nearly eight months after we ha.dunanimouslyadopted&C
resolution of 22 November 1957? This Council did its

7. I now call on the representative of the United States of
America.
8. Mr. BALL (United States of America): Mr.President,
on one subject I am certain that I can, without presumption
or immodesty, speak for my colleagues on the Council even
though I have not consulted them, and that is in expressing
to you, Mr. President our profound admiration for the skill,
sensiti,vity and patience which you have shown in presiding
over the evolution of a draft resolution in which we can
now all join. This is an example of parliamentary statesmanship of the highest order for which we are all grateful to
you, Sir.
9. For long periods, going back more than a quartercentury, the Middle East has lived in an environment of
tension, of conflict, of terror. No nation, no people that has
been an actor in this drama has been without guilt. The
tragedy of terror and the reprisals which it has induced, and
induces, is not only that it levies its principal toll on
innocent victims who are in no way responsible for the
situation against which the violence is aimed; it is that this
pattern of conduct is a deception, a tragic illusion. Neither
J side benefits from terror or violence of any kind; all suffer.
.1 Seeresolution 256 (1968).

2

18. As on many occasions, my delegation feels obliged to
repeat the comments it has made regarding the methods
used in this Council in the fulfilment of so complex a task.
It seems impossible to us that the Cduncil should fail to
realize sooner or later the situation, fraught with future
dangers, which our Organization is creating for itself when
the Council no longer attempts to fulfil all its obligations as
it should.

work well at that time. In resolution 242 (1967) it laid
down the principles on which a just and lasting peace could
be established, a peace that would permit every State in the
area to live in safety behind secure and recognized
boundaries, free from threats or acts of force. It called for
the .withdrawal of Israeli forces from occupied territories, a
just solution to the refugee problem, guarantees of freedom
of navigation through international waterways and guarantees for tht territorial inviolability and political independence of every State in the area.

19. Indeed, it is to be feared that, insofar as the Council
continues to offset the grievances addressed to it by alleged
counter-grievances, we may finally lose a clear view of that
which has always been the strength and greatness of our
Organization, and of this Council, namely, the hope we are
supposed to offer the weak and oppressed.

13. That resolution was carefully drafted and unanimously
adopted, and my Government has given and will continue
to give it every support, as I know every single member of
this Council that honestly desires peace in the area will do
also. But the fact remains that it is only a statement of
principles; it is not self-executing. It can be given effect
only through agreement of the parties and pursuant to that
resolution. Ambassador Jarring continues to promote such
agreement.

20. By this observation my delegation does not wish to
give the impression that it is unaware of the motivations
determining the attitude of those who seem to have an
interest in creating this confusion; for although it is Israel
and the Palestinian people’s just struggle for liberation
which are involved today, the same situation applied to
Rhodesia and South West Africa yesterday, as it may
tomorrow to Zambia or any other African country beset by
all kinds of problems and which will have no other recourse
but to engage in a dreadful and desperate struggle.

14. What more do we need than the resolution of 22
November? Certainly through that resolution the Council
created a framework within which men of goodwill should
bk able to reach a settlement. Yet the lack of progress
which Ambassador Jarring has so far been able to make in
spite of his wise, skilful and untiring efforts brings into
question the very existence of such goodwill, For in spite of
all that he has done, progress continues to be impeded by
procedural rigidities, a refusal on both sides to face the hard
realities to break free from the doctrinal strait jackets with
which each party has voluntarily hobbled itself.

21. In this connexion it is fitting to recall the memorable
words spoken a few days ago by our distinguished colleague
from Senegal, Ambassador Boye:
“Mrmbers of the Council should realize that Sslazar in
Portugal, Ian Smith in Rhodesia and Vorster in South
Africa are listening to us to see how we react to the
interpretation Israel seems to be giving to the concept of
legitimate self-defence” [143&h meeting, para. 1311.

15. Humanity demands more than this. It demands that all
parties to a dispute that keep a major area of the world in
agony and turmoil should act responsibly to resolve it.
Indeed, the Charter obligates the parties to seek a pacific
settlement. I therefore underline the statement that you,
Mr. President, made reporting the widespread support of
the Council for Ambassador Jarring’s efforts, for a just and
Iasting peace is long overdue in the Middle East-tragically
overdue. Such a peace is imperative, such a peace is
possible, provided and only provided that the parties show
humane restraint so as to create a new environment of
understanding and by less doctrinaire positions demonstrate
a will to build that sound and lasting peace for which the
whole world is crying.
J

22. If, today as in the past, our Organization has not been
in a position to respond in the only way appropriate to
Israel’s repeated aggressions against the Palestinian people,
it is undoubtedly because there are forces whose interests
are directly threatened by the struggle undertaken by the
national liberation movements, whether in the Middle East,
South-East Asia, Africa, or even in Latin America.
23. The Algerian delegation is as convinced as any of the
need to arrive at compromises in the settlement of
international disputes, since compromise is the very essence
of co-operation and constitutes a step forward on the path
to mutual understanding and necessary agreement. But here
it is no longer a matter of compromise; it is a matter of
outright surrender of principIes. Unfortunately, we have
become accustomed to a permanent state of bargaining
which only too often flouts all principles, and particularly
those laid down in the Charter of our Organization which
was certainly not intended at the time of its writing to
become a mere list of pious wishes. The authors of the
Charter certainly did not imagine a day would come when
the situation would be such that any threat to peace in the
world, bringing in its wake the destruction and suffering we
all know, would be primarily the subject of refined
legalistic quibbling unrelated to immediate circumstances,
which we all witnessed at the time when we learned of the
latest, and not the last, of Israel’s aggressions.

!6. Mr. BOUATTOURA
(Algeria) (translated from
French): Mr. President, allow me first of all to thank all my
colleagues who have so kindly and generously paid tribute
to my humble self for the uneventful presidency I assumed
during the past month. Although I have not been consulted
by my distinguished colleague Ambassador Ball, I wish to
associate myself fully with the well-deserved words and
tribute he has addressed to you for the way you have
conducted these long, painstaking and delicate negotiations.
17. In explaining its vote, my delegation would like to
draw the conclusions from the discussions which have taken
place in the past few days, in order to reach the best
possible agreement and enable the Security Council to play
its rightful role,
3

24. It is even denied that peace is really threatened on the J 31. Mr. MELLBIN (Denmark): May I first also pav
homage to the extraordinary skill, patience and, indeea,
grounds that peace cannot be threatened whereit does not
statesmanship demonstrated by you, Mr. President, during
exist. Such talk is certainly not the language of the Charter.
Whatever language we use, no one here in the Council can the week-long negotiations which have preceded today’s
deny that a situation of serious conflicts is being per- meeting. If I should emphasize your patience it is not
petuated in the Middle East. To deny the existence of these becauseit overshadowsyour other outstanding faculties but
becausethat wasperhaps the one that I taxed the most,
conflicts in order to avoid sincere and natural implementation of the appropriate provisions of the Charter constitutes
32. Turning to the item on our agenda, I wish to recall
a violation of the Charter and a major step backwards in
relation to the spirit reigning in the international corn. that in my statement in the meeting of the Council on
7 August (1436th meeting/ I outlined the main considers.
munity at the time it wasconceived.
tions which would guide my delegation in the deliberations
on the..questions now on our agenda. In our meeting today
25. No, peace does not reign in the Middle East, nor will it
I shall therefore only explain the vote cast by my
be able to reign there so long as the conditions required for
delegation
in favour of the resolution just adopted by the
the establishment of a just and lasting peace are not
Council. I wish, however, briefly to recall that in out
fulfilled-conditions involving the observanceand effective meeting on 7 August I stated that all violations of the
implementation of all the Charter’s provisions and of all the
cease-fire in the Middle East must be deplored and that it
principles which the international community took such should
be brought home to the parties in no uncertain
pains, if not to implement at least to lay down as universal terms that
the Security Council expects that from now on
moral terms of reference-and I would cite one of the most
they
will
adhere
scrupulously to the cease-fire.I also stated
important, namely the right of peoples to decide their own
that
all
concerned
must support the mission of the Special
fate.
Representative of the Secretary-General.
26. The theory has been advancedin this hall according to
which the so-called defensive measures taken by Israel
should be justified by alleged attacks made from Jordanian
territory. The resolution we have just adopted deals with
this statement as it deserves.The same resolution clearly
establishes that premediated and repeated military attacks
constitute a danger to peace, and that any further military
attack by Israel would be committed in flagrant violation of
the United Nations Charter and of resolution 24s (1968).

33. The resolution just adopted by the Council does te a
certain degree take into account our fundamental view.
points. The resolution is very explicit in its assessmentof
the military actions by Israel and leaves no doubt that those
actions must not be repeated. It is equally clear from the
resolution that all violations of the cease-fire should be
prevented, but the resolution does not contain a reference
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
to the very important mission entrusted to him. That, we
believe, is an imperfection.

27. Moreover, the same resol.ution clearly warnsIsrael that
if such attacks should be repeated the Security Council
would have to consider further and more effective steps as
envisaged in the Charter to ensure against repetition of such
acts.

34. However, I wish to express the great satisfaction of my
delegation with the statement made by you, Mr. President,
in which you took note of the widespread support that has
been expressed for the efforts of the Special Representative
in the mission entrusted to him-,a statement which the
Secretary-General, I understand, will convey to Mr. Jarring,
for whose efforts I would like to take this opportunity to
express the highest admiration of my delegation and,
indeed, of my Government. To our mind, these expressions
of support to the Special Representative bear out that the
parties must extend their full and unconditional COoperation to Ambassador Jarring.

28. At the risk of once more offending the modesty of my
colleague, Mr. Boye, I should like to saythat the resolution
adopted has fortunately followed the advice he himself gave
when he said that we must strongly protest against this
method and say “no” to Israel.
29. There is no doubt that the repeated attacks made by
Israel against Jordan, the systematic action of despoiling
the Palestinians which continues unimpeded constitute
obvious threats to peace. Must we really become resigned to
admitting that at Israel’s next aggression-which, as we all
how,
will not be delayed for long-we shall again have to
call a series of meetings in order to produce once more a
watered-down, hesitant and ineffective resolution which
will be nothing but a reproduction of previous resolutions?

35. It was only in this context that my delegation could
support the resolution. It does not meet with all our wishes
but we know and we acknowledge that it is the price that
other delegations as well have had to pay in order that we
might obtain a compromise which would enjoy the support
of all members of the Council. Under the circumstances
which I have described, we for our part did not consider
that the price was too high because, in speaking with one
voice in this important matter, the Council has put its full
authority behind the resolution. We can only expressthe
hope that this resolution and the constructive interventions
made in the course of our debate will help break up the
vicious circle of violence so that an atmosphere may prevail
conducive to real progress for the efforts of the SPecld
Representative of the Secretary-General to promote agree
ment and assist efforts to achieve a peaceful and accepted

30. We are now at the crossroads: for, either the Security
Council will openly admit its inability to solve these
international problems, as was the case, recently, con
cerning the question of South West Africa, or else it will
owe it to its own position to react effectively, in which case
it will surely have at last to contemplate the implementation of the measures required by the situation and which
are explicitly laid down in the Charter.
4

settlement in accordance with the provisions and principles
in the Security Council’s resolution 242 (1967) of 22
November 1967.
J

startling disparity of magnitude and quality” [1435th
meeting, pura. 731.

.’!I,

42. It is a matter of some satisfaction to my delegation
that in this respect the resolution which we have adopted
had as its core and essence the condemnation of, and
warning to, Israel. It is my delegation’s hope that this is the
last occasion when the Council will remain content with a
resolution of this kind in the face of an act of aggression
which is an unmistakable threat to peace.

36. Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): Mr.President, the representative of the United States, Ambassador George Ball,
certainly spoke for all of us when he paid tribute to your
high statesmanship in uniting the Security Council behind
the resolution that has just been adopted. If I may say a
word more, your determination to break the deadlock
which more than once overtook our consultations was a
great inspiration to us and impelled us not to abandon our
quest for a unanimous resolution. We express our gratitude
to you, Sir.

43. Mr. IGNATIEFF (Canada): Mr. President, I would
wish to associate the ‘delegation of Canada with the
well-merited tributes to the very high qualities of statesmanship-particularly
those of patience and understanding-with which you conducted our affairs, both in
the Council and in the consultations which .have resulted in
the resolution to which we are addressing ourselves today.

37. As the Council is aware, the draft resolution just
adopted has been the result of arduous debates and
exhaustive consultations in which all viewpoints were fully
set forth. It is therefore a compromise text and, like all
such texts, is not entirely satisfactory to all delegations.

44. The Security Council has once again considered and
pronounced itself on a further outbreak of violence in the
Middle East. The complaints of the parties concerned have
been heard in detail, and the Council has now unanimously
approved a resolution reaffirming its previous resolution
248 (1968) in its entirety, and condemning the air attacks
by Israel on Jordanian territory.

38. For our part, we expected a resolution which would
be the logical, sequel to resolution 245 (1968). In that
resolution, the Council clearly pledged itself to consider
further and more effective steps, as envisaged in the
Charter, to ensure against repetition of premediated and
massive military attacks, such as those which werelaunched
on Irbid and Salt in Jordan on 5 June and 4 August. These
attacks were characterized by even greater ruthlessnessthan
in the past, and therefore we felt the Council would fall
short of its duty if it did not proceed to take such effective
steps.

45. Particular note, as far as our delegation is concerned,
has been taken by the Council of the fact that “grave
violations of the cease-fire cannot be tolerated”. In supporting the present resolution, the Canadian delegation
recognizes that acts of retaliation of the kind we have been
considering in the area of Irbid and Salt, however explained, contribute seriously to the deteriotation of the
situation and should be condemned, At the same time, it
should be apparent that the gravity of the situation in the
Middle East results from breaches of the cease-fire on both
sides. We believe ‘that acts of violence feed on one another,
and that all violations of cease.Iire must be avoided. We
believe that the Council, considering its responsibility in
establishing the cease-fire in the area in the first place, must
be firm and precise regarding the need for the prevention of
all violations, of the cerise-fire. The ultimate outcome of this
cycle of violence can only be a breakdown in the tenuous
peace in the Middle East as a whole.

39. It is clear from our debate that the massive air attacks
by Israel’ on Jordanian towns and population centres have
been unanimously condemned. The difficulty in the draftirlg of the resolution did not arise out of any doubts about
Israel’s responsibility. It arose because of long-standing
differences in regard to the exercise by the Council of the
powers conferred on it by the Charter. My delegation is one
of those which firmly believe that the disuse by the
Security ‘Council of its legitimate powers even when the
occasion demands their exercise can only result in the
atrophy of its strength and the decline of its authority.
There have been distressing reports that one of the parties
here consistently holds the Council and its deliberations up
to ridicule. This is the result of our hesitancy to invoke the
Council’s powers.

46. My delegation welcomes the fact that a message is
being sent from this Council conveying widespread support
for the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Representative in his important mission for peace. The full
co-operation of all the parties concerned is essential to the
successof that mission. Ambassador Jarring cannot dictate
a settlement, but he can help the parties to attain one in
accordance with the provisions and principles of Security
. Council resolution 242 (1967).

40. Nevertheless, we voted for the resolution-even though
we considered it inadequate to the needs of the sitirationbecause it condemns Israel’s military attacks on Jordan,
The resolution also warns Israel against a repetition of those
attacks. Furthermore, the Security Council considers that
their repetition constitutes a danger to the maintenance of
peace. The Council’s responsibilities in the face of a danger
to peace are spelt out in the Charter and I have no reason to
recite them on tkis occasion.

_,47. /?$f course, the main responsibility for the achievement
‘of--,a;settlement must lie, as Article 33 of the Charter
indicates, with the parties directly concerned.

41. At the 1435th meeting of the Council on 6 August
1968, I pointed out that to ‘&equate the small, sporadic and
spontaneous acts of resistance of the people of the
territories occupied by Israel” with the massive and brutal
military attacks by “the armed forces of Israel is to ignore a

48. I believe that it is desirable for the Council to try, as it
did successfully though with some difficulty on this
occasion, to achieve a consensus on the problems brought
before it. Nevertheless, it should not be thought that the
5

Council’s resolutions of this kind represent an answerin the
long run. There is no doubt that the Council can at times
successfully and properly state positions. It can also set
forth guidelines for settlement of a dispute, but the Council
cannot impose a settlement. It can only facilitate one.

the Middle East. The French delegation has followed
Mr. Jarring’s activities with the greatest interest. It con.
gratulates him on the efforts he is making within the terms
of reference of resolution 242 (1967) which defines his
mission, and it pays tribute to the patience and Per.
severancehe has shown in the performance of his duties. lt
hopes that his mission will receive the full support of cur
Council, particularly of its permanent members, thereby
helping to make possible the establishment of a just and
lasting peace in the Middle East.

49. My delegation firmly believes that the role of the
Council is to make diplomacy work, to help heal rather
than to inflame the critical situation, and such an approach
is vitally needed in this troubled area with which we are
concerned at this time. But it requires the co-operation of
the parties directly involved. It is with these thoughts in d 58. Mr. BOYE (Senegal) (translated from Frmd+
Mr. President, I should like first of all to say that youhave
mind that the Canadian delegation was able to support the
just demonstrated brilliantly how a highly accompli&d
text of the resolution which has been adopted unanimously
diplomat should act in the conduct of negotiations, Ycu
by the Council.
have been loyal, frank, patient and sincere, showing all
qualities which I take pleasure in emphasizing as I, in turn,
4 50. Sir Leslie GLASS (United Kingdom): Permit me, Sir,
pay you the tribute you deserveso well.
to add the sincere tribute of my delegation to you for your
patient and skilful efforts.
59. Following arduous negotiations, the Council hasjust
adopted a draft resolution on the painful problem which
51. As we conclude our proceedings today with the
consensus which has been achieved, I wish on behalf of my
has been before us for several days. Senegal, which has
Government to make this short stafement.
taken an active part in the negotiations in order to find I
acceptable solution, is gratified by the spirit of co-operation
which has inspired all the representatives during all these
52. Throughout our protracted proceedings all of us, I am
sure, have had uppermost in our minds the necessity of
long days. Open to dialogue as it is, Senegal continues to
avoiding all actions which make a just settlement more
believe that the effo;ts made by Mr. Jarring will be crowned
difficult. On the contrary, what we all wish to see is by successand will no longer be hampered by reprehensible
incidents such as those which have concerned us here,
immediate advance on the basis of the principles and
purposes on which the Security Council voted unanimously
last November. The urgency for pressing ahead with that
60. Certainly the resolution which has just been adopted
initiative is made all the more compelling by the events marks the Council’s more decided intention not to tolerate
which we have been discussing.
this kind of incident any more in the future. The
Government of Israel must cease the bombings on
53. My delegation whole-heartedly supports the efforts of
Jordanian territory and state unequivocally that massiveair
the Secretary-General’s Special Representative and we wish attacks such asthose of Irbid and Salt, which havejust been
to associate our selves in the strongest terms with your
unanimously condemned, will not be resumed again.
statement.
Personally, I see the moderation shown by the Arab
delegations during the negotiations as a proof of their
goodwill in the attempt to reach a just and lasting peace.
4 54. Mr. BERARD (France) (translated from French):
Mr. President, I join my congratulations to those already so The other party should therefore make an effort and stop
fittingly addressed to you by my colleagues.
trying to use certain arguments such as that of legitimate
defence, which is a dangerous concept in international law
55. In its statement of 6 August [1435th meeting], the
and one which I, as an African, could not accept in any case
French delegation had occasion to state its position
because of my solidarity with my Arab brothers, and also
regarding the grave events which have again occurred in the
with those African fighters for freedom who are strugglirrg
Middle East, especially the attacks against Irbid and Salt,
for their human dignity.
which were referred to our Council. Those statements
clearly explain our attitude concerning the resolution we
61. Mr. SOLANO LOPEZ (Paraguay) (translated jwt8
have just adopted and, even though we feel it,represents
Spanish): The Council has just unanimously adopted the
only a minimum on some points, we may congratulate
draft resolution which, as you have said, Mr.President, is
ourselves on the fact that it wasadopted unanimously.
the result of long, arduous and patient consultations during
which the participants have contributed, through mutual
56. At the time of that statement of 6 August, in referring
concessions, towards arriving at a wording acceptable to all.
to resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967 the French
delegation observed, and I quote:
62. A resolution of this type, as one of our colleagueshas
already said, does not, nor can it properly reflect the
“My Government believes that this text , . . should
various criteria of the members, but it does indicate the
form the basis for a settlement in the Middle East and
minimum common denominator. Today’s resolution is se
that all the principles embodied in it should be effectively
exception to this general rule.
carried out” (ibid., para. 311.
63. The criterion upheld by my delegation hasbeen stated
57. The provisions envisaged in this resolution include
repeatedly, and particularly in my statement during cut
morning meeting of last Friday 9 August [r&%
sending a special representative of the Secretary-General to
.b.
6

meeting]. If we examine the resolution adopted in the li&t
of thatlstatement, the reasons why it does not exactly’nor
totally agree with otir general position are obvious. However, under the present circumstances we have added our
vote so that this resolution could be adopted unanimously.

that Israel’s premeditated and repeated attacks on Arab
countries in themselves constitute a threat to the maintenance of peace. In this connexion the resolution contains
a warning that if such acts are repeated by Israel, the
Council will duly note that this resolution has not been
observed. These are serious conclusions and warnings, in
keeping with the real state of affairs. They emphasize the
Council’s responsible approach to its task, which is to put
an end to Israeli aggression against the Arab States and
guarantee peace in the Middle East on the basis of a
political settlement as provided by the Security Council
resolution of 22 November 1967.

64. The primary and constant concern of my Government,
and my delegation which represents it, is to obtain a just
and lasting peace in the Middle East. In the present
conditions we believe the only real possibilities of doing so
are based on the achievement of a total implementation of
the provisions and principles contained in resolution
242 (1967) of 22 November 1967, a resolutian which we
should bear in mind at all times. But if this resolution is to
become a reality, and if the difficult task entrusted to the
talent and devotion of the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative, Ambassador Jarring, is to be successful,the
complete co-operation of the parties concerned ‘is an
indispensable condition. And, as a prerequisite, it is
necessary that all these parties scrupulously observe the
cease-fire ordered by this Council in 1967. This mutual
respect for and submission to the Council’s decisions
constitute the mirninum favorable climate needed for the
Jarring mission eventually to achieve results.

70. The Soviet delegation supported this resolution, considering that its adoption by a unanimous vote of the
Security Council may definitely be useful in creating some
tangible barriers in the path of Israeli aggression. At the
same time, the Soviet delegation considers it indispensable
to state that the resolution adopted, although it does
contain that minimum which offers a possibility of agreement on its wording, nevertheless lacks a number of
important provisions which could strengthen it considerably and heighten its significance as a measure for
putting an end to and preventing Israel’s aggressiveactions.
71. During the complex and protracted consultations on
the drafting of the resolution in which the members of the
Security Council took part, it became perfectly obvious
which of them not only continue to sympatbize with, but
even to protect Israel in the continuation of its aggressive
course. We cannot fail to draw attention to, this circumstance in the discussion of the many serious new acts of
aggression by Israel, inasmuch as such a line with regard to
the aggressor cannot fail to encourage, and in fact does
encourage him to new acts of aggression. Those who take a
sympathetic and protective position regarding the aggressor
cannot fail to sharehis responsibility for the fact that Israel
continues its acts of aggression, and that so far no progress
has been made in implementation of the resolution of 22
November of last year unanimously adopted by the
Security Council. As long as Israel refuses-and, in fact, it
continues to refuse-to implement this resolution, there can
be no progress in this direction.

65. My Government and delegation are not prepared, and
we have said so many times, to condone any of the
violations or breaches of the cease-fire, nor the acts of
violence, including the acts of terrorism.
66. The situation resulting from the conditions I have
mentioned would be temporary, and only temporary, until
all the provisions of resolution 242 (1967) have been
implemented and all its objectives achieved. We hope that
no new incidents will require our attention in the future.
We also hope the tirre wi!l come when this long and bloody
era will end in the Middle East and another of just and
Iasting peace and prosperity for all the countries of the
region will begin.
67. In conclusion, allow me, Mr. President, to join those
who have already paid tribute to you for the outstanding
tact and remarkable skill with which you have conducted
our protracted consultations preceding the unanimous
adoption of today’s resolution.

72. It goes without saying that not one of the provisions
of the resolution adopted by the Council today can ‘be
regarded as aimed against the struggle for freedom of the
Arab population in the territory occupied by Israel as a
result of its aggression. In this struggle the people of the
occupied territories are defending their legitimate, inalienable right to freedom, a right acknowledged to all
people by the international community and by well and
widely known decisions of the United Nations.

68. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
The Security Council has just
unanimously adopted a resolution which decisively condemns Israel’s new acts of aggression against Jordan’s
territory, the barbarous bombing of the towns of Irbid and
Salt, carried out in violation of the Security Council
decision on a cease-firein the Middle East and despite the
warning previously issued to Israel by the Security Council
in its resolution of 24 March of thiz year [248 (1968)].
[translated

from Russian):

73. As to whether a political settlement in the MiddIe
East, based on the Security Council resolution of 22
November 1967 will in fact be effected and when this will
be done, now depends on Israel, since the Arab States have
clearly and explicitly declared their readiness to accept and
implement all the provisions of this resolution; they have
even expressed their readiness to work out a time-table for
its enactment. Therefore, the main problem is to put an end
to Israel’s aggression, its new acts of aggression against the
Arab countries and peoples, and eliminate the consequences
of this aggression.

69. The resolution now adopted by the Council contains
the indispensable minimum of the provisions required of
the Security Council in the present situation. In its
resolution the Council firmly and specifically condemned
Israel for the new military attacks on Jordan. It not only
condemned these new military attacks, which is very
important, but, in conformity with the Charter of the
United Nations, went further and expressed its conviction
7

74. The situation in the Middle East continues to become
increasingly dangerous as a direct result, of Israel’s unceasing
aggressive actions against Arab States. The present aggravas
tion of the situation in the Middle East is the direct
consequence of Israel’s aggression against Arab countries in
June 1967 and its incessant new acts of aggression against
Arab countries.
75. It is quite evident that in its position, which constitutes a challenge to the Security Council-a challenge to
the entire United Nations Organization-Israel continues, as
in the past, to count on outside support on the part of
certain Governments, and first of all, as is perfectly
obvious, on support from the United States.
76. This is the crux of the matter. This is the causeof the
difficulties in the implementation of the Security Council
resolution of 22 November 1967; this is the root of the
difficulties hampering the success and mission of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General of the
United Nations in the Middle East, Ambassador Jarring.

resolution will prove an effective and positive contdbution
by the Security Council towards peace in the Middle East.
81. In the view of my delegation, the present resolution
deplores all violations whatsoever of the cease-firewhile
laying stress on the premeditated military attacks recently
launched by Israel against Jordan. In dealing with these
grave incidents we cannot however lose sight of the
measures previously taken by the Security Council towards
the establishment of a durable peace in the area, h this
connexion my delegation wishes to reiterate its full support
of the efforts of Ambassador Gunnar Jarring, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General ln the Middle East,
to promote agreement and assist efforts to achievea
peaceful and acceptable settlement in accordance with the
provisions of resolution 242 (1967).

77. Therefore any attempt, from whatever quarter, to
mitigate Israel’s responsibility and transfer its fault to the
other side cannot be regarded otherwise than as lending aid
and support to the aggressor.Whoever does so is hindering a
peaceful settlement in the Middle East ‘and is therefore
assuming a grave responsibility for all the possible consequences: for the aggravation of the situation, and for all
those obstacles arising both in the path of implementation
of the Security Council resolution, and in that of Ambassador Jarring’s successful accomplishment of the mission
entrusted to him.

82. The Brazilian delegation wishes to emphasize the point
made in its previous statement of 9 August [1437tlr
meeting] before the Security Council and to reiterate its
appeal to the major Powers to reflect that they should
endeavour to reach understanding on the crucial question
of the supply of armaments and instruments of war to the
parties involved in the crisis of the Middle East. At this
stage we forgo the presentation of any specific suggestions
on this matter, which certainly requires further thought,
study and examination. But we would be failing in our
responsibility as a member of the Security Council if wedid
not draw the attention of the major Powers and of the
members of the Council to the armaments race now
prevailing in the area-an armaments race which could lead
the countries affected to a new round of fighting and
untold sorrow and distress.

78. If Israel, taking advantage of this, once again attempts
to repeat its aggressiveacts against Arab States, then the
Security Council will obviously be obliged to refer directly,
in its decisions, to those who sympathize with Israel and
support its aggressivepolicy.

83. It is our earnest conviction that efforts should not be
spared in this connexion, and we reiterate the appeal we
previously made to the major Powers upon whom falIsthe
primary responsibility for the preservation of world peace
and security.
84. Speaking now as PRESIDENT of the Security Council,
I would ask if any member wishes to address the Councilon
the resolution which has been adopted.

79. The Soviet Union firmly maintains the need for the
most rapid settlement possible of the Middle East problem
on the basis of the Security Council resolution of 22
November 1967. The Soviet Union has done and is doing
everything necessary to contribute to the implementation
of this important decision of the Security Council. The
Soviet Union supports the efforts of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General of the United Nations in
the Middle East, Ambassador Jarring, and sincerely desires
the successof his mission which is designed to promote the
implementation of the Security Council resolution of 22
November 1967.

85. The representative of Iraq has asked for the floor.
86. Mr. PACHACHI (Iraq): The Security Council hasjust
adopted another resolution condemning Israel’s attackson
Jordan and warning that such attacks in the future will lead
to more effective measures. It is our hope that this will be
the last warning. For two decades now, the Security
Council has been warning Israel, but to no avail. This latest
action of the Council reinforces the already firmly estab
lished jurisprudence and practice of the United Nations that
military reprisals are inadmissible under any circumstances
and for whatever alleged provocation. This principle has
been reaffirmed many times in the last two decadessin@it
was first enunciated in clear and unequivocal terms en 19
August 1948 [resolution N/1948)],
when the Cearreil
decided that “No party is permitted to violate the truceea
the ground that it is undertaking reprisals or retaliations
against the other party”

80. The PRESIDENT: Speaking as the representative of
BRAZIL I wish to state very briefly the reasons which have
prompted my delegation to support the resolution which
the Security Council has just adopted unanimously. This
resolution was the result of long and protracted negotiations and it represents the consensus of the Security
Council. While it is perfectly natural that not all of our
points of view have been met and not all of our opinions
are reflected in the text adopted, none the less it is the
earnest conviction of my delegation that we have adopted a
safe and wise course and we sincerely hope that the

87. Moreover, the Council today has refused once agalat*
equate the actions of the so-called infiltrators With the of
8

Israel’s armed forces. This view is held not only by Arab
States but also by States which can hardly be accused of
being unfriendly to Israel. I recall that in similar circumstances the representative of the United Kingdom, Lord
Caradon, said: “This large-scale military action cannot be
justified, explained away or excused by the incidents which
preceded it”, or, as Ambassador Goldberg of the United
States said, again in similar circumstances: “This deliberate
governmental decision must be judged as the conscious act
of responsible leaders of a Member State, and therefore on
an entirely different level from the earlier incidents.”

93. Under the pretext of giving the Jarring mission a
chance to succeed, the Arabs are told to bear silently and
stoically their misfortunes, while Israel is permitted, with
full freedom and impunity, to proceed with its plans for
annexation of the occupied territory,
94. Now, what has been Israel’s record in the past year?
The representative of Israel often speaks of reciprocity; but
for him, reciprocity means freedom of action for Israel in
the occupied territories and complete immobility for the
Arabs of Palestine. Lest we forget, let us refresh our
memories by a very brief account of the most glaring
examples of Israel’s activities in the last fourteen months;
and then we can be in a better position to judge how we
can have reciprocity in this case.

88. The cease-fire resolution was addressed exclusively to
Governments. It logically follows that violations of that
resolution can be attributed to Governments only for
actions undertaken directly by them, under their own
authority and control. In view of this, the activities of the
Palestinian patriots, which have never been inspired,
directed or controlled by any Arab Government, do not
and cannot, either in fact or in law, fall under the cease-fire
resolution. As far as the Government of Jordan is concerned it has respected and scrupulously observed the
cease-fire, while Israel has continuously violated it. In fact,
those violations go as far back as June 1967, when large
areas on the west bank and in Syria were occupied after the
adoption of the cease-fire resolution and its acceptance by
Israel and the Arab States directly concerned.

95. In the Suez Canal area, there has been wilful and
deliberate obstruction by Israel of all efforts to open the
Canal; there has also been repeated shelling of densely
populated areas in the Suez Canal region, with heavy loss of
life; in Gaza, continuing and systematic expulsion and
maltreatment of the civilian population, including refugees;
refusal to accept a special representative of the SecretaryGeneral to go into the occupied territories to see for
himself what kind of treatment is being meted out to the
civilian population; in the Syrian sector the establishment
of nahal colonies and further expulsion of the Arab
population; in Jerusalem, annexation of the City in clear
violation of the resolutions of the General Assembly and
the Security Council; expropriation of Arab property;
demolition of Arab property, and desecration of Holy
Places-all in defiance of the United Narions resoIutions.

89. These incontrovertible facts, and no fictitious and
fabricated stories which the representative of Israel claims
to be confidential information can alter them. I must say,
however, that the representative of Israel has introduced a
novel, if somewhat bizarre, element into our discussions by
labelling the usual harangue, to which the Council has
listened with infinite patience all these months, as “confidential information”.

96. On the west bank, civilians have been prevented from
returning to their homes, again in violation of the humanitarian resolutions of this Council and of the General
Assembly. There are administrative and economic measures
in the west bank area to integrate that area into Israel; on
the east bank, continuous shelling and bombing across the
Jordan, and, of course, the five instances of armed
incursion across the Jordan River and inside Jordanian
territory, on 21 March, 8 April, 4 June, 4August and
6 August.

90. Yesterday the representative of Israel changed his
tactics and started dropping names and numbers of alleged
regiments. And he referred to the alleged activities of the
Iraqi forces stationed in Jordan at the request of the
Jordanian Government in order to help that Government to
repel Israeli aggression against its territory. The representative of Jordan has already categorically denied those
allegations, and I do likewise today. In our view, wild and
unsubstantiated stories of this kind are no substitute for
facts for the Council’s consideration.

97. Now, against such a background of continuous and
wilful disregard of the resolutions of this Organization and
a policy of relentless expansion, can the people of Palestine
be blamed for continuing their struggle against Israel?

91. But let us assume for the sake of argument that the
Palestinians are willing to cease their activities, or that the
Arab Governments are able-which they are not, I repeatto put an end to those activities: what is there to warrant or
justify such reticence on the part of the Palestinians or the
Arab Governments? Has Israel done anything since the war
of June 1967 to inspire confidence in its intentions? Has it
really left any alternative to the Palestinians but to fight
and resist?

98. If you want reciprocity, then you must give the people
of Palestine all the right in the world to react against this
catalogue of continuous violations and maltreatment on the
part of Israel. And in this struggle for survival, the people of
Palestine are fighting to preserve their identity as a distinct
national Arab community. They are determined to stay
alive whatever the cost. They will never submit. For it
cannot be repeated too often that the people of Palestine
have been the victims of a colonial invasion unparalleled in
its viciousness and ferocity. Like other colonial peoples
who fell under alien rule, they aspire to regain their rights
uld. recover their !ost freedom and their usurped homeland.

92. When you ask everyone to stop all activities that may
harm you, are you not expected to do the same? Or is this
a one-way operation: Israel is to be free to do whatever it
likes inside the occupied territories, while the Palestinians
should keep quiet and watch passively?

99. I think I can anticipate what the representative of
Israel will be saying in a short while: he will repeat the
9

by them, those we heard today, are precisely tile same as
malicious and tendentious diatribe about alleged Arab
five and ten and fifteen years ago-when their belligerency
aggression. But the fact is that in the three major armed
and hostility reigned supreme as unfortunately they still do
conflicts which broke out between the Arab States and
at present.
Israel duling the last twenty years it was always Israel
which committed aggression and attacked first. Was it not
105. To us in Israel this adamantly warlike posture of the
Israel which launched a carefully planned attack against the
Arab
Governments is not a matter of Security Council
Arab countries in June 1967, an attack which could not by
debates only. To us it is expressed in premeditated and
any standard be considered a spontaneous act of selfrepeated attacks from Arab territory, in open preparations
defence? And in 1956 was it not Israel, in collusion with
for
another round against Israel, in unabated incitement to
two great Powers, which attacked Egypt? In 1948, the
hostility and hatred. To us this is the continuation of th#c
Arab armies, the armies of the Arab State, entered Palestine
twenty-year
war of Arab aggression, pursued now ti~
only to save the remnants of the Arab population from
particular
by
the method of terror warfare. The Security
complete annihilation and to prevent the entire country
Council discussion has left no doubt regarding the direct
from being occupied by the advancing Zionist forces. It is a
responsibility of Arab Governments for this warfare.
well-known
fact that in 1948 the Zionist forces had
occupied large areas which were allotted to the Arab States
under the Partition Plan and made hundreds of thousands
106. The resolution which has just been adopted demon.
of Palestinian Arab refugees long before a single soldier of r? ti es again the inadequacy of the Security Council’s
handling of this situation. It reminds us of the long-stand&
the Arab States had entered the country.
disabilities under which the Security Council labours in
questions arising from the Israel-Arab conflict. However,
100. I also think it is pertinent to say that in all these three
conflicts-1948,
1956 and 1967-the fighting took place
these circumstances cannot affect the fundamental prel;eprs
of law. These bestow upon Israel the inalienable right tu
entirely on Arab soil, never on land controlled by Israel,
defend itself against the continued warfare waged by the
101. The representative of Israel made ill-concealed and
Arab States, a right enshrined in the United Nations
undisguised threats yesterday regarding the possibility of
Charter. The Government of Israel is responsible for the
the outbreak of hostilities in the area. If this should happen
security of the population in Israel-controlled territory and
in spite of all the resolutions of the Security Council, it
will discharge this responsibility in accordance with its
should be clear to all members where the responsibility lies,
rights and duties. The people of Israel too, like any other
and it is our hope, after all these warnings, that when the
people in the world, has a right to independence, security
Security Council meets again-and it will meet again after
peace.
another incident or another attack launched by Israel-the
warning which it has been issuing for all these twenty years
107. I should like to express appreciation to those
will finally mean something and will finally be translated
delegations that have raised their voice against the Arab actr
into effective action, because without that there can be no
of aggression. It is regrettable that reference to these acts in
chance for peace in the region.
the resolution is insufficient, thus reflecting once more thz
Council’s inability to deal effectively and equitably with
102. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
this grave obstacle to peace in the area.
Israel.
108. Yet, if the Jordanian and other Arab Governmenls
\il 103. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I should like to express to
heed the unequivocal injunction in the resolution against
YOU, Mr. President, my delegation’s tribute and also to all
violations of the cease-fire, they will take action to
members of the Security Council our appreciatio 1 Jf the
terminate all military attacks-whether
by regular or ire
patience and devotion as shown in the prolonged discussion
regular forces against Israel-attacks
which endanger the
of the situation arising from the warfare pursued against
maintenance of peace. If they do that, the cease-fire will be
Israel from Jordanian territory and Israel’s defence measeffectively maintained.
ures,
109. Israel will do its utmost to ensure the maintenance of
104. A significant result of the debate just concluded on
the cease-fire. It expects the Arab States to do the same.
the Israel and Jordanian complaints is undoubtedly the
Israel will pursue its efforts to attain a just and lasting peace
light it has thrown on the present Arab attitude toward
in the area through negotiations and agreement and wifl
Israel. It remains an intransigent, belligerent attitude. It
extend its co-operation to Ambassador Jarring’s endeavours
openly supports the continuation of warfare against Israel
towards this objective. It hopes that the Arab States will acl
in violation of the cease-fire. It continues to be based on
likewise. Whatever they do, however, it is essential that
the Khartoum decisions of no peace; no negotiations, no
they bear in mind at all times that reciprocity remains Ihe
recognition of Israel, decisions which’defy the Charter of . cornerstone of the relationship between sovereign States
the United Nations and the Security Council resolution of
and that it is therefore in the interest of all the peoplesof
22 November 1967. The Arab States are called upon to
the areathat the cease-firebe fully respected.
reach a just and lasting peace with Israel. They retort-no
peace with Israel. They are called upon to arrive at
110. The PRESIDENT: I now call upon the representative
agreement with Israel. The Arab States proclaim-there will
of Jordan.
be no agreement with Israel. Indeed, the attitude adopted
by the Arab States in this debate; the tenor of statements
111. Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): On 5 August, we bro@I
made by their representatives, including the arguments used
before the Council a complaint of a very seriousnature.A
10

very grave violation of the cease-fire was committed by
Israel, in defiance of your previous resolution 248 (1968)
~. I
and in flagrant violation of the United Nations Charter. The
Israeli authorities in Tel Aviv, as well as their representative
in the Security Council, admitted that they had committed
that grave violation, and we therefore asked the Council to
reaffirm the stand it took in resolution 248 (1968) and
consider further and more effective steps as envisaged in the
Charter, in accordance with that resolution, to ensure
against repetition of such acts. We have asked the Council
to
condemn Israel and to invoke Chapter VII of the
Charter.
112. In an attempt to distort the issue, Mr. Tekoah
adduced many irrelevant arguments and a variety of
colourful, wild allegations to justify the war crime committed by the Israeli air force-namely, the bombing of the
civilian population.

down to the will of the occupier. Ambassador Malik asked
the question: who is responsible for this theory? Hitler?
His henchmen? Has Israel fallen so low as to propound this
Hitler-like theory, denying the rights of the inhabitants of
the occupied territories to be patriots, to fight for their
freedom and that of their country? The Soviet Union
condemned the Israeli attack in the strongest terms.
119. The representative of Pakistan emphasized that the
new Israeli act of aggression is not merely another in a long
chain, but graver than the earlier incidents. He said that
deploring the latest action, in order to be meaningful,
should go beyond a mere expression of sentiments; it has to
be formulated in such terms, in a pronouncement of the
Council, as to have a deterrent effect on Israel.
120. The representative of Senegal, Ambassador Boye,
said that Senegal cannot but formally condemn the raids
and military operations, such as those before the Council,
which can only jeopardize the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Representative. He also reminded the
Council that Jordan was not the aggressor and had not
unleashed any attack against Israel, and that it was on its
territory and its towns and cities, that the bombs fell.

113. We asked the Council to reject the arguments,
emphasizing that what was committed was a war crime that
had no justification. Jordan reminded the Council that the
bombing of civilians was listed in the Nuremberg indictment and considered at the Nuremberg trials as a war crime.
We are grateful to members of the Council for not taking
Mr. Tekoah’s allegations seriously when they considered the
draft resolution.

121. The representative of Hungary expressed his delegation’s deep concern over these new acts of aggression by the
Israeli armed forces against Jordan.

114. The question of observers was raised by a few
members during our deliberations. Our answer was that the
emphasis should be placed on the withdrawal of foreign
Israeli troops occupying our territories-not
on any idea
which may amount to helping freeze the situation or
accommodate the continued Israeli aggression.

122. The representative of India said that his delegation
has had many occasions to state before, and would not
hesitate to repeat, that there can be no peace in West Asia
without
the withdrawal
of Israeli armed forces from
occupied Arab territories. That was one of the fundamental
principles embodied in the Security CounciI resolution of
22 llovember 1967. He emphasized that the representatives
of the United Arab Republic and Jordan have already
indicated more than once the willingness of their Governments to implement in full the resolution of 22 November.
The Council, he said, must expect Israel to come forward
with a similar statement.

115. We would like to repeat that the continued Israeli
presence, together with the arbitrary measures now being
taken in Jerusalem, Gaza, the Golan Heights, and the
occupied Arab territories constitute a grave violation of the
cease-fire. This is simply because a cease-fire represents a
transitional stage; it is a temporary arrangement. It should
also be borne in mind that the Security Council’s injunction
calling for a cease-fire was issued to the parties with that
understanding.

r23. Our colleague the representative of Ethiopia said that
in spite of a unanimous decision taken ten months ago by
the Security Council, the situation remains as dangerous as
ever, with the prospect of another conflict beginning to
loom large in the background. This, he said, is a very serious
prospect, to which we should give our full and undivided
attention, Otherwise, we run the risk of making the same
historical error as we made during the time preceding the
conflict of June 1967, the error of leaving things to drift
towards tension, confrontation and final conflict.

116. My delegation would like to express its satisfaction at
the constructive approach adopted by the members of the
Council. All members, without exception, in one way or
another condemned the Israeli premeditated large-scale
military attacks, Let me, with your permission, cite some of
these statements.
117. The representative of France stated that his Government was seriously alarmed by the repetition of incidents as
serious as those committed despite appeals and decisions of
the Security Council. He said that the Council must
condemn such action and must, above all, do everything to
prevent a recurrence by ‘ensuring an effective application of
the Security Council resolution of 22 November.

124. The representative of the United States, Mr. George
Ball, made it clear that his Government does not condone
the major military attack Israel made upon Jordan. He said
that there must be no doubt whatsoever of the United
States opposition to this attack and others that have
preceded it, and I take it that what he meant by others was
Irbid, Karameh, Shunah and similar attacks.

118. The representative of the Soviet Union, Ambassador
125. The United States representative then referred to the
Malik, said that the Israeli representative had placed before
human aspects of the tragedy, asking the question, “How
the Council a monstrous theory to the effect that inhabitants of occupied territories have but one right: to bow _ many more incidents must occur, how many lives must be
11

lost, how many families must look forward to a bleak and
tragic future before this hard but simple lesson is learned? ”
[1434th meeting, para, PP4.J How many no one can say
today, he said, but in situations as complex as this the best
we can do is urge and hope.
126. This afternoon, the representative of the United
States referred to outrages that “have been committed
against the Israeli population by terrorists operating from
Jordan”.
127. Mr. President, with your permission we are concluding our debate, but I am not aware of any evidence
introduced in this Council implicating Jordan other than
the statement of Mr, Tekoah. Mr. Tekoah has been offering
wild allegations, wild fabrications. He has been repeating
distortions time and again, and apparently believing that
sometimes repeating a lie may make it stick. I am surprised
to hear the United States, without any evidence against
Jordan whatsoever, come and say that terrorists were
operating from Jordan, Which part of Jordan? The west
bank, the part occupied by Israel? This is resistance from
within. The other side? Where is the proof? In the
Security Council we go by evidence,’ and I know of no
evidence whatsoever implicating my Government, but if the
idea is to have Jordan protect Israeli aggression, this was
never the case in any resistance. National resistance is not
something new to the Council, nor to any member around
this table.
128. The other points. It was mentioned that parties
should realize the harsh reality. Yes, Israel should realize
the harsh reality and the realities are there for every
member to see. Reality number one is that Israel does not
want to accept the harsh reality that it cannot ignore the
immediate party, the 2.5 million Palestinians, This is the
reality, the harsh reality, for Israel, but they cannot simply
ignore it.

134. Thus this resolution embodies not only condemna.
tion of the attacks, but a specific paragraph which consides
that the Israeli military attacks endanger the malntcnalla
of the peace, and here the term “peace” has only one
meaning, that is, international peace embodied in Chapter
VII of the Charter.
135. However, my delegation feels that the Council was
too patient in giving Israel-after it committed seven actsof
aggression and after It was condemned or censured seven
times-another warning. We thought the Council owed it to
itself to go far beyond the steps already taken. We were
hoping that the Council this time would, besides condemaing
Israel for its arrogant defiance of the Council, without any
further delay apply sanctions. We are aware of the fact tlla!
the resolution has this time gone much further than any
other resolution adopted in the past vis-l-vis Israeli aggres.
sion. But certainly it did not go far enough.
136. We expressed the hope that the Council would carry
out its responsibilities and face the Israeli aggression with
the only remaining effective remedy, namely, sanctions.

129. Reality number two: Israel does not want to accept
the harsh reality that it is those people within the occupied
area and outside it who are struggling for their homeland,
their liberty and their freedom. Over those people, Jordan
has no control.
130. Reality number three: it is true that Israel cannot
accept the harsh reality that national resistance and
terrorism are not identical. The United States in particular,
which resisted foreign occupation, would be unfair to its
history if it called resistance in the cause of independence
and freedom terrorism. It would be unjust to George
Washington, the great American, who started a revolbtion,
calling for resistance and liberation. It would be unfair to
the great values of the United States if we confuse
resistance for liberation with terrorism. It would be unfair
to the great Constitution of the United States if WCstart
confusing resistance
..
. for liberation, for getting rid of the
occupier, with terrorism.

133. The Security Council, after lengthy debate, consultations and contacts with the capitals, has unanimously
adopted a resolution this afternoon. It reaffirmed its
resolution 248 (1968), which declared that grave violations
of the cease-fire cannot be tolerated and that the Cour~cil
would have to consider further and more effective steps a
envisaged in the Charter to ensure against repetition of such
acts. The Council considered that the premeditated rnilitav
attacks by Israel endangered the maintenance of peace.
Finally, the Security Council condemned these further
attacks by Israel in flagrant violation of the Charter aad
resc$tion 248 (1968), and warned Israel in clear terms that
if such attacki were to be repeated the Councils would duly
take account of the failure to comply with the resolution.
This is taken from Article 40 of the Charter, which appears
in Chapter VII.

137. This is the more so, since these latest Israeli attacks
were aimed at civilian centres and peaceful Jordanians in
towns and cities. Any leniency on the part of the Council ie
taking a punitive and effective measure, or any under.
estimation of the grave and serious situation which would
result from large-scale Israeli attacks of this kind, can only
encourage Israel and lead to a further deterioration of the
situation in the area, It will obstruct the constructiw
efforts of the Secretary-General’s Special Representative,
Ambassador Jarring,
138. What is more, it will lead to a loss of faith in the
Security Council by peoples and Governments. Peoples will
then question the usefulness of resorting to the Council for
effective remedy.
J

131. Israel should realize the harsh reality-this is number
four-that this Organization reFused to accept military force
as a substance for valid armistice agreements.
132. The other harsh reality, which relates to number
three, is the fact that the United Nations itself recognized
the legitimacyof resistance
for freedom.
12

139. I n conclusion, Mr. President. I should like to express
the appreciation of my Government and my delegatiwl to
you for the patience, wisdom and statesrnanship with which
you conducted our deliberations. I should like to ~39
tribute to the representatives of Senegal and Pakistan for
their constructive contributions. They were certainly instrw
mental in bringing about the unanimousresult achievedthis
afternoon. I know that there wasa time whenthe COUIK~

was facing one deadlock after another, but thanks to your
wisdom, Mr.President, and to the contributions of the
representatives of Senegal and Pakistan, together with the
goodwill and genuine desire of all members to co-operate,
unanimity was brought about in the Council, although it
falls short of our expectation.

142. On the other hand, I need not remind the Council
that Israel has not yet accepted this resolution in its
entirety, and has not declared that it will implement this
resolution. Actually, we hear of official Israeli statements
rejecting the resolution. We also observe the continuous
Israeli attacks on Jordan, in direct violation of the cease-fire
resolution.

140. My delegation would like to express its gratitude to
the delegations of France, the Soviet Union, India, Ethiopia
and Hungary for their kind support for our just cause,and
for their continued efforts to reach a decision.

143. Jordan has been working for peace. It is the Israeli
stand that is not helping peace in the land of the Prince of
Peace.

141. Much has been said during our deliberations about
giving Ambassador Jarring, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, full support. Our support for Ambassador Jarring is expressed in deeds and words. We have
co-operated with him, and we shall continue to do so. I
need not repeat that we accepted, and will continue to
accept, the resolution of 22 November. We declare our
acceptanceto implement the resolution in its entirety.

\/144. The PRESIDENT: As we have come to the conclusion of our debate, I wish to expressmy thanks for the kind
and generous words addressedto me by several delegations,
and I wish to express my deep gratitude to each of the
members of the Security Council for all the understanding,
goodwill and statesmanship that made this conclusion
possible.
l%e meeting rose at 8.5 p.m.

13

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

United
Nations
publications
the world.
Consult
Your

NATIONS
may
bookstore

PUBLtCATtONS

be obtained
or write

from bookstores
to: United
Nations,

and

distributors
Sales
Section,

throughout
New York

or Geneva.

COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

Les publications
der
deportfairer
du monde

Nations
entier.

Nations

Unies,

des ventes,

HAK

IlOflY’iklTb

COMO

Section

CONSEGUIR

DES NATIONS

Unier
sent
Informer-vow

HBAAHMR

PUBLICACIONES

New York

en vente
dans
ouprhs
de votre

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

les librairier
librairie
ou

et les agencer
adresser-vouy
6:

ou Gentve.

OPFAHM3A~MM

DE LAS

tar publicaciones
de lar Nacioner
Unidor
estbn
en todas partes
del mundo.
Consulte
a IV librero
Ventar,
Nueva
York o Ginebro.

Litho

UNIES

06bEAMHEHHblX

NACtONES
en vcnta
o dirijare

$U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

HAUHI

UNIDAS
en

in other

librerias
a: Necioner

Y casas dirtribuidorar
Unidar.
Seccibn

currencies)

de

35666-October

1972~2,050
