A/56/PV.94

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-sixth session

94

th plenary meeting
Friday, 15 February 2002, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Han Seung-soo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

In the absence of the President, Mr. Balzan
(Malta), Vice-President, took the Chair.

(Republic of Korea)

Agenda item 32 (continued)
Multilingualism

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Draft resolution (A/56/L.44/Rev.2)
Agenda item 125 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations
Letter from the Secretary-General
(A/56/780/Add.2)
The Acting President: In the letter contained in
document A/56/780/Add.2, the Secretary-General
informs the President of the General Assembly that
since the issuance of his communications contained in
documents A/56/780 and Add.1, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya has made the necessary payment to reduce
its arrears below the amount specified in Article 19 of
the Charter.
May I take it that the General Assembly duly
takes note of the information contained in this
document?
It was so decided.

The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of France to introduce draft resolution
A/56/L.44/Rev.2.
Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): First, a
technical point. In operative paragraph 9 of the French
version of the text of the draft resolution, the words
“Dag Hammarskjöld” must be deleted, so that the texts
are exactly the same in all the official languages.
I believe that today is an important and happy day
for the Assembly. We are all here together in this Hall,
representing all the peoples of the world in their
cultural, political, religious and economic diversity.
This diversity is a fundamental wealth of our humanity.
When one says “diversity” in this building, one
naturally says “dialogue” — economic dialogue,
political dialogue, but also cultural dialogue and, this
year in particular, a dialogue of civilizations.
In order to have this dialogue, we must
understand one another, and for that purpose we must
agree on the question of languages. I think we have

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

02-25456 (E)

*0225456*

A/56/PV.94

succeeded in understanding one another, and I am very
much pleased to say so. Understanding means, first of
all, respect for the other and hearing the other. It is in
this spirit that France, along with all the other sponsors
of the text before the Assembly, decided twice, on 11
December and 21 December, to delay voting on the
draft resolution because we had the feeling that we had
not yet arrived at a perfect understanding through this
necessary dialogue.
Today — unlike in 1995, when we last voted on a
substantial text on the issue of languages and were
divided in that vote — I hope that we shall adopt this
text by consensus. I say this with deep satisfaction and
express the gratitude of France and all the other
sponsors to all those who participated in the many
informal meetings that gradually led to an agreement.
My gratitude is addressed first to the sponsors
themselves, who agreed not to have a vote and to be
flexible in the negotiations. They also agreed that the
text now before the Assembly should be a bit less
exacting on the question of languages. However, this
lesser requirement allows us to have the force of
consensus. I say to all the sponsors that it seems to me
that a less exacting text, adopted by consensus, has
greater political force.
The gratitude of France and all the sponsors also
goes to all the States that do not have the good fortune
or privilege of being represented in the Assembly
through an official language. I am addressing myself
particularly to Ambassador Yukio Satoh, but also to the
representatives of great countries — such as Korea and
countries in South-East Asia, countries in Europe and
in Latin America — that are not represented in this
Hall through an official language and nevertheless
agreed to participate with us in these long and good
negotiations, which have enabled us to come together
today. I feel that we have been able to take their
concerns into account in this text.
In addition, the gratitude of France and the other
sponsors goes to the English-speaking countries.
Though they are represented by an official language,
we needed their understanding. We have listened to the
arguments of the countries — including India, Nigeria,
South Africa and others — for which English is the
second, third or fourth language, used for
communication, and thus for which the requirement of
learning a second official language is a handicap and a
heavy burden, since in universities in the developing

2

countries students must concentrate mainly on studies
other than languages.
I think I can say that we have also been able to
take into account the arguments of this important group
of English-speaking countries — in particular
developing English-speaking countries of the South —
to help us reach a consensus. We have asked them to
listen to the arguments of the developing countries
fortunate enough to be represented in this Hall by
means of an official language — be it Spanish, French,
Russian, Chinese or Arabic — for which that official
language is also not their first language, but often the
second or third language after their mother tongue,
their local or regional tongue and is used for
communication, as is the case with English in India or
Nigeria. We have asked that their problem also be
taken into account.
I think that I am in a position to say that that is
the case today. It seems to me, therefore, that the text
the Assembly now has before it is the product of a
genuine consensus.
In conclusion, let me say that this text represents
success for each and every delegation. It is a highquality text that unites us around a common goal: to
promote multilingualism as well as the six official
languages of our United Nations, with determination
and ambition, but also with realism and pragmatism.
This message of unity is addressed especially to the
Secretariat, which will have to implement this text day
by day.
One last word. This text contains two parts,
because, apart from the question of the six official
languages, we have also heard from those who, like the
Ambassador of Papua New Guinea, want attention to
be paid also to those languages spoken by ethnic
minorities in their own countries. To that end, we have,
with everyone’s agreement, asked the SecretaryGeneral to report to us on that issue.
This is what France wanted to say to the
Assembly. From the bottom of our hearts, we extend
our gratitude to all on behalf of all of the sponsors.
The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/56/L.44/Rev.2.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.

A/56/PV.94

Mr. Perfiliev (Director, General Assembly and
Economic and Social Council Affairs Division): I
should like to inform members that, should the General
Assembly adopt draft resolution A/56/L.44/Rev.2 on
the implementation of the conclusions and
recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General (A/56/656), which would be
endorsed by operative paragraph 1 of draft resolution
A/56/L.44/Rev.2, this would imply a review of those
conclusions and recommendations by the relevant
intergovernmental organs, including the Committee on
Information. Should those intergovernmental organs
make recommendations in the context of the review
which could lead to additional requirements under the
regular budget, a statement of programme budget
implications would be submitted to those organs, in
accordance with established procedures, as appropriate.

resolutions, particularly resolution 55/258, this text
gives due regard to the principle of equitable
geographical distribution, to be observed by the
Secretariat in human-resource management.

On
that
understanding,
draft
resolution
A/56/L.44/Rev.2 would have no programme budget
implications for the biennium 2002-2003 at this stage.

The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position.

The Acting President: I shall now give the floor
to those representatives who wish to speak before
action is taken on the draft resolution. May I remind
representatives that explanations of vote are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Satoh (Japan): It is indeed a great pleasure
for me to speak following the excellent and thoughtful
introduction of this draft resolution on multilingualism
by Ambassador Jean-David Levitte of France. That text
before us represents a consensus reached after two
months of negotiations.
I should like to express my heartfelt appreciation
to all of my colleagues for their efforts to reach this
consensus. Of course, my special thanks go to
Ambassador Levitte for his excellent coordinating
efforts.
The text of this draft resolution is indeed a great
improvement over the previous draft, especially insofar
as it contains no language that could be
disadvantageous, in terms of employment, to nationals
whose mother tongue is not one of the official
languages of the United Nations, or to nationals of
developing countries where only one of the official
languages of the United Nations is taught at school.
In addition, by referring to Article 101 of the
Charter and to the relevant General Assembly

As recognized in the preambular part of the draft
resolution, multilingualism is to be pursued as a means
of promoting, protecting and preserving diversity of
languages and cultures globally. Obviously, the spirit
of cooperation that has characterized our discussion is
essential to ensure that such pursuit is productive, and I
am therefore very much encouraged by what we have
attained together.
Having said this, I should like to conclude my
statement by assuring you, Mr. President, that the
Japanese Government will continue to work to promote
multilingualism in its true sense.

The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/56/L.44/Rev.2.
Before proceeding to take action on the draft
resolution, I should like to announce that the Bahamas
is not a sponsor of draft resolution A/56/L.44/Rev.2;
Djibouti and Somalia are sponsors of the draft; and
Nicaragua has become a sponsor of the draft.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/56/L.44/Rev.2?
Draft resolution A/56/L.44/Rev.2 was adopted
(resolution 56/262).
The Acting President: I shall now give the floor
to those representatives wishing to speak in
explanation of position on the resolution just adopted.
May I remind delegations that explanations of vote are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Mubarez (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): I wish
to thank you, Mr. President, for giving me the
opportunity, on behalf of the Arab Group, to make a
few brief comments on the resolution adopted by the
Assembly with regard to multilingualism.
This item has been very important to the Arab
Group since the fifty-fifth session. On behalf of the
Group, I should like to note that the Arab States all
supported the draft resolution contained in
A/56/L.44/Rev.1, even before the amendment thereto,

3

A/56/PV.94

contained in document A/56/L.44/Rev.2, and that many
Arab delegations participated in the presentation of the
draft resolution by France. However, the amended
resolution does not take into account the views
presented by the Arab Group.
The Arab Group would have preferred to see an
enhanced approach to expanding work in the six
official languages. It would have liked the draft
resolution to emphasize the need for United Nations
staff to know, as a condition of appointment, an official
language other than the two working languages. We
believe that it would also have been important for the
draft resolution to send a message to the Secretariat
that interpretation must be available to all meetings,
including regional meetings, and that documents must
be provided in all six official languages, in accordance
with the relevant General Assembly resolutions.

4

Unfortunately, that is often neglected. The Arab Group
wishes also to reiterate its view that it is important for
the General Assembly to implement all relevant
resolutions, without engaging in selectivity.
The Arab Group considers that part II of the
resolution does not set out all the objectives to be
pursued under this agenda item. But the Arab Group
reaffirms its willingness to cooperate with all other
delegations when the Assembly takes up this item at its
fifty-eighth session.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 32?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 3.35 p.m.
