S/PV.6700

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional
:

Sixty-seventh year

6700th meeting
Wednesday, 11 January 2012, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Nkoana-Mashabane . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(South Africa)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Araud
Mr. Berger
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Haroon
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Zhukov
Mr. Menan
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (S/2011/814)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-20459 (E)

*1220459*

S/PV.6700

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Expression of welcome to new members and
of thanks to outgoing members of the Council
The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council this year, I should like take this
opportunity to extend a very warm welcome to
everyone and to wish a fruitful new year to all
members of the Security Council, the United Nations
and the Secretariat.
On behalf of the Council, I would also like to
extend a warm welcome to the new members, namely,
Azerbaijan, Guatemala, Morocco, Pakistan and Togo.
We look forward to their participation in the work of
the Council. Their experience and wisdom will be of
invaluable assistance in the discharge of the Council’s
responsibilities.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
express the Council’s gratitude to the outgoing
members — Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Gabon,
Lebanon and Nigeria — for their important
contributions to the work of the Council during their
term in 2010 and 2011.
Expression of thanks to the retiring President
The President: I should like to take this
opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the Council, to
His Excellency Mr. Vitaly Churkin, Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation, for his
service as President of the Security Council for the
month of December 2011. I am sure I speak for all
members of the Council in expressing deep
appreciation to Ambassador Churkin and his team for
the great diplomatic skill with which they conducted
the Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (S/2011/814)
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of South Sudan and the Sudan to
participate in this meeting.

2

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Hervé
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2011/814, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ladsous.
Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): I would like to
thank the members of the Security Council for giving
me this opportunity to brief them on the current
situation in Darfur and on the implementation of the
mandate of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).
Members will have seen the Secretary-General’s
report on UNAMID (S/2011/814) dated 30 December
2011. In that connection, I should like to highlight
certain key points pertaining to the political, security
and humanitarian situation in Darfur.
On the political front, following the progress
outlined in the Secretary-General’s report, the parties
have moved ahead on power sharing and the
implementation of provisions concerning security set
out in the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. On
18 December 2011, the President of the Sudan issued a
decree appointing Bahr Idriss Abu Garda, SecretaryGeneral of the Liberation and Justice Movement
(LJM), as Minister of State for Health. On
27 December, three additional presidential decrees
concerning the peace process were issued, which
dissolved the transitional regional authority for Darfur
and established the Darfur Regional Authority as the
main body responsible for the implementation of the
Doha Document for Peace in cooperation with the
Government of the Sudan. The decrees also appoint the
members of the Authority’s governing body.
The appointments include, among others, seven
members of the Liberation and Justice Movement, in
accordance with the protocol on political participation.
They also include a member of the Sudan Liberation
Army (SLA)-Unity and a member of the Justice and
Equality Movement-Peace Wing, which are two
signatory organizations to the declaration of
commitment to the Doha Document for Peace in

12-20459

S/PV.6700

Darfur, a member of the National Congress Party and a
division general of the Sudanese Armed Forces as the
commissioner in charge of security arrangements. The
LJM has accepted those appointments. The next phase
should include the establishment of the legislative
council, ministries and the departments of the Darfur
Regional Authority and the setting of priorities for the
implementation of those measures.
Yesterday, President Al-Bashir issued three
decrees appointing new governors to Darfur States,
including appointments for two newly created States.
That brings the number of States comprising Darfur to
five. The decrees also released certain governors from
their duties and appointed a presidential adviser.
Decree No. 1 stipulates that the governors of South
Darfur and West Darfur, Abdulhameed Musa Kasha
and Jaafar Abdulhakam, saw their duties ended. Decree
No. 2 appoints new governors ─ Abdulhameed Musa
Kasha as Governor of East Darfur, Yousef Tibin Musa
Adam for Central Darfur, Hamad Ismail Hamad
Abdulkarim for South Darfur and Haider Galo Koma
Atim for West Darfur. Lastly, the third decree appoints
Mr. Jaafar Abdulhakam presidential adviser.
East and Central Darfur are therefore two newly
established States. Zalingei, which is the place of
origin of the Fur ethnic group, will become the capital
of Central Darfur and includes a large part of Jebel
Marra. The town Ed Daein, which is home to certain
Arab tribes, will become the capital of East Darfur. It
is situated in the south-east of that region. All the
newly appointed governors belong to the National
Congress Party, with the exception of Mr. Haider Galo
Koma, appointed to West Darfur, who is a vicepresident of the Liberation and Justice Movement.
Also yesterday, 10 January, the Sudanese
Minister of Justice appointed Mr. Ahmed AbdelMotalib Ahmed as Public Procurator of the Special
Court for Darfur. That appointment is made in
accordance with the provisions of the Doha Document
on justice and reconciliation. The headquarters of the
Public Procurator of that Special Court will be in
El Fasher, in North Darfur, with branch offices, if I can
call them that, in Nyala and El Geneina.
Regarding the implementation of the security
provisions of the Doha Document following four
meetings of the Ceasefire Commission and the
inaugural meeting of the Joint Commission described
in the report, the LJM has shared its list of staff for the

12-20459

observer post groups and the teams responsible for the
verification of forces. Moreover, that verification is
expected to begin in a few days.
With regard to the inclusiveness of the peace
process since the signing of the Doha Document on
14 July, the Government and the non-signatory
movements have not met. There was a window of three
months offered by the Government to the parties likely
to want to sign the Doha Document, and that window
expired in October without any move towards new
signatures. As noted in the Secretary-General’s report,
the Joint Chief Mediator ad interim continued to put
pressure on the Government, the Justice and Equality
Movement (JEM), the SLA-Minni Minawi and the
SLA-Abdul Wahid for them to resume negotiations.
However, a series of disagreements of the scope of the
negotiations, appeals by the Sudanese Revolutionary
Front and the fact that an alliance had been established
among the JEM, SLA-Minni Minawi and SLA-Abdul
Wahid with a view to overthrowing the Government
led by the National Congress Party all obstructed any
resumption of talks.
It is known that the leader of the JEM, Khalil
Ibrahim, is dead. The consequences of his death for the
peace process will in time become clear. However,
what can be said at this stage is that his death seems to
have reduced the chance of resuming talks between his
movement and the Government in the near future. In a
statement that it made shortly after Khalil’s death, the
JEM vowed to avenge him and declared that it would
continue to work to overthrow the Government of the
National Congress Party.
For its part, the Government of the Sudan called
on all armed groups in Darfur to lay down their
weapons and to rejoin the peace process on pain of
suffering the same fate as Khalil. We believe that the
JEM is currently in the process of choosing a successor
to him.
As the report before the Council points out, the
Secretary-General is developing, in close cooperation
with the African Union, a road map for peace in Darfur.
That road map seeks to give the United Nations and the
African Union a framework to jointly facilitate talks
among the parties in three key areas: first, support for
the implementation of the Doha Document; secondly,
sustained engagement with the Government and the
non-signatory movements in order to promote

3

S/PV.6700

negotiations; and thirdly, support for internal dialogue
in Darfur.
(spoke in English)
As noted in the report, while a number of areas in
Darfur remain relatively free of military hostilities,
clashes between Government and movement forces in
areas along the Northern Darfur-Northern Kordofan
border, the Southern Darfur-Southern Kordofan border
and West Jebel Marra took place during the second half
of December. There were no reports of civilian
casualties or displacement recorded by UNAMID in
relation to those incidents
The security situation in Darfur relates not only
to military clashes, but also to threats to the physical
well-being and freedom of movement of civilians. In
that connection, we remain concerned about the
incidence of banditry, crime and sexual and genderbased violence, as described in detail in the report.
Of particular concern is the situation in the
Zam Zam internally displaced persons (IDPs) camp.
Following the appointment in late October of a new
Central Reserve Police commander at the camp, the
security situation there deteriorated. The incidence of
shooting at night, looting and harassment of IDPs by
Central Reserve Police personnel gradually increased
following that appointment. On 29 November, an IDP
was shot dead and two were injured by Central Reserve
Police.
Many of the incidents were reported to
Government authorities, including through UNAMID,
but one must say that little reaction was observed.
UNAMID vigorously engaged state Government
officials and repeatedly drew their attention to the
reports of misconduct by Central Reserve Police
personnel. Following a determined démarche of
Government police officials by UNAMID on
18 December, the Central Reserve Police commander
was replaced. Tension within the camp has since eased
considerably.
UNAMID continues to monitor the situation
closely, to facilitate weekly coordination meetings
among IDP leaders, local security officials and
humanitarian agencies, and to work with Government
authorities to enhance security in the camp in an
appropriate manner.
The marked increase in manoeuvres and clashes
between Government and movement forces in recent

4

weeks was accompanied by a sharp increase in
restrictions of movement imposed on UNAMID by
Government authorities. That included restrictions on
flights and land patrols in the areas of conflict noted
earlier from mid-December to early January. The
restrictions were imposed on the basis of ongoing
Sudanese Armed Forces operations.
The denials of access have severely impeded
UNAMID’s ability to implement its mandate and to
resupply team sites in affected areas. The Mission has
repeatedly called on the Government in an effort to
re-establish access. I myself have strongly urged
officials of the Government of the Sudan in my
meetings with them, starting with my visit to the Sudan
in October, to allow UNAMID unhindered access
throughout Darfur, emphasizing that UNAMID forces
are armed and therefore able to protect themselves
against security threats.
With regard to other operational issues, I am
pleased to inform the Council that all 447 containers
that had been at dock in Port Sudan since May 2011
waiting customs clearance were cleared on 9 January.
That development comes after repeated démarches of
Government officials in Port Sudan and Khartoum by
UNAMID.
However, the number of outstanding visa requests
remains of concern. As of 10 January, the total number
of outstanding requests stood at 935 — 467 police, 172
military and 296 civilian personnel. UNAMID
continues meeting with Ministry for Foreign Affairs
officials on a weekly basis in relation to that issue and
has of course repeatedly provided to Government
officials, in addition to the initial visa applications
submitted, consolidated lists of outstanding requests.
With regard to the humanitarian situation, the
continued trend of internally displaced persons and
refugees voluntarily returning to their homes at a rate
of approximately 1,500 people per month was
encouraging. The total number of verified voluntary
returnees in Darfur from 1 January to 30 October 2011
was more than 85,000, as compared to 70,000 newly
displaced. Nevertheless, the World Food Programme
provided assistance to some 4 million people in Darfur
during the course of 2011. While most parts of Darfur
were accessible to humanitarian organizations, with a
UNAMID security escort needed outside the main
town centres, access to western Jebel Marra was
repeatedly denied, and intermittently restricted to the

12-20459

S/PV.6700

greater Jebel Marra, Shangil Tobaya and Umbaru areas
and to the Zam Zam camp.

enter rapidly into political negotiations in a spirit of
goodwill and compromise.

Regarding the safety and security of mission and
humanitarian personnel, the attacks on UNAMID
peacekeepers that occurred in Zam Zam on 10 October
and in Nyala on 6 November, resulting in the death of
four peacekeepers and injuries to seven, were of course
of serious concern. The Secretary-General has called
on the Government to cooperate fully with UNAMID
in investigating the incidents and to do all that it can to
hold the perpetrators accountable. In addition, we are
relieved that an aid worker who had been kidnapped in
Nyala on 14 August was released on 16 December.

The Republic of South Sudan notes that the
situation in Darfur is not entirely isolated from the
other challenges facing the two Sudans. We
respectfully invite members of the Council to take the
wider political and security context into consideration
during its discussions. For example, the ongoing
situation in Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile states
could have an effect on the dynamics of the situation in
Darfur. We encourage the international community to
consider the challenges of the region in a broad
manner, as that will be the most effective way to
maintain and strengthen peace and security in the long
term.

The initial steps taken by the signatory parties in
the implementation of the Doha Document provide
reason for optimism. The parties should be supported
in that regard by the Council, and by the international
community more broadly, particularly with the
implementation of provisions that bring about tangible
improvements to the lives of Darfuris. In addition,
there remains a need to bring the Government and the
non-signatory movements to the negotiating table.
Their long-standing grievances can only be effectively
dealt with through peace talks that result in an
agreement to cease hostilities and to work together
towards peace. We shall continue to work with the
African Union towards that end.
Furthermore, we will continue to provide
protection to civilians, facilitate the delivery of aid and
assist voluntary returnees, with a view towards bring
relief to the people of Darfur during the search for a
comprehensive and lasting settlement to the conflict.
The President: I thank Mr. Ladsous for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of South
Sudan.
Mr. Choat (South Sudan): I would like to express
my appreciation to the Republic of South Africa for
convening this meeting and to you, Madam President,
for presiding over the discussion.
The Republic of South Sudan is concerned about
the security situation in Darfur. We believe that
insecurity in any part of our region, including in the
Republic of the Sudan, has the potential to affect the
security situation in our country. It is our view that the
Darfur crisis needs to be resolved through negotiation
and a political settlement. We encourage all parties to

12-20459

The Republic of South Sudan remains fully
committed to resolving all outstanding issues between
Sudan and South Sudan in a full and comprehensive
manner. We hope that progress made in the
negotiations between our two countries might also
positively influence the chances for progress in Darfur
and in Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile states, so that
all of the peoples of the Sudan can enjoy the lasting
and permanent peace that they deserve.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to welcome to this meeting Her
Excellency Ms. Maite Nkoana-Mashabane, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of sisterly South Africa. We are
honoured to have her presiding over our deliberations
today on the report (S/2011/814) of the SecretaryGeneral on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). I would also like to
take this opportunity to express my warmest
congratulations to the representatives of Azerbaijan,
Guatemala, Morocco, Pakistan and Togo as they join
the Security Council as non-permanent members.
I would also like to express our thanks to
Mr. Hervé Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, for his briefing on the
situation in Darfur. I want to thank him in particular for
clarifying the significant positive developments that
have taken place there. I would like to respond to some
of the minor procedural issues he cited, but in general
his briefing was positive — indeed promising — in
view of the signing of the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur.

5

S/PV.6700

Our deliberations today on the report before the
Council on UNAMID are taking place as the situation
in Darfur is showing stability on the security,
humanitarian and development pillars. There have also
been significant positive developments, namely, the
fact that the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur has
entered the implementation phase and that the Darfur
transitional authorities have assumed their full
authority, with Mr. Tijani Seise of the Liberation and
Justice Movement (LJM) taking the oath as the Chair
of the Darfur Regional Authority, on 23 October.
Many members of the factions named in the Doha
Document have been appointed as ministers and State
ministers in the central Government and in other posts
in the transitional Authority in Darfur, as Mr. Ladsous
noted earlier. This is a very promising development
that shows that the people of Darfur, who carried arms
until recently, are today in control of Darfur, with the
exception of a few elements that I will discuss later on.
In the past few months, Darfur has witnessed an
increase in the number of refugees and internally
displaced persons, who have voluntarily begun to
return, in the tens of thousands, to their villages. It is
clear to all that they have been reassured of the
stability of the security situation and that their daily
needs in those villages are being met.
The Sudanese Government has for example
allocated the sum of $600 million, as a foreign
component, and 134 million Sudanese pounds, as a
local component, to the reconstruction fund for Darfur
for resettlement and to ensure stability and a life of
dignity for those who return, and also for the
implementation of a number of development projects in
the region.
In that context, we also pay tribute to the tireless
efforts made by the Government in rehabilitating
model villages for the returnees, a project that involved
the provision of solar-generated electricity to 100
villages in Western Darfur and to social clubs, health
centres, schools and other types of installations. These
provide citizens with modern means of communication,
including a number of satellite channels, and with
health-care services. That represents a significant
qualitative leap in terms of development in Darfur,
especially in Western Darfur. Efforts will continue with
a view to rehabilitating all the remaining areas.
In that context, I should also like to recall that the
committee that has been entrusted with the

6

implementation of the Doha Document, under the
chairmanship of Qatar, is now preparing for an
international conference to be held on 16 January in the
city of El-Fasher, the capital of Northern Darfur, as
part of efforts to promote development.
According to the information I have received, the
following countries and entities will participate in the
conference, whose theme will be the promotion of
stability and development in Darfur: Great Britain,
China, Russia, the United States of America, Canada,
the African Union, Burkina Faso, Chad, Egypt, the
European Union, the League of Arab States, the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation and UNAMID.
Many other countries are expected to announce their
participation in that international conference. That
shows that peace has taken root in Darfur.
As stated in paragraph 6 of the report before the
Council, the Ceasefire Commission, which was
instituted in the context of the Doha Document for
Peace in Darfur, has met four times during the period
covered by the report. The signatories to the Document
have provided the required information on the
disposition and locations of their forces, in accordance
with the Document. That will allow the ceasefire
groups to undertake follow-up and verification
exercises; complete the process of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration; and integrate LJM
combatants into the Sudanese Armed Forces.
Let me recall here that the LJM forces are a
group of 11 rebel factions that have joined the Peace
Agreement. We will ensure that those who wish to joint
the armed forces or return to civilian life can do so.
Sudan, an active Member of the United Nations,
now has vast experience in the disarmament and
reintegration of former combatants, absorbing rebel
movements and disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration. We can share our experience in that
respect with those that require it.
The examples I have cited confirm that major
strides towards peace are taking place in Darfur. They
make clear the determination of all parties and of the
Government to implement the Doha Document in a
very serious manner. In addition, the parties to the
Document have launched awareness-raising campaigns
in Darfur about the Document, with the assistance of
UNAMID. Here I would like to thank UNAMID for its
efforts in the context of the awareness-raising and
outreach campaign in the countryside. A total of

12-20459

S/PV.6700

25 copies of the Document have been distributed to the
non-governmental organization community and to civil
society.

details of this action. There is no doubt that those
elements are now in the Timsah region, well inside the
1956 borders.

In the context of cooperation by the Sudanese
Government with the international community, I should
like to highlight the meeting of the special
representatives of countries members of the Security
Council that was held in El Geneina, Western Darfur,
last October, and which was attended by
representatives of the African Union and African
elders. That was but one of the significant and positive
developments taking place in Darfur. The meeting was
also attended by representatives of Canada, China, the
European Union, France, Germany, Japan, the Russian
Federation, South Africa, Sweden, Britain and the
United States.

We have asked the Council to urge our brothers in
the Government of South Sudan to extend no
assistance to that force. We have asked that they be
disarmed. We have asked that those who are being
sought by the Government of the Sudan to answer for
their crimes be turned over. Unfortunately, we have
seen no progress in that regard. We request the Security
Council to send a clear and strong message. The
situation is clear. These forces were armed by Colonel
Al-Qadhafi when they were defending his regime in
Libya. When the regime fell, they crossed the border
into the Sudan, and when we chased them they crossed
into South Sudan.

Moreover, the final document of the conference
affirmed that the Doha Document represents an
important step towards peace and stability in Darfur.
The meeting took place in October 2011, and we
eagerly await the arrival of representatives of Security
Council members to assist the Sudan in the peace
effort.

We genuinely fear for the stability and
development of that country, because these armed
forces are capable of reigniting the conflict in South
Sudan. There is ample cause for our fear. Tribal
conflict and mass murder are ongoing in South Sudan.
We are concerned that the weapons of that armed group
will find their way to the tribes, whose combatants will
use them to settle their scores.

Paragraphs 22 to 25 of the report before the
Council note the improved security situation in the
region, with the exception of a few pockets where
some rebel movements have rejected peace and have
no intention whatsoever of joining the peace process.
They have become desperate following their military
defeat, and have turned to pillaging and armed robbery.
Mr. Ladsous referred to armed gangs that kidnap and
terrorize civilians even in the internally displaced
persons camps; these are the actions of the remaining
armed movements and gangs of pillagers that have
rejected peace. Their only remaining activity is armed
robbery, and they do not hesitate to undertake reckless
suicide missions.
This was manifest when Khalil Ibrahim, the
leader of the Justice and Equality Movement (JEM)
who was killed on 23 December 2011, announced that
the JEM was preparing to attack Khartoum militarily
and to overthrow the Government. In that context, we
registered a complaint with the Security Council on
29 December, containing documented evidence that
South Sudan is host to many of the JEM members who
crossed the international border in 79 militarized fourby-fours carrying more than 350 armed elements of
that Movement. The Council has been apprised of the

12-20459

As the representative of South Sudan noted, we
are most eager to resolve all pending issues with the
South. A meeting will be convened in Addis Ababa on
17 January under the presidency of Mr. Thabo Mbeki
to address all such issues. I wish to place on record that
we are very sincere in our desire to resolve all
outstanding matters, but that South Sudan has not
reciprocated our sincerity or translated its words into
deeds. Although it claims to be eager to settle these
issues, it is providing unlimited support to the rebel
movements in Southern Kordofan and Blue Niles
states. How can we reconcile its stated intentions with
its actions?
This attitude will not help to build South Sudan
into a modern country. South Sudan needs stability,
security and peace if it is to meet the major challenges
it faces. I believe that ensuring such conditions is the
responsibility of the Security Council. We fear that if
the Council fails to address the situation resolutely and
to send a clear message to the Government of South
Sudan, its actions will have repercussions for the entire
region.
Paragraph 32 of the report before the Council
notes that, “between 1 October and 12 December,

7

S/PV.6700

UNAMID carried out 19,644 military and police
patrols”. That huge number illustrates the vast
geographical area covered by the patrols, as well as the
stability and security prevailing in the region. The
sheer size of UNAMID — the world’s largest
peacekeeping operation — also means that it carries
out the highest number of military and police patrols
anywhere in the world. That illustrates the unlimited
cooperation provided by the Government of the Sudan.
If there are some cases concerning entry visas, then
that must be understood in the context of the very large
number of personnel in the mission. As a Member of
this international Organization, let me say sincerely
that we are very eager to rationalize the budget of the
United Nations.
I see that the official of the Secretariat is holding
a side discussion, which disrupts my statement. I
would request that he pay appropriate attention to my
statement.
In the wake of the prevailing stability in Darfur, it
is high time that the Council consider reducing the
huge number of personnel, which consumes a budget
of almost $3 billion. Should we not utilize that money
for other United Nations projects? We believe that the
existence of remaining pockets of armed movements
should not be a reason for the United Nations to waste
$3 billion monthly. In reality, what we should do is to
put pressure on those armed movements that reject
peace to join the peace process — or to punish them.
Their members are now kidnapping humanitarian
workers and members of UNAMID. We reiterate that
we will continue to cooperate with UNAMID to put an
end to that phenomenon. In that connection, we were
able to liberate the Italian national Francesco Azzara,
who was abducted near Janina two months ago, just as

my Government has been successful in securing the
release of other hostages in the past.
In conclusion, let me again say that we will
continue to fully implement all the provisions of the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. We will not close
the door on anyone who chooses the road to peace. We
hope that today’s Security Council deliberations will
result in the adoption of a more positive approach by
the Council that helps to complete the process of peace
and stability, which has now taken hold.
Finally — and this pertains to a piece of
information provided by Mr. Ladsous — the Doha
Document for Peace includes a reference to
establishing special tribunals to try those who
committed crimes during the conflict, including crimes
against humanity, war crimes or armed robbery in
Darfur. A special prosecutor was recently appointed in
that regard. As Mr. Ladsous has said, that prosecutor is
credible and well known for his legal background.
There will be several branches of the tribunal in
Darfur. As I said, that just occurred yesterday. The
Doha Document for Peace also refers to the fact that
the tribunal could receive observers from the United
Nations and elsewhere to monitor its work. That means
that no one who has committed a crime will enjoy
impunity.
The President: I would like to take this
opportunity to once again thank the representative of
South Sudan for the statement he made earlier. In the
same vein, I thank the representative of the Sudan for
his statement.
There are no more names inscribed on my list. I
now invite Council members to informal consultations
to continue our discussion of the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.05 a.m.

8

12-20459
