UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1997/14
13 March 1997
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: ENGLISH AND FRENCH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3751st meeting of the Security Council, held on 13 March 1997 in
connection with the Council's consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Albania", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council, having considered the letter of 13 March 1997
to the President of the Council from the Permanent Representative of the
Republic of Albania (S/1997/215) and the letter of 12 March 1997 to the
President of the Council from the Permanent Representative of Italy
(S/1997/214), expresses its deep concern about the deteriorating situation
in Albania. It urges all concerned to refrain from hostilities and acts of
violence and to cooperate with diplomatic efforts to reach a peaceful
solution to the crisis.
"The Security Council calls upon the parties involved to continue the
political dialogue and to live up to the commitments undertaken on
9 March 1997 in Tirana. It urges all political forces to work together to
lower tension and facilitate the stabilization of the country.
"The Security Council calls upon the parties not to impede the
provision of humanitarian assistance to the civilian population and, in
this context, recalls the importance of keeping open all means of
communication in the country. It encourages Member States and
international organizations to help with the provision of humanitarian
assistance.
"The Security Council stresses the importance of regional stability
and fully supports the diplomatic efforts of the international community,
in particular those of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe and the European Union, to find a peaceful solution to the crisis.
"The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to keep the
Council informed of developments in the situation in Albania.
"The Security Council will remain seized of the matter."

----97-06899 (E)

130397
