S/2021/75

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
25 January 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 22 January 2021 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefings provided by
Mr. Geir Pedersen, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, and Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, as well as the statements delivered by the representatives of China,
Estonia, France, India, Ireland, Kenya, Mexico, the Niger, Norway (on behalf of
Norway and Ireland), Norway, the Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Tunisia, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the
United States of America and Viet Nam, in connection with the video-teleconference
on “The situation in the Middle East (Syria)” convened on Wednesday, 20 January
2021. Statements were also delivered by the representatives of the Islamic Republic
of Iran, the Syrian Arab Republic and Turkey.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter by the President of the
Security Council addressed to Permanent Representatives of the members of the
Security Council dated 7 May 2020 (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of
the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, these
briefings and statements will be issued as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Tarek Ladeb
President of the Security Council

21-00885 (E) 290121 230221

*2100885*

S/2021/75

Annex 1
Briefing by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria,
Geir Pedersen
As the Syrian people face the year 2021, a decade of conflict has seen them
experience death, injury, displacement, destruction, detention, torture, terror,
violations, indignities, instability, intervention, occupation, division, de-development
and destitution on a massive scale. Today millions inside the country and the millions
of refugees outside are grappling with deep trauma, grinding poverty, personal
insecurity and lack of hope for the future.
For many, the daily struggle just to survive crowds out most other issues.
According to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, more than
8 in 10 people in Syria are living in poverty. The World Food Programme has assessed
that 9.3 million people inside the country are food insecure. Humanitarian assistance
by States Members of the United Nations and donors remains a lifeline for Syrians.
But trends are expected to worsen. A perfect storm of factors — the impact of
a decade of conflict, global economic conditions owing to the pandemic, the spillover from the Lebanese crisis, such internal factors as war economies, corruption,
mismanagement, as well as external factors and measures — is producing a slow
tsunami that is crashing across Syria. With rising inflation and bread and fuel
shortages, we can expect the Syrian Government and other de facto authorities to be
increasingly unable to provide basic services and subsidies for basic goods.
The pandemic also continues to take its toll. Syrians are suffering. It remains
essential to keep any sanctions from worsening their plight. A torn society faces a
further unravelling of its social fabric, sowing the seeds for more suffering and even
more instability.
However, the Syrian people are at least seeing less all-out violence than they
did before. The last 10 months have been the calmest since the conflict began, with
the front lines barely shifting. But this is a fragile calm that could break down at
any moment. The past month alone showed us an abrupt and significant escalation
around Ayn Issa, in north-east Syria, an intensification of air strikes attributed to
Israel, continuous attacks by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in the east and
central areas of the country, mutual shelling and air strikes in and around Idlib, as
well as turbulence in the south-west.
The calm is also a very relative calm. Civilians continue to be killed in ongoing
cross-fire and attacks by improvised explosive devices. They continue to face a
range of other dangers as well, from instability, arbitrary detention and abduction to
criminality and the activities of United Nations-listed terrorist groups.
As the Syrian people face poverty and insecurity — to say nothing of the
unfulfilled hopes and dreams that so many of them have — I salute the work of all
those Syrians in civil society who continue to strive to do what they can to improve
the situation and support a political process. I was pleased to be able to engage with
several of them in late December via our Civil Society Support Room.
But, as they stressed to me, the political process is not yet delivering real
changes in the lives of the Syrian people, and neither is it providing a real vision for
the future. Steps that could build confidence are not really being taken, including
full and unhindered humanitarian access; progress on detainees, abductees and the
missing — at the very least information on such persons, access to them and the
release of women, children, the sick and elderly; a nationwide ceasefire; a cooperative
and effective approach to countering the United Nations-listed terrorist groups;
steps to create a safe, calm, neutral environment; or external and internal steps to
2/46

21-00885

S/2021/75

address the socioeconomic crisis. Moreover, there are no political talks among the
Syrians other than those on a constitutional track. Free and fair elections to be held
pursuant to a new constitution and under United Nations supervision, as envisaged
in resolution 2254 (2015), seem far in the future.
As I continue to take stock of the implementation of resolution 2254 (2015),
it is clear that no one actor or group of actors can impose their will on Syria or
settle the conflict. They must work together. Indeed, the process must be Syrianowned and Syrian-led, even though the conflict is highly internationalized, with five
foreign armies active in the country. We cannot pretend that the solutions are only in
the hands of the Syrians, or that the United Nations can do it alone.
That is why we need more serious and cooperative international diplomacy.
This really should be possible. After all, despite their differences, key States are
committed to resolution 2254 (2015), and they have shared interests, including
on such issues as stability, the containment of terrorism, the safe, dignified and
voluntary return of refugees and preventing further conflict.
We must be able to build on those aspects together. I am more convinced than
ever that we need a comprehensive approach that addresses all issues and brings
together all actors taking mutual and reciprocal steps on all the matters outlined in
resolution 2254 (2015). Such an approach could unlock genuine progress and chart a
safe and secure path out of the crisis for all Syrians, men and women alike. I continue
to engage widely on this front with all key actors. I look forward to continuing to
do so, including of course with the new United States Administration, which takes
office today.
As I pursue this wider path, I continue to work with the Syrian-led, Syrianowned, United Nations-facilitated Constitutional Committee. The fifth session of the
Committee’s small body will convene in Geneva next week, from 25 to 29 January,
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) conditions permitting. It will — as agreed and in
line with the mandate, the terms of reference and core rules of procedure — discuss
constitutional principles and basic principles a future constitution.
I note that there are still considerable COVID-19 challenges in Geneva. We
will be ensuring that the strictest health and safety protocols are followed. We
highly appreciate the cooperation of the Swiss authorities in enabling the session
to go ahead, and we appreciate the commitment of the Chairs and Constitutional
Committee members to respecting the measures put in place.
I hope that I will soon be able to continue my consultations with the Syrian
Government in Damascus and with the Syrian Negotiations Commission on the
overall political process. In the meantime, in preparing for the Constitutional
Committee session, I have been virtually engaging with the two Chairs. I also met
virtually with the middle third civil society group yesterday.
Let me also note that I met virtually with the Syrian Women’s Advisory Board
twice in December. I look forward to engaging the Board virtually again this week
and next. Its members have emphasized the importance of women’s full participation.
They stress that, in the process, the core constitutional rights of women across
political, social and economic spheres must be safeguarded. They have pressed for
more concrete and tangible progress in the work of the Constitutional Committee.
The moment pandemic conditions allow, I hope we will be able to reconvene the
Board in person.
I see the coming session of the Constitutional Committee as very important.
For more than a year, many subjects have been discussed. I believe that the time
has come for the Chairs to establish effective and operational working methods, so
that the meetings are better organized and more focused. I believe that we need to
21-008853/46

S/2021/75

ensure that the Committee begins to move from “preparing constitutional reform” to
“drafting a new constitution”, as it is mandated to do. The Committee can do this, I
believe, by beginning to consider specific constitutional issues and draft provisions.
I also believe that the Chairs can and should reach agreement on a workplan for
future meetings with clear agendas and topics, and there needs to be more urgency
in the process.
I believe that all those are reasonable goals, but I cannot assure the Council
that they will be met this time. My consultations are ongoing and will continue in
Geneva this weekend before the Committee session begins. I strongly appeal to the
Chairs and to all members of the Committee to be ready to move to a new phase of
work in this next session.
This is no doubt a time of huge global and regional challenges. We must ensure
that addressing the conflict in Syria is high among our shared priorities. Syria has
a great and proud history, but it is enduring the most profound tragedy. We need
to begin to unlock progress, step by step, in a reciprocal and mutually reinforcing
manner, along the path prescribed by resolution 2254 (2015). If we do not, the dangers
to Syria’s civilians, to Syria as a State, to its society and to the region will only grow.
That cannot be acceptable to any Syrian or to any of us. That is why I count on the
support of the Security Council and all key actors for maintaining calm nationwide,
supporting confidence-building and moving the political process forward.

4/46

21-00885

S/2021/75

Annex 2
Briefing by the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mark Lowcock
I will address five main topics in my briefing to the Security Council today: the
economic crisis, the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), the protection
of civilians, humanitarian access and how humanitarian organizations are providing
assistance across Syria.
Syrians are starting 2021 with a currency whose value has drastically declined
and with food prices at historically high levels, partly because subsidies for such
key commodities as bread have been cut. In December, monitoring by the World
Food Programme showed food prices had increased again — by 13 per cent since
November and by 236 per cent since December 2019. Nearly one in five households
reported poor food consumption in December, which is double the level recorded
last year.
Bread shortages continue in many areas. Domestic wheat production cannot
meet demand, and most of what is produced is grown in areas outside Government
control. In Government areas, production fell significantly last year.
As a result of decreased purchasing power, over 80 per cent of households
report relying on negative coping mechanisms to afford food, perhaps the most
worrisome of which is a growing reliance on child labour. One in 10 families say
they have to rely on their children to contribute to the family income.
Fuel shortages and power cuts in the middle of winter are another manifestation
of the deep economic crisis. Black market prices for heating fuel are up to 10 times
the subsidized rate. There are shortages of fuel for transportation and long queues
at fuel stations.
We have previously informed the Security Council of our concern that
many vulnerable families would not be sufficiently prepared for winter this year.
Unfortunately, those concerns are proving to be justified. As a result of heavy rainfall
affecting thousands of people in the north-west this week, people are telling us that
they, their children and their elderly parents are spending nights standing upright in
their tents because they have been inundated with so much water. There are similar
problems in other parts of the country. Heavy rains in Tartous have caused flooding
in at least one internally displaced persons camp. Rural Damascus faces particularly
harsh weather owing to its high elevation, and many people there are vulnerable.
Compounding the economic crisis is the impact of COVID-19. While testing
remains too limited to convey the true extent of the outbreak, there are indications
that Syria may be experiencing a renewed wave of infections. Cases reported in
Government areas increased by 64 per cent between November and December. More
than 50 per cent of tests are coming back positive in Sweida and Tartous; in Homs it
is 60 per cent. Survey data in December revealed 45 per cent of households as having
lost one or more sources of income over the previous month because of restrictions
related to COVID-19.
As to the protection of civilians, so far this year at least 13 children have
been killed in incidents involving explosive weapons and unexploded ordnance
across Syria. At least 14 more have been injured. In Al-Hol, in the north-east, we
are monitoring with concern the security situation in the camp following a surge
in violent incidents, which also reduce the ability of humanitarian organizations
to operate safely. The responsibility for security inside the camp rests with local
authorities. Security must be provided in a manner that does not endanger residents,
violate their rights or restricts humanitarian access. Let me highlight again that most
21-008855/46

S/2021/75

of the 62,000 people who remain at Al-Hol are young children, under the age of
12 years, who are growing up in unacceptable circumstances.
Infrastructure that is indispensable to the survival of civilians must also
be protected. The Allouk water station, on which almost half a million people in
Al-Hassakeh continue to rely as their primary water source, resumed operations on
20 December. It is critical that technical teams continue to be provided safe access
to the water and electricity installations at Allouk.
That brings me to my next point, humanitarian access. The United Nations
has been unable to proceed with a planned first cross-line mission from Damascus
into Idlib, as parties on either side remain unable to agree on the composition of the
mission. The United Nations will continue to engage with all relevant parties to work
towards a solution that will allow the mission to go forward. I hope to have more to
say on this topic next month. In the meantime, cross-border operations into northwest Syria dispatched an average of 1,000 trucks of aid a month in 2020, reaching
2.4 million people each month throughout the year.
That brings me to my final point, which concerns the humanitarian assistance
being provided to people in need across Syria. The United Nations-coordinated
humanitarian operation assisted an average of 7.6 million people a month across
the country in 2020. That is an increase of approximately 20 per cent as compared
to 2019. On 1 December I released an overview of global humanitarian needs for
2021, including for Syria. The overview highlights that there are 13 million people
in need of humanitarian assistance inside the country and another 10.1 million in
need, including 5.5 million Syrian refugees, in the region. The needs are calculated
on the basis of our independent assessments and are the basis for our response, which
focuses on life-saving humanitarian needs and repairs to critical humanitarian
facilities. A total of $10 billion is being requested, including $4.2 billion for needs
inside Syria, to respond in 2021.
Let me also update Council members on how the United Nations is organizing
itself to provide assistance in Syria. The United Nations assistance continues to
be guided by the humanitarian principles, and United Nations leadership remains
attentive to the necessary oversight of the Organization’s work on the ground
through our established internal coordination mechanisms and regular engagement
with Member States, both in the form of dialogue and through the governing bodies
of United Nations entities. Appropriate internal oversight mechanisms and other
frameworks remain in place, including the parameters and principles of United
Nations assistance in Syria, and we continue to work in compliance with the
resolutions adopted by the Council and other relevant decisions, including General
Assembly resolution 46/182.
The United Nations country team in Syria continues to engage in discussions
with the Syrian Government and with Member States in the region regarding its work
on resilience and early recovery and the new strategic framework for 2021-2023.
Given the importance of further engagement, the United Nations in Syria is working
on a six-month extension of the strategic framework to ensure that critical operational
activities continue. We will continue to use every opportunity that we have to deliver
aid to those most in need. That will require adequate funding, improved access and
an end to the violence that has tormented Syrians for nearly a decade.

6/46

21-00885

S/2021/75

Annex 3
Statement by the Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Zhang Jun
[Original: Chinese]
I thank Special Envoy Pedersen and Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for
their briefings. China supports the Council’s consideration of both the political and
humanitarian issues concerning Syria in one meeting.
Since the outbreak of the crisis 10 years ago, finding a political solution to
the issue at an early date and restoring peace and calm to the country have been the
common wishes of the Syrian people and the shared expectation of the international
community. In that regard, I would like to make the following points.
First, we should firmly promote the Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political
process. The fifth session of the Constitutional Committee will convene in Geneva
next week. China commends Special Envoy Pedersen for his good offices. We
hope that the Syrian parties can work within the framework of the Constitutional
Committee and deepen dialogue to resolve differences, broaden consensus and
achieve meaningful progress in the relevant areas. The Constitutional Committee’s
work must remain independent and free from outside interference. The international
community should create favourable conditions for talks among the Syrian
parties and provide encouragement and guidance instead of wilfully putting
pressure on one single side. The Syrian Government has repeatedly expressed its
support for Special Envoy Pedersen and its willingness to actively participate in
the work of the Constitutional Committee. That should be acknowledged by the
international community.
My second point is on stabilizing the security situation in Syria. The current
security threats to Syria are mainly from foreign occupation and terrorist activities.
Only by addressing those two issues can a favourable security environment be
created for the political process in Syria. Faced with foreign military and terrorist
forces, the Syrian Government has the right to defend the country’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity and to conduct counter-terrorism operations to defend its
national security. Many Council members are concerned about terrorist activities
inside Syria and the spill-over risks. In accordance with international law and
Council resolutions, the international community should adopt uniform standards,
support Syria in enhancing its counter-terrorism efforts and not allow the sustained
presence of terrorist forces in the Idlib region.
My third point is about improving the economic and humanitarian situation.
Over the past few months, the prices of fuel and bread in Syria have skyrocketed and
the value of the Syrian pound has dropped. Its people do not have enough fuel in the
cold winter, and the number of confirmed coronavirus disease cases keeps increasing.
The dire humanitarian situation in Syria warrants a high level of attention and focus.
The Syrian Government, shouldering its responsibility, is actively taking actions
to promote economic recovery, improve livelihoods and control the pandemic. The
international community should assist the country and make an effort to ease the
humanitarian crisis on the ground. China has used bilateral and multilateral channels
to provide assistance to Syria worth approximately $130 million, and we are ready to
continue to help and support the Syrian people. Relevant United Nations departments
and agencies should take active measures to address the humanitarian situation in
Syria, improve their cooperation with the Syrian Government and relevant parties
and enhance the effectiveness of their humanitarian operations.

21-008857/46

S/2021/75

Fourthly, it is necessary to remove unilateral coercive measures against
Syria at an early date. It must be pointed out that the economic and humanitarian
difficulties in Syria are, to a large extent, caused by the economic blockade and
other unilateral coercive measures, which severely undermine Syria’s economic
base and hinders its people’s access to medical supplies and services. In the
virtual Arria Formula meeting on unilateral coercive measures last November, the
Secretary General of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent gave a detailed briefing on the
negative impacts of unilateral coercive measures on the humanitarian situation in
the country and the difficulties in the actual implementation of the humanitarian
exemptions mechanism. The Human Rights Council’s Special Rapporteur on the
negative impact of unilateral coercive measures on the enjoyment of human rights
recently stated very clearly that unilateral coercive measures hamper the rebuilding
of infrastructure such as hospitals in Syria and undermine its people’s rights
to survival and development, including their rights to housing and medical care,
thereby worsening the humanitarian situation. She urged the country concerned to
remove the sanctions. We hope that the relevant countries will respect the facts and
closely heed such calls.
China would like to reiterate that diplomacy that relies on sanctions will
not succeed and will lead only to endless suffering for the people of the targeted
countries. We urge the countries concerned to respond to the appeal of SecretaryGeneral Guterres, listen to the strong calls by the international community and
immediately remove the unilateral coercive measures against Syria.

8/46

21-00885

S/2021/75

Annex 4
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Estonia to the
United Nations, Sven Jürgenson
I thank Special Envoy Pedersen and Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for
their briefings on both the political and humanitarian situation in Syria.
I welcome the announcement by the Special Envoy of the upcoming next round
of Constitutional Committee talks in Geneva. Those meetings are an important step
towards restoring trust between the Syrian authorities and its legitimate opposition.
I encourage the Special Envoy to explore additional measures to rebuild
confidence between the parties. In that regard, the release of arbitrarily detained
people, especially women and children, remains an imperative. According to the
Syrian Network for Human Rights, more than 1,800 people were arbitrarily arrested
in Syria 2020.
We remain cautiously optimistic about the ceasefire agreement in northwestern Syria. As we heard, the truce largely holds, but violence prevails in many
places across the country, putting in danger the most vulnerable. We must admit
that the war is far from over. Confrontations continue, including deadly attacks by
extremist groups.
Against the backdrop of the ongoing conflict, millions of people have
been forced to leave their homes. According to the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, 1.5 million Syrians live in internally displaced person camps
across Syria. Ahead of winter, it is crucial that humanitarian workers have access
to all of those locations, of which there are thousands. Estonia calls on the Syrian
authorities and other parties to the conflict to ensure unimpeded humanitarian
access to all those in need.
We are now one year into the first reduction of cross-border aid to Syria
after the Russian and Chinese double vetoes at the end of 2019. That decision of the
Security Council seriously damaged our capacity to support Syrian civilians. The
promises of replacing cross-border deliveries with cross-line aid have fallen short in
their substance.
We remind the Syrian Government and its allies that the European Union
will not support Syria’s reconstruction or lift any sanctions until a genuine political
process is firmly under way. Resolution 2254 (2015), the Secretary-General’s
guidelines and the document on humanitarian aid “Parameters and principles of UN
assistance in Syria” remain at the core of sending aid to Syria. Only in that way
can we ensure that humanitarian aid will not be instrumentalized to reassert unjust
policies on the Syrian people.

21-008859/46

S/2021/75

Annex 5
Statement by the Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations, Nicolas de Rivière
[Original: English and French]
Let me first thank Ambassador Kelly Craft for all she did during her tenure
as the Permanent Representative of the United States of America and for all her
achievements during those 18 months. I wish her all the best for her future projects.
I thank Mr. Lowcock and Mr. Pedersen for their briefings.
France notes with concern the continuing heightened tensions and the risk
of escalation on the ground. We warn against any attempt to change the front lines
in northern Syria. We reiterate our call for the implementation of a definitive and
verifiable cessation of hostilities at the national level, in accordance with the appeals
of the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy, as well as Council resolutions. The
Special Envoy must lead those efforts.
Only a cessation of hostilities will bring relief to the Syrian people and unite
the efforts of the international community to address the threat posed by listed
terrorist groups in line with international law. The resurgence of Da’esh in the centre
and north-east must be a matter of common concern. The terrorist organization has
taken advantage of the current instability to rebuild its strength. France will continue
to fully play its part in the fight against terrorism, together with its partners in the
international coalition. That is a priority.
The humanitarian situation remains catastrophic. Food insecurity is
increasingly becoming the harsh reality for the Syrian population. The coronavirus
disease pandemic continues to spread, and the official figures provided by the
regime seem far from genuine. The shortfalls in terms of aid delivery, particularly
in the north-east, are alarming. The severe winter conditions make life wretched for
hundreds of thousands of people who do not have adequate shelter. In that context, it
is more essential than ever to ensure safe humanitarian access to all those in need. We
will not stop reiterating that international humanitarian law is an obligation for all. I
refer in particular to the protection of civilians, which remains an absolute priority.
France commends the tireless efforts of the Special Envoy to preserve the
centrality of the United Nations process. That is my third point. The Constitutional
Committee will be meaningful only if it ultimately leads to substantive discussions
between the parties and allows for the rapid completion of the constitutional reform
provided for by resolution 2254 (2015), which Syria very much needs. However, the
drafting of a constitution is just one step. If the next meeting fails to yield substantive
results, the Special Envoy and the Council will have to draw the necessary conclusions
and review their approach.
It is high time for the political process to respond to the aspirations of the
Syrian people and give them hope. That requires progress on the issue of detainees
and missing persons and means giving the Syrian people their voice back through
elections. We call on the Special Envoy to continue his efforts to implement those
key elements of resolution 2254 (2015), in particular the electoral aspect, and to keep
the Council informed about his progress. We also call on Russia to use its influence
to ensure that such efforts succeed.
The crisis in Syria today is far from over. Only a political solution, in line with
resolution 2254 (2015), will allow for a way out of the chronic instability and enable
refugees and displaced persons to return home voluntarily, safely and with dignity.

10/46

21-00885

S/2021/75

That is a priority for France given the impact of the Syrian conflict on the stability
of the region and international peace and security.
Until such time, the European Union and its member States, whose pledges
account for 70 per cent of those made during the fourth Brussels Conference, will
continue to assume their share of responsibility to fund the humanitarian response
in Syria, including in areas held by the regime. They will also continue to ensure
full respect for ensuring the impartial and transparent delivery of aid and its full
compliance with the document on parameters and principles established by the
United Nations.
However, until the regime commits to engaging in a credible transition process,
France and the European Union will not normalize their relations with the regime
and will continue to encourage their partners to follow the same line. Equally, we
will not fund reconstruction or any assistance aligned with the regime’s development
priorities. It is essential that the United Nations do the same so as not to be complicit
in serious human rights violations committed by the regime.
It is those responsible for such violations who are targeted selectively by the
European sanctions. They will need to be brought to justice for their crimes. That
is why we continue to provide our full support to mechanisms to combat impunity.

21-0088511/46

S/2021/75

Annex 6
Statement by the Permanent Representative of India to the
United Nations, T. S. Tirumurti
Let me begin by thanking Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and Under-SecretaryGeneral Mark Lowcock for their briefings on the recent political developments and
the humanitarian situation in Syria.
As we are all aware, discussions on the Syrian conflict began in March
2011, during the initial days of our previous innings in the Security Council. Amid
prevailing sharp differences, the impasse was then broken with the adoption of the first
presidential statement, under India’s presidency in August 2011 (S/PRST/2011/16).
Subsequently, the first resolution on Syria was adopted in March 2012 (resolution
2042 (2012)), despite deep divisions among Council members, endorsing the sixpoint plan of the Joint Special Envoy of the United Nations and the League of Arab
States, Kofi Annan.
By December 2012, three resolutions had already been adopted on Syria,
but there had hardly been any progress in terms of their implementation. The
politicization and militarization of the conflict brought disastrous consequences.
Terrorist groups took advantage of the situation and entrenched themselves. The
humanitarian consequences of the conflict rendered more than 1 million people
homeless and nearly 300,000 as refugees in neighbouring countries. When Lakhdar
Brahimi took over from Kofi Annan, the failure of the international community in
addressing the crisis had already started affecting the entire region.
As we begin our new Council term eight years later, it is indeed disheartening
to note that the ongoing crisis in Syria still has no end in sight and the political
process is yet to take off. The conflict has become even more complex with the
involvement of regional players. Terrorism emanating from Syria has spread far,
reaching even parts of Africa. Foreign fighters involved in the Syrian conflict have
also moved to other places as mercenaries. The humanitarian situation has worsened,
further exacerbated by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
The fact that the conflict has been so long-drawn and intractable points to
the inevitability of a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political process, preserving the
unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria, in line with resolution 2254
(2015), culminating in constitutional reform and free and fair elections. We hope
that the conflict in Syria will end completely sooner rather than later and that the
reconstruction of Syria will begin, so that Syria reclaims its place in the comity of
nations as well as its historic role in the Arab world. Towards that objective, India is
ready to play a constructive and meaningful role in the Council.
On the political track, the fifth session of the drafting body of the Constitutional
Committee is scheduled to meet in Geneva on 25 January. As agreed at the fourth
session, held a month back, the Committee will be discussing basic principles of
the constitution. We hope all parties will show the commitment, flexibility and
compromise necessary to move forward on the political track. The international
community, including the United Nations, should continue to assist the parties in
that process.
We note that, since the signing of the ceasefire agreement in March last
year, the situation has been generally calm in north-west Syria, which is a positive
development. We hope that the Astana guarantors will further strengthen interaction
with the United Nations to maintain the sanctity of the ceasefire on the ground.
However, it is a matter of concern that hostilities in other parts of the country
have continued unabated. The presence of foreign terrorist fighters, along with
12/46

21-00885

S/2021/75

continued terror activities, has worsened the situation on the ground. It is imperative
that all parties adhere to their international obligations to fight terrorism and terrorist
organizations in Syria, as designated by the Security Council.
Allow me to now address some issues of immediate concern on the
humanitarian side. As emphasized by Under-Secretary-General Lowcock, the Syrian
people are facing very harsh conditions compounded by these cold winter months.
In the past two months, the prices of fuel and bread have doubled, the Syrian pound
has devalued, people lack fuel to withstand the cold and half of households report
poor food consumption. Those are all serious concerns that must be addressed as a
priority if we are to avoid a dire humanitarian situation.
We call on the international community to provide assistance to Syria
in rebuilding its infrastructure, safeguarding people’s livelihoods and fighting
COVID-19. In this situation, compounded by both economic and humanitarian
crises, we should be sensitive to the debilitating impact that sanctions continue to
have on the lives of the common people of Syria.
India supports the United Nations continuing its humanitarian relief operations
through all possible channels, with the cooperation of the Syrian Government.
In that regard, it is important to delink humanitarian assistance from progress on
the political track. We believe that the noble and necessary cause of humanitarian
assistance should always be free of politics.
Since the conflict broke out in 2011, India has provided $12 million in
humanitarian assistance to the Government of Syria through bilateral and multilateral
channels. Furthermore, India has set up a biotech park and an information technology
centre and extended $265 million in lines of credit for projects in the steel and power
sectors. In July 2020, in order to help Syria fight the COVID-19 pandemic, we sent a
gift of 10 metric tons of medicines to Damascus. We also organized an artificial-limb
fitment camp in Damascus during December 2019-January 2020, which benefited
more than 500 Syrians. We have also provided 1,000 scholarships for Syrian students
to study in India. As Syria’s reliable and long-standing friend, India stands ready to
continue to render all possible help and support to the Syrian people.

21-0088513/46

S/2021/75

Annex 7
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Ireland to the
United Nations, Geraldine Byrne Nason
At the outset, knowing that it is the last day on the Security Council for the
representative of the United States, I wanted to send my personal best wishes to
Kelly for her future and certainly to remind her not to forget her Irish roots as she
leaves one family and returns to another.
I thank you, Mr. President, as well as Mark Lowcock and Geir Pedersen for
today’s briefings, which have set out very starkly indeed the enormous challenges
that we still face in Syria. I will concentrate today on the political issues only, as
the representative of Norway just spoke on behalf of Ireland as co-penholder on the
humanitarian aspects.
Today is another painful recognition of the fact that, after almost 10 years of a
brutal war with devastating consequences for the ordinary people of Syria, we seem
no closer to a credible political solution that can implement resolution 2254 (2015).
That is no reflection on Special Envoy Pedersen and his dedicated team, but it does
flow largely from the lack of serious engagement by the Syrian authorities in the
political process. To be clear, Ireland fully supports the role of the United Nations
and commends Mr. Pedersen and his team on the sterling work that they do and for
the briefing they gave us today.
It is welcome news that the Constitutional Committee members continued
their dialogue on national foundations and principles, but clearly progress to date is
neither sufficiently rapid nor substantive enough. Ireland can only hope that at the
upcoming fifth session we will see all parties working urgently, and, we underline,
sincerely towards concrete outcomes on the basic principles of the constitution.
I want to commend especially the work of the civil-society members of that
Committee and to welcome in particular the ongoing consultation and engagement
with Syrian women representatives, including the Syrian Women’s Advisory Board.
We know that, in such dire circumstances on the ground, conflict has the greatest
impact on the lives of the most vulnerable and that usually, very often, that means
women, in this case Syrian women. But we also know that they are resilient women,
and we know that the work of the Board is highlighting the importance of ensuring
their full and meaningful equal participation in political life. That is being done
when those women are facing challenges that would defy many of us. I assure
Mr. Pedersen that we will keep saying that and supporting that.
Progress on the constitution is a critical part of the work that we need to do to
find peace. There are also several other vital aspects of resolution 2254 (2015) that
must be urgently addressed if Syria is to achieve sustainable peace.
Violent conflict and terrorism remain, we know, a grim reality for many
ordinary Syrians. In Mr. Pedersen’s words, a fragile calm largely continues, but it
still falls far short of the lasting and verifiable nationwide ceasefire as we demanded
in resolution 2254 (2015). Shelling, airstrikes and attacks using improvised explosive
device attacks continue to kill and injure civilians. We know that that, of course, is
completely unacceptable and not sustainable.
As we see it, there can be no sustainable peace without accountability and
no true peace without justice. We believe that it is imperative that those who are
responsible for violations of international humanitarian law and for human rights
violations and abuses be held to account and that the recommendations of impartial
mechanisms, including the United Nations Independent International Commission
14/46

21-00885

S/2021/75

of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic and the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism, be implemented.
We firmly believe that we should collectively stand against impunity and ensure
that those who torture, murder and commit other heinous crimes be held accountable.
Evidence of serious violations and abuses has been extensively documented.
Accountability and reconciliation are linked and are key to sustainable peace.
As pointed out by the Special Envoy, we have yet to see meaningful progress
on detainees, abductees and on missing persons. Ireland supports Mr. Pedersen’s
call for significant action, including the provision of access to prisons and detention
facilities, so that we can have real information on the missing. Action on those issues
is urgent, and it is also essential as a confidence-building measure.
Today millions of Syrian people, ordinary Syrian people, remain scattered
as refugees, and the conditions necessary for them to return in a safe, voluntary
and dignified manner are far from having been achieved. Only a credible political
solution can lead to such conditions. We hope to see that urgently.
Ireland remains concerned that the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
and its affiliates remain active and are, of course, exploiting the vacuum that exists
in some parts of Syria. The European Union is contributing by non-military means to
the Global Coalition to Counter ISIL/Da’esh for the stabilization of north-east Syria.
After nearly a decade of conflict, the political process quite simply has
failed the ordinary Syrian people. We regret that deeply, as they continue to suffer
unconscionably — both inside and outside Syria. Once again, only a political solution
can end that suffering and prevent continued conflict and instability.
We will continue to work with Mr. Pedersen; he can count on Ireland as he
works with the Syrian authorities, and we hope that the Syrian authorities will
sincerely engage with those efforts. We want to restore peace, justice and, above all,
hope to the people of Syria.

21-0088515/46

S/2021/75

Annex 8
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Kenya to the
United Nations, Martin Kimani
I thank Mr. Geir Pedersen and Mr. Mark Lowcock for their briefings.
I would like to start by thanking Ambassador Kelly Craft for her service
and partnership. Kenya wishes her all the very best in her future endeavours. Her
departure from the Security Council just as I arrive reminds me that, although
there may be permanent members and that we all serve in Permanent Missions, at a
human level we all are elected. We are all passing through and hope to make the best
contribution possible. I hope that this realization is one we all hold, because it may
allow us to forge greater consensus to meet the urgency of the expectations of the
people of Syria, and those in other files, for peace and security. I also congratulate the
United States on a peaceful transition of power from one Administration to another,
which is being observed by the world and appreciated for its seamless transition.
My delegation appreciates the combined meetings on the political and
humanitarian situations, as they provide a holistic and undeniably interlinked
overview of the situation in Syria.
We are gravely concerned by the immense suffering of the Syrian people.
No one can forget the depredations and evil visited on them by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant and other forms of extensive and inhumane violence. We
vividly recall the caravans of refugee families fleeing for their safety from homes
and regions that the Government could not protect.
Kenya stands with the Syrian people. We understand the pressures and interests
that are feeding into how the Syrian people are treated and how the solutions to help
them are being crafted and implemented in the light of those interests.
Kenya believes that the Security Council and the multilateral order must put
the Syrian people first. That is the reason for which the Council was created. That
is the only claim for the Council to be held in high esteem by all the well-meaning
citizens of the Members of the United Nations.
Seeing the lack of consensus and the subjecting of the interests of the Syrian
people to multiple competing interests makes us understand even more profoundly
why it is so important to reform the multilateral system to be a more effective
mediator of global peace and security.
It is based on this position that Kenya strongly believes that the long-term
solution to the Syrian crisis lies in a political dialogue that includes the widest
spectrum of the Syrian people. Our urgent note of caution is that, in the pursuit
of inclusive dialogue, the terrorist groups and their leaders that have caused such
immense suffering and atrocity should not be rewarded with political recognition.
Kenya notes the conclusion of the fourth session of the Constitutional
Committee, which was held from 30 November to 4 December 2020. What is needed
now is urgent collaboration by the parties on the constitutional reform process as
the basis for a political solution that can be the foundation for security. We look
forward to the next briefing highlighting the outcome of the fifth session of the
Constitutional committee.
On the alarming humanitarian situation, Kenya is gravely concerned about
the ongoing targeted attacks on civilians and humanitarian aid workers as well as
the high number of coronavirus disease infections. In that regard, we hold that there
should be no limitation on the delivery of aid. For that reason, we urge stronger
cooperation between the Syrian Government and the United Nations to better
16/46

21-00885

S/2021/75

support cross-line and cross-border humanitarian assistance to reach the civilian
population in great need.
In conclusion, Kenya reiterates its support for a Syrian-led and Syrianowned political dialogue. We remain convinced that the multilateral system, and in
particular the Security Council, must find more ways to generate the consensus and
collaborative approach that the people of Syria deserve and the entire world expects.

21-0088517/46

S/2021/75

Annex 9
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Mexico to the
United Nations, Juan Ramón de la Fuente Ramirez
[Original: Spanish]
I would like to take this opportunity to wish my friend Ambassador Kelly
Craft all the best in her personal and professional future. Our time in the Security
Council overlapped very little, but our teams worked quite well in various forums
as befits two good neighbours. I wish dear Kelly good luck. We will keep in touch.
I thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and Under-Secretary-General Mark
Lowcock for their briefings.
Mexico welcomes the progress — modest though it may be — made at the recent
meetings of the Constitutional Committee and hopes that, at the session scheduled
for next week, progress will continue to be made on defining the constitutional
principles, and that the drafting of a new constitution can proceed.
We recognize the efforts of Special Envoy Pedersen to ensure the participation
of civil society in the Committee, in particular women. Mexico firmly believes that
women’s leadership and substantive participation is essential for peacebuilding.
We also call for a redoubling of efforts and progress in other areas in favour
of the political transition, such as the national ceasefire, the unilateral release of
detainees and the clarification of the facts in relation to missing persons.
The Syrian conflict, as has been stated here, cannot be resolved through
military means. The only way to address it is through consultation and political
dialogue facilitated by the United Nations, and with the support of regional and
international partners. Therefore, we welcome the Al-Ula declaration, in which the
Gulf Cooperation Council reaffirms its support for that political process, on the
basis of resolution 2254 (2015).
As this is the first time that Mexico is intervening in its capacity as a member
of the Security Council on this issue, we want to recognize the work of the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, all United Nations agencies and
all humanitarian actors on the ground who have contributed to addressing this
humanitarian crisis.
However, the humanitarian situation continues to deteriorate. The coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic has exacerbated a situation that was already serious,
but is now even more so, as the population requiring humanitarian assistance for
subsistence now stands at around 13 million people. Given the immensity of the
humanitarian challenge, allow me to highlight three points.
First, with regard to the critical food situation, a decade of conflict has led
to more than 9 million people facing food insecurity. Humanitarian assistance from
the various United Nations agencies and other humanitarian actors is imperative
to prevent this situation from deteriorating further. All humanitarian actors and
shipments must have unrestricted access and must not be subject to unnecessary
bureaucratic delays.
Secondly, with regard to the impact of winter and the situation of displaced
persons, despite the efforts made, there is still a lack of adequate housing and
necessary protection, which further hampers the living conditions of the population.
Camps, such as Al-Hol, are mainly inhabited by women and children, who in the
absence of adequate protection resort to unsafe practices that have already caused
very regrettable accidents. The fires are a case in point.
18/46

21-00885

S/2021/75

Thirdly, with regard to the increase in cases of COVID-19, medical personnel
must be provided with personal protective equipment and, in due course, both the
personnel and the entire Syrian population must have access to vaccines. We again
call on all States to increase cooperation, in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 74/274, to ensure equitable access to medicines, vaccines and medical
equipment. That is the best way to address the pandemic. The Syrian people are
entitled to the highest standard of physical and mental health.
The distribution of protective equipment to health personnel, as well as food
and protective supplies for the winter season, are examples of the importance of
keeping all channels active to deliver humanitarian assistance. If necessary, more
crossings, such as Bab Al-Hawa, should be opened, with the fundamental objective
of saving lives.
This is not a matter of geopolitics. Mexico calls on all actors involved to
prevent the politicization of the provision of humanitarian assistance, which the
Syrian people urgently need, and to prevent the assistance from being deliberately
prevented from reaching its destination.

21-0088519/46

S/2021/75

Annex 10
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Niger to the
United Nations, Abdou Abarry
[Original: French]
In the various briefings that they have given to the Security Council, Mr. Geir
Pedersen and Mr. Mark Lowcock have faithfully presented the hope but also the
frustration and even disappointment at the situation in Syria. The statements that
they have just made do not depart from that tradition.
The position of my country, the Niger, regarding the Syrian crisis remains
constant. For us, the resolution of the crisis must be achieved on a political and not a
military basis, according to an inclusive process led by the Syrians themselves. We
therefore believe that we must firmly support the Special Envoy in his tireless efforts
to promote dialogue and mutual trust between the parties concerned and to get the
political process back on track, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015).
That is why my delegation is pleased that the work of the Constitutional
Committee has resumed after several months of interruption. We hope that, at the
upcoming meetings, all members of the Committee will engage in the negotiations
in good faith, seeking the compromises necessary to put Syria on the path to peace
and security.
The cessation of hostilities remains an essential precondition for achieving
tangible progress in resolving the crisis in Syria. The continued fighting, bombings
and the use of improvised explosive devices remain a genuine source of concern
for us. My delegation therefore calls on the parties concerned to respect the
commitments made in the various agreements in order to achieve a comprehensive
national ceasefire.
We also support the calls of the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy for
an immediate national ceasefire in Syria to create the conditions for the success of
the political process and to make effective the fight against the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, whose spread is increasing exponentially in the country.
On the humanitarian front, it is clear that a substantial improvement must
be made in the mechanism for the delivery of humanitarian assistance throughout
the Syrian territory. At a time when the Syrian population continues to suffer from
the combined effects of economic hardship and the increase in COVID-19 cases,
procedures at the Bab Al-Hawa crossing point and between the line of control must
be streamlined to allow for the accelerated delivery of humanitarian assistance,
including much-needed medical supplies and equipment, to the Syrian health-care
system in order to address the pandemic. My delegation reiterates its appeal to all
parties to abide by their obligations to protect civilians and allow timely, safe and
unimpeded access to all humanitarian workers concerned with helping millions of
people in need, often at the risk of their lives.
Similarly, the Niger remains concerned about the plight of the many women,
and even children, who were arbitrarily detained in both camps. We call on the
parties to the conflict to respect human rights and to share information on the fate
of those detainees.
We support the calls by the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy for a
massive and unilateral release of detainees, as well as for meaningful action on the
case of missing persons. That will undoubtedly contribute to the easing of the overall
situation and could greatly help to promote the progress we all expect towards a
successful resolution of the Syrian crisis.
20/46

21-00885

S/2021/75

In conclusion, my delegation urges the members of the Council to always bear
in mind the difficult conditions that the Syrian people are in when considering the
multiple facets of this crisis, which has lasted too long.
Like all nations facing terrorism, the Syrian Arab Republic has the right to
protect its sovereignty and to relentlessly combat terrorist groups, which seek to
exploit the current health crisis in order to regroup and regain lost ground, ignoring
the Secretary-General’s call for a ceasefire during this time of pandemic. Of course,
this fight must be carried out in accordance with international humanitarian law,
ensuring in particular the protection of innocent civilians and their access to
humanitarian assistance.

21-0088521/46

S/2021/75

Annex 11
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Norway to the
United Nations, Mona Juul
I make this statement on behalf of the co-penholders on the Syrian humanitarian
file, Ireland and Norway. We would like to thank Under-Secretary General for
Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Mark Lowcock, and Special Envoy Geir Pedersen for
their briefings today.
We meet today for the first Security Council meeting of 2021 on the
humanitarian situation in Syria. Almost 10 years have passed since the conflict
began. After turning the page on 2020, we continue to witness an extremely
challenging humanitarian situation throughout the country. Our role as humanitarian
co-penholders will reflect a long-term engagement with the humanitarian response in
Syria. The overall objective will be to ensure that humanitarian assistance continues
to reach all people in need, by all means and modalities necessary, in line with the
humanitarian principles.
The total number of people in need of humanitarian assistance and protection
increased from 11 million to a record high of 13 million people over the past year.
The socioeconomic crisis in Syria continues to spiral to new disastrous depths.
Throughout the country we have seen increasing food prices, worsened fuel shortages
and continued loss of livelihoods — all further exacerbated by the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19). In all likelihood, more than half of Syria’s population now
faces food insecurity.
We are concerned as the number of reported COVID-19 cases continues to
rise, with a disastrous impact on an already shattered health system. With limited
or lacking test capacity, indicators such as the fatality ratio leave little doubt that
community transmission is widespread. It is vital that the Syrian health-care
system receive the support needed to battle the pandemic, including equitable
access to vaccines. Needless to say, we give our full support to the World Health
Organization’s efforts.
Clean and uninterrupted water supplies are essential in all situations, but
even more so in the midst of a pandemic. We are deeply concerned by renewed
reports of interruptions at the Allouk water station, denying more than half a million
people access to their primary source of water. All parties involved must commit to
a settlement and support United Nations efforts to find a sustainable solution.
Winter came late but has hit hard. People now go cold and hungry all over Syria.
The impact on the over 2 million internally displaced persons living in inadequate
emergency shelters is devastating. Several children have died tragically in tent fires
as families try to keep warm. We are following with concern the winter storms in
the north-west of the country, which are reportedly the biggest so far this season.
The heavy rainfall across western Aleppo and Idlib governorates in north-west Syria
has reportedly caused damage to sites for internally displaced people. Reports are
indicating that at least 41,200 people have been affected and at least 62 camps have
been damaged or destroyed by the storm. We ask for the urgent scaling up of the
relief efforts for children and families in the affected areas.
The protection needs of Syrians are mounting. Earlier this month, we again
received heartbreaking news of children killed in accidents caused by unexploded
ordnance in places such as Dar’a and Deir ez-Zor. They were not the first and will
not be the last. The hard work of humanitarian mine clearance has barely begun.
That also demonstrates the need to step up efforts in mine-risk education in all
affected areas.
22/46

21-00885

S/2021/75

Reports by the Secretary-General underscore the immense and growing
humanitarian needs facing Syrians. The United Nations, the International Red Cross
and Red Crescent movement and non-governmental organizations partners continue
to mount one of the world’s largest humanitarian responses, reaching an average of
7.4 million people per month across Syria. The ongoing response demonstrates the
need for ensuring a principled approach to humanitarian assistance and protection,
reaching people in all parts of the country.
While humanitarian access remains challenging, some progress has been made
in certain areas of the country over the past year. We hope to see that development
continue in 2021. Recent reports from the Secretary-General and humanitarian
partners emphasize that cross-line support to the north-east is still not reaching
the population on a scale sufficient to meet their needs. We therefore call on all
parties involved to facilitate a concerted scaling up of cross-line support. In the
north-west, thanks to the efforts of the United Nations and its partners, the crossing
at Bab Al-Hawa continues to play an indispensable role in the delivery of aid to the
3 million people in need.
In conclusion, I want to pay tribute to all humanitarian and medical personnel
for their tireless efforts. We call on all parties to adhere to their obligations
under international humanitarian law and protect those who risk their lives while
saving others.

Second statement by the Permanent Representative of Norway to
the United Nations, Mona Juul
I will now make some additional remarks on the political track in my
national capacity.
The only way to bring an end to the displacement, destruction and humanitarian
need is through a nationwide ceasefire and a political solution. Military victories
may be won on the battlefield, but only a lasting and inclusive political solution can
end the suffering of the people of Syria and prevent renewed conflict and instability.
Norway will do its utmost to support a political settlement in Syria.
We give our full support to Special Envoy Pedersen and his Office in their
efforts to facilitate the implementation of resolution 2254 (2015). That includes the
critical work of the Constitutional Committee, as well as broader endeavours to end
the conflict and bring sustainable peace to Syria.
On the Constitutional Committee, we welcome the resumption of meetings
during the latter part of 2020 and the upcoming round of talks scheduled for next week
in Geneva. For the first time, the Committee’s small body will discuss constitutional
principles. We look forward to good-faith engagement from all sides on issues
of substance, with a view to finding common ground and paving the way for the
drafting process to start. It is the Syrian parties that need to move the constitutional
process forward. The process must be Syrian-owned, with strong support from the
international community and the Security Council. This is an opportunity not to
be missed.
More than five years have passed since resolution 2254 (2015) was adopted
by the Council. We urge the parties and all actors to contribute to concrete progress.
We support the Special Envoy’s call for taking stock of where the political process
stands in order to find the best possible way to move it forward. In addition to
the important work of the Constitutional Committee, we also need wider efforts
to address the full range of issues, with regional and international partners and all
parties constructively engaged.
21-0088523/46

S/2021/75

We also remain concerned about the countless persons who remain missing
or detained in Syria. We call on all parties to release arbitrarily detained persons —
particularly women and children — and facilitate their return to their families. No
confidence-building measure is more important. We urge all parties to take all the
necessary steps to better protect children and ensure children’s rights, including
keeping schools and health facilities safe.
We know from experience that inclusivity is vital for peace processes to
succeed and for political settlements to be not only just, but more sustainable. In
that respect, we commend the Special Envoy for his close dialogue with the Syrian
Women’s Advisory Board and for being a strong advocate for the active participation
of women, including those from diverse backgrounds, and the broader civil society
in the constitutional process. The direct and meaningful participation of women and
civil society in the political process is key to building sustainable peace with the
respect for human rights and the rule of law at its core.
Lastly, let me turn to the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). Recent
attacks in central and eastern Syria, claiming dozens of casualties, remind us that
ISIL remains a serious threat, both to Syria and to international security and stability.
We must remain vigilant of their existence and their potential to grow and inspire
terrorist attacks far beyond Syria and Iraq. Norway is committed to stabilization
efforts in both countries and to continuing our support for the fight against ISIL.

24/46

21-00885

S/2021/75

Annex 12
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Vassily Nebenzia
[Original: Russian]
Before turning to the topic of our meeting, I would like to pay tribute to
United States Permanent Representative Kelly Craft, who today is attending her
last Security Council meeting in that capacity. I would like to thank her for her
cooperation and for the friendly spirit she has shown despite our disagreements in
the Council, including on today’s topic. I am sure Mrs. Craft has left her mark on
the history of the Security Council and has contributed to its work. I ask her to
please accept our sincere wishes for all the best and every success in all her future
endeavours. We hope that she will not forget her Security Council friends. I will
now turn to what Permanent Representative Craft referred to in her statement as the
Russian version of the Syrian story.
We are grateful to Geir Pedersen and Mark Lowcock for their information on
the situation in Syria.
We welcome the fact that, despite the coronavirus factor and the known
restrictions in that regard, the fifth session of the drafting committee of the
Constitutional Committee has already been scheduled for 25 January in Geneva.
That confirms the resolve of the Government delegation to stabilize and resolve the
situation in the country, despite the accusations against it and economic, political
and military pressure from Western States. We intend to support Mr. Pedersen’s
mediation efforts and, together with our colleagues in the Astana format, to encourage
the delegations from Damascus and the opposition to work constructively. We have
consistently advocated non-interference in the political process led and conducted by
the Syrians themselves, as explicitly set out in resolution 2254 (2015). It is all the more
inadmissible to prejudge the outcome or to impose artificial deadlines. Incidentally,
resolution 2254 (2015) is silent on and has no bearing on the upcoming elections.
Despite the stabilization of the situation in Syria, risks of escalation remain.
We note the high degree of tension, in particular in areas not controlled by the
Government — Idlib, the Euphrates region and Al-Tanf. The terrorists of Hayat
Tahrir Al-Sham continue to shell population centres and Syrian army positions and
continue the practice of harassing civilians, carrying out executions and illegally
enriching themselves. There has been an increase in Islamic State in Iraq and the
Shams cells in the Euphrates region as well as in clashes between Kurdish units and
tribes and among various Kurdish forces. We also condemn Israeli air strikes on
territory, which threaten the stability of the entire region.
It is disappointing that Western countries have imposed sanctions against
Syrian Foreign Minister Fayssal Mekdad. That action demonstrates the West’s
unwillingness to seek a diplomatic solution to the Syrian crisis, which it instigated,
to a large extent.
With regard to the humanitarian component of the Syrian file in the Security
Council, let us focus on the key aspects that require an urgent solution.
The countdown in the operation of the cross-border mechanism for the
provision of humanitarian assistance to Syria is accelerating. We have repeatedly
said that the work of the mechanism raises many questions because of its lack of
transparency and accountability — all the more so because the share of United
Nations humanitarian shipments through it within the total volume of humanitarian
aid from Turkey is extremely small.
21-0088525/46

S/2021/75

Against that background, of course, it is discouraging that, for almost a year
now, there has not been any movement in the humanitarian convoy to Idlib across
the contact lines. Mr. Lowcock has said that the parties cannot agree on this convoy.
I want to correct him. Damascus has fulfilled its obligation to approve the mission,
having issued an authorization back in April. The way to the enclave is open. What
is stopping the so-called “other parties” from cooperating? We ask this question
over and over again because we do not understand the meaning of the declaration of
commitment on compliance with international humanitarian law and the facilitation
of humanitarian assistance signed by armed groups — terrorists, in fact, who have
been classified as such by the Security Council — under the auspices of the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (UNOCHA). We have not heard anything
from OCHA on that document. We would like to finally hear from them.
We would like to address the new co-penholder on the Syrian humanitarian
dossier — the delegations of Ireland and Norway. They should not take the example
of their predecessors and focus only on the cross-border mechanism. It will not be
long before we are once again faced with the question of whether it needs to be
extended. The flywheel of passion and emotion will spin exponentially faster, but
predictably in a one-sided manner. Once again, the majority will keep silent about
the lack of progress in aid deliveries from Damascus to Idlib.
Our position is very clear: the cross-border mechanism, created as a provisional
tool in 2014, is becoming outdated and continues to undermine Syrian sovereignty
and territorial integrity. The Syrian Arab Republic is no longer the terrorism-torn
country it was when the mechanism was first launched. It is being rebuilt, and the
Government has facilitated the delivery of aid from inside the country in every way
possible. Suffice it to mention the World Health Organization’s (WHO) humanitarian
aid to the north-east alone — more than 90 per cent is distributed to territories not
controlled by Damascus.
Syria’s sovereignty and territorial integrity must be restored. We call on our
Irish and Norwegian colleagues, as well as on all other members of the Council, to
show their impartiality and look at the situation from that perspective. Criticism
of our position on the cross-border mechanism sounds blasphemous in a situation
where supplies to Idlib from Damascus are being delayed due to far-fetched and
inexplicable pretexts.
I cannot fail to mention the topic of unlawful unilateral restrictive measures —
simply put, sanctions. During the Security Council meeting in December (see
S/2020/1257), we drew attention to the anti-sanctions guidelines for the period of
the coronavirus disease pandemic, which were issued on 10 December by Alena
Douhan, United Nations Special Rapporteur on the negative impact of unilateral
coercive measures on the enjoyment of human rights. This is essentially a summary
of all the problems faced by humanitarian workers in Syria. It was dialogue with
them that provided the basis for the preparation of this document.
I will cite only the following as one of the most vivid examples of the difficulties
faced by ordinary Syrians. The Syrian Central Bank’s exclusion from international
payment systems and the potential "dual use" of humanitarian goods prevent the
Government of Syria from purchasing not only polymerase chain reaction tests,
personal protective equipment and syringes but — absurd as it may sound — even
toothpaste. Restrictions on the use of online platforms that cannot be accessed from
Syrian territory also contribute to Syria’s difficulties. For example, in the absence
of sufficient medical staff, remote medical consultations for patients, telemedicine,
which the modern world prides itself on, are hampered. Schoolchildren are deprived
of the opportunity to study online from home.

26/46

21-00885

S/2021/75

In the same context, it is worth highlighting the right of Syrians to access the
coronavirus vaccine. The sanctions pressure that is exerted on Syria significantly
limits the ability of the inhabitants of Government-controlled territories to protect
themselves from the pandemic. The reasons are the same: blacklists of sanctions
violators discourage potential contractors.
This vicious circle that ordinary Syrians have been trapped in needs to be
broken as soon as possible. It is unacceptable to label the Government and accuse it
of inaction while completely cutting the country off from the outside world, business
contacts and financial transactions. Syria has a legitimate right to self-sufficient
sustainable development, and Damascus is doing all it can in the current complicated
circumstances to keep its economy afloat.
Colleagues will be reminded that the occupied north-east of Syria is rich not
only in hydrocarbons, but revenues from their sale go not into Syrian treasury but
elsewhere. In the meantime, Syria is suffering environmental damage for which no
one wants to be held accountable, and the United Nations simply keeps silent. The
occupying Power is responsible. The north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic, which
used to be the breadbasket not only of the country but also of the region, now is also
cut off from the national economy. While the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations reports a significant increase in crop production in 2020— an
average of 77 per cent as compared to the previous five years — the rate of starvation
in the country is increasing. In this situation, is it right to blame Damascus, which is
experiencing problems in feeding its citizens because it lacks access to its national
resources?
As much as some colleagues might like to see Russian or Syrian propaganda
in sanctions-related topics, this issue is increasingly raised at the United Nations.
In addition to the Special Rapporteur’s materials and the Secretary-General’s calls
in December, the WHO Regional Director for the Eastern Mediterranean, Ahmed
Al-Mandari, openly admitted during a briefing that sanctions are negatively affecting
all aspects of life in Syria, including health care.
We cannot help but ask Mr. Lowcock a question in that regard. During the
14 January Council meeting on Yemen (see S/2021/56), he emotionally stated that
having humanitarian exemptions would not solve the problem of supplies to that
country and that, even if they did allow goods to be delivered, the prices would be
severely inflated. He said it raised serious concerns in the context of Yemen because
it severely limits the ability of humanitarian workers on the ground. We appreciate
his frankness and courage in that regard. But what is the difference between the
situation in Yemen and the situation in Syria? The same dysfunctional humanitarian
exemptions, the same blocking of bank accounts, the same fear of suppliers falling
under secondary sanctions and the same rising fuel prices amid increasing shortages.
Should we only talk about this in the context of Syria if people start starving on the
same scale as in Yemen? This is a selective approach to country-specific files. We
are counting on Mr. Lowcock to be as principled on Syria as he was on Yemen.
Finally, I would like to ask another question, once again to Mr. Lowcock. The
humanitarian plan for Syria and the country-specific United Nations Sustainable
Development Cooperation Framework expired in December 2020. It would be
interesting to learn about the progress in preparing new versions of those documents.
Furthermore, in the context of coordinating humanitarian efforts and promoting
development — what some call nexus, although that term is not entirely clear to
us — and given the growing trend for Syrian refugees to return to their homes,
the issue of rebuilding the social infrastructure in Syria — hospitals, schools and
housing — is becoming increasingly urgent.

21-0088527/46

S/2021/75

In that regard, we once again wish to underscore that imposing political
conditions for the United Nations work in the interest of Syria’s development is
unacceptable. We should be guided by the real needs of the Syrians and the priorities
of the Government, as set out in the agreed parameters for United Nations assistance.
We recall the internal document “Parameters and Principles of United Nations
Assistance to Syria,” which contained an unacceptable thesis about the conditions
of assistance, and proceed from the assumption that, in reality, the United Nations
remains impartial and independent. This document also mentions the work of the
Inter-Agency Task Force. We would like to ask Mr. Lowcock about its parameters
and progress, as we understand that OCHA is a member of it.

Second statement by the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Vassily Nebenzia
First of all, I would like to start by saying that I presumably should appreciate
the lesson on manners that the representative of the United Kingdom gave me. I also
checked the timing of his intervention; it was five minutes and 57 seconds. However,
I would like to remind him that he speaks English and does not need interpretation.
If I had spoken in English, I could have condensed my statement to perhaps three
minutes. But I have respect for the interpreters, who have to cope with the speed of
my statement and interpret it. Still, I would like to apologize to him for stealing his
precious time. Judging by the fact that he left, he was indeed in a hurry. However, it
seems to us that it was not the only reason. It looks like certain parts of our statement
were not particularly pleasing to the representative of the United Kingdom.
On the idea of separating political and humanitarian meetings on Syria, as far
as we know, it is already in the February programme. Let us strike an understanding,
then. When we have political Syria on the agenda, we speak about political Syria.
When we have humanitarian Syria on the agenda, we speak about humanitarian
Syria. We do not mix the two, as was often the case in our previous meetings, when
political and humanitarian files on Syria became practically indistinguishable,
according to the statements of some of our colleagues.
Now, on what Mr. Lowcock commented, I would not call it an answer to a
question that I graciously asked him yesterday. If he is unable to comment more in
depth on the strategic framework for Syria, then I suggest that we invite another
briefer who is closer to that issue to our next meeting on Syria.
On the comparison between Yemen and Syria, I do not agree that the two
situations differ. Although Syria was not put on the list by the State Department,
the sanctions applied against Syria are no less harmful than the consequences, for
Yemen, of the State Department’s decision.

28/46

21-00885

S/2021/75

Annex 13
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines to the United Nations, Inga Rhonda King
I thank Under Secretary-General Lowcock and Special Envoy Pedersen for
their usual informative briefings.
Syria’s humanitarian crisis and its resultant socioeconomic downturn
continues to be a source of profound concern. As the Syrian pound depreciates,
food insecurity and shortages of other essential commodities increases, placing the
Syrian people in a perilous position. Humanitarian aid therefore remains a critical
lifeline for millions, particularly those residing in overcrowded camps for internally
displaced persons, and especially in the harsh winter months and in consideration
of the coronavirus disease pandemic. Consequently, aid access facilitated by the
cross-border mechanism, as well as other indispensable modalities, is vital to the
humanitarian response. Yet it still requires significant scaling up and enhancing to
ensure that those in need of support are able to receive it in line with the humanitarian
principles and in a timely, safe, sustained and unimpeded manner.
Mr. Pedersen likened the confluence of circumstances in Syria to a slow
tsunami. Intrinsically related to the issue of Syria’s socioeconomic downturn is that
of the imposition of unilateral coercive measures. We continue to appeal for the
lifting of those measures, which are not only incompatible with international law but
also undermine the country’s capacity to combat the pandemic.
The protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure and the maintenance
of an effective humanitarian response require an immediate nationwide cessation
of hostilities, as called for by the Special Envoy. There is no military solution to the
conflict, and we strongly urge parties to exercise maximum restraint and to fully
respect the ceasefire in the north-west. While we recognize the substantial threat
posed by the scourge of terrorism, we remind parties that all counter-terrorism and
other military activities must comply with the enduring principles of international
law. Distinction, proportionality and precaution ought to guide all actions.
The only sustainable solution to the protracted conflict and its attendant
humanitarian crisis remains through an inclusive Syrian-led and Syrian-owned
political process that meets the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people. In pursuit
of this durable and sustained resolution, the work of the Constitutional Committee
remains an essential component. We therefore continue to encourage all parties to
negotiate in a spirit of compromise to make tangible progress during the upcoming
fifth session. We also reiterate our support for the steadfast efforts of the Special
Envoy in that regard.
The viability of the political process also requires the undertaking of meaningful
confidence-building measures to foster goodwill and facilitate reconciliation. As
such, it is imperative that the outstanding issues of detainees and missing persons be
urgently addressed to encourage further progress.
In conclusion, we appeal to the international community to take pragmatic
steps to assist Syria in restoring peace and stability. Such steps include the withdrawal
of all unauthorized foreign forces, in respect for Syria’s sovereignty, unity and
territorial integrity, and by contributing to Syria’s reconstruction, as the restoration
of the country’s critical infrastructure will undoubtedly assist in alleviating the
overall humanitarian situation. The well-being of the Syrian people ought to remain
at the forefront of all actions, for it is they who continue to suffer the consequences
of the conflict.

21-0088529/46

S/2021/75

Annex 14
Statement of the Permanent Representative of Tunisia to the
United Nations, Tarek Ladeb
[Original: Arabic]
I now wish to make the following statement in my national capacity as the
representative of Tunisia.
I should like to thank the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. Lowcock, and the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Pedersen, for their briefings.
Tunisia welcomes the resumption by the Constitutional Committee of its work,
which is facilitated by the United Nations. The fifth round of talks is scheduled for
the beginning of next week in Geneva, following the fourth round that took place
late last year.
We hope that this round will enable the Constitutional Committee and its small
body to continue their work and lead to progress in the formulation of constitutional
principles and foundations.
In that context, we urge the Syrian parties to be flexible and focus on common
aims in order to make it possible to find common ground and reach a consensus
regarding the substance of the Constitution and to move the expanded political
process forward, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015). We also commend
Syrian women for the active role that they are playing into the effort to reach a
comprehensive settlement.
As Mr. Mark Lowcock stated in his briefing, the humanitarian situation in
Syria remains a matter of grave concern. We are alarmed by the deteriorating living
conditions of Syrians against the backdrop of the worsening economic crisis and the
repercussions of the coronavirus disease pandemic. Deteriorating food and water
security would exacerbate the situation, compound the suffering of the Syrian people
and hamper efforts to contain the pandemic.
It is therefore necessary to address the various factors of the crisis and the
drivers of instability, in order to prevent the situation from degenerating further. In
that connection, we would like to reiterate the need to prioritize the following:
First, a ceasefire must be established. The establishment of a ceasefire is both
an urgent necessity and a long-term goal, especially in view of the recent increase in
tension, violence and terrorism in several parts of Syria.
In this context, we reiterate the need to work towards the restoration of overall
calm in order to bring about the conditions needed to improve the humanitarian
situation and to create the safe, neutral and stable environment required to move
the political process forward. We also urge all parties to exercise restraint, adhere
to international law and international humanitarian law and strive to ensure that
civilians, civilian and medical facilities and medical and humanitarian workers
are protected.
At the same time, Tunisia stresses that it is necessary to combat terrorist
organizations that are on the Security Council lists in an effective, collective and
coordinated manner and in accordance with international law. Doing so is essential
any long-term political solution to the Syrian crisis and a prerequisite to restoring
security and stability to Syria and the region.

30/46

21-00885

S/2021/75

Secondly, there is a need to guarantee humanitarian access. Tunisia commends
the efforts of the United Nations, its partners and specialized agencies to ensure that
life-saving assistance can continue to reach all parts of Syria and is expanded to
meet the growing need, using the various access methods available. We reiterate
that it is incumbent upon all parties to help facilitate the safe and prompt delivery of
humanitarian and medical assistance to those in need, without discrimination.
Thirdly, early recovery efforts must be bolstered by maintaining the
infrastructure for basic services and providing decent livelihoods. In this regard,
it would be useful if the scope of humanitarian projects and programmes could be
expanded to include the maintenance of hospitals, schools, roads, water supply,
electricity and sanitation, while providing decent and sustainable livelihoods for
the affected and most vulnerable groups, thereby enhancing the effectiveness of the
response to the humanitarian crisis.
Lastly, the Security Council has stressed in successive resolutions relating to
the humanitarian situation and in its resolution 2254 (2015) that the humanitarian
situation will continue to deteriorate in the absence of a political solution to the crisis.
As the conflict approaches the ten-year mark, we reiterate our firm position
that there is no military solution to the Syrian crisis. The only way forward is to
expedite a political settlement based on resolution 2254 (2015) that is Syrian-led
and Syrian-owned and facilitated by the United Nations, as that will end the human
suffering of the Syrian people, address the deep roots of the crisis, preserve the
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Syria and restore peace and stability to
Syria and the region.

21-0088531/46

S/2021/75

Annex 15
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the
United Nations, Jonathan Allen
Let me start by marking Ambassador Craft’s final meeting by simply saying
how much I have appreciated her honesty, integrity, compassion and friendship
during her time on the Security Council. I have no doubt that she is proud of that too.
I also want to thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and Under-SecretaryGeneral Mark Lowcock for their briefings.
I listened carefully to the Russian Ambassador’s statement, as I always do,
and I think he would be the very first to admit that it was a lengthy statement,
longer than the five minutes that we, as Security Council members, recommend to
each other in presidential note S/2017/507. I, in no way, wish to be impolite about
this — is an issue we all have, not only he. And that tells me, as winter bites in Syria
and as Mr. Pedersen seeks action on the Constitutional Committee, that we need to
take the proper time as a Council to consider these two issues and return to separate
meetings, as has been our practice over many years.
As the Syrian conflict approaches its eleventh year, the situation continues
to deteriorate. Over 500,000 people have died during the conflict, the vast majority
of them civilians. The conditions for the millions of civilians displaced by the
conflict are dire. Since the beginning of the crisis, the United Kingdom has given
over $4 billion in humanitarian aid in Syria and in surrounding countries. And I
encourage others, especially those who support the Syrian regime and who say they
are so worried about the impact of sanctions, do more themselves to support the
Syrian people.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic continues to compound the
humanitarian situation, with confirmed cases having now surpassed 42,000. The
true figure is undoubtedly much higher. All donors will need to work together to
ensure the equitable distribution of COVID-19 vaccines across Syria, while ensuring
that those in most acute need of a vaccine are prioritized. The United Kingdom is
committed to working with the United Nations to lay the groundwork for the delivery
of vaccines and longer-term pandemic preparedness. There are complex challenges
to overcome, but the World Health Organization and other United Nations delivery
agencies have the United Kingdom’s full support.
Efficient, effective cross-border and cross-line access, as we have heard from
the United Nations and from non-governmental organizations for many months now,
remains essential to meeting the needs of the Syrian people. Over the course of 2020,
we saw the loss of three border crossings and a further increase in humanitarian
needs by over 2 million people. Cross-line access alone is sadly not enough to sustain
the humanitarian needs of 30 million people — that is, about three quarters of
the population.
Aid running through Bab Al-Hawa has never been more important, and the
rationale for renewing the cross-border mandate in the summer has not diminished.
Indeed, with the prospect of a vaccine, the delivery of which may well require
complex storage and supply chains, it only grows stronger.
In order for the humanitarian response to keep up with growing needs, the
volume and frequency of aid being delivered via Damascus to north-east Syria needs
to increase, including to those areas outside of regime control. That means alleviating
bureaucratic hurdles and ending arbitrary denials of access for aid workers, an
32/46

21-00885

S/2021/75

abhorrent example noted by Under-Secretary-General Lowcock last month of the
blocking of food aid to 220,000 people in Raqqa is simply unacceptable.
We are also concerned about the recent water crisis in regime-controlled Syria.
As with many serious problems, rampant corruption has played its role, with regime
diesel supplies designated for the city’s water pump generators being sold illegally.
The food, fuel and economic crises, all of the regime’s making, sadly continue.
An improvement in the humanitarian situation is possible only with a reduction
in violence. We remain deeply concerned by ongoing violations of agreed ceasefires,
with routine violence in the north-west, including shelling and sporadic air strikes,
an escalation in tensions in the north-east and a surge in attacks claimed by Da’esh.
The political settlement envisaged in resolution 2254 (2015), which the
Council adopted unanimously just over five years ago, remains the best means of
resolving Syria’s multiple crises. It is vital that the parties engage constructively on
the substantive issues of the Constitution during the fifth session of the Constitutional
Committee this month. Progress to date has been too slow, but there is a sense that
we are approaching a watershed moment. We hope the regime delegation will arrive
in Geneva willing to engage in good faith in the talks.
Without a new constitution, free and fair elections involving all Syrians,
including members of the diaspora, cannot take place as envisaged in resolution
2254 (2015). Plans to hold elections according to the previous Constitution would
contradict the political process by the Council. The United Kingdom will not
recognize elections that are neither free nor fair.
Free and fair elections should involve all Syrians, including members of the
diaspora. If the Syrian regime wants refugees to return, they need to ensure that the
conditions set out in paragraph 14 of resolution 2254 (2015) are met and that Syrian
citizens will not be returning to the status quo that led to and sustained this conflict.
Let me turn to the subject of sanctions. The Syrian regime and its Russian
backers blame “Western” sanctions for the failing economy in Syria. In reality, the
regime has devastated its own economy through nepotism, corruption and by funding
brutal violence against its people. It must bear responsibility for that. On 1 January,
the United Kingdom’s autonomous Syria sanctions regime designated 353 individuals
and entities responsible for repressing civilians in Syria. It is the United Kingdom’s
most extensive sanctions regime. I want to be clear: United Kingdom sanctions
target those individuals in the regime responsible for civilian suffering and prevent
those who support and benefit from the regime from entering the United Kingdom,
channelling money through United Kingdom banks and profiting from our economy.
Food and medicine are not subject to sanctions, and exemptions are in place for
humanitarian aid and the COVID-19 response.
As we have said so often, the path to the removal of sanctions is clear. Rather
than interfering with aid, bombing schools and hospitals and detaining and torturing
its people, the Syrian regime must heed the calls of its population, engage seriously
with Special Envoy Pedersen and the United Nations-led political process and
achieve a peaceful end to the conflict.

21-0088533/46

S/2021/75

Annex 16
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United States of
America to the United Nations, Kelly Craft
This meeting marks my final opportunity to address the Security Council as
the Permanent Representative of the United States of America. When I assumed this
position, in September of 2019, I vowed to speak in this body with moral clarity, to
always have in mind those who could not be present themselves — families fleeing
the abominable Maduro regime, Rohingya communities desperate for a return to
normalcy, South Sudanese women exhausted by the inaction of political leaders.
And the besieged people of Syria — bombed, starved, displaced and tormented by
the Al-Assad regime and its supporters. That this body has failed to do more to
address the needs of the Syrian people and promote real, positive action towards a
peaceful resolution to this crisis is scandalous.
The United States has worked tirelessly with partners to push for a change in
the political dynamics that afflict the Council and continue to deny the Syrian people
a path towards peace, stability and hope. The Council is failing millions of Syria’s
civilians, not just today but for more than a decade. It is appalling. As Ambassadors,
we serve our respective countries. However, we have the responsibility to be selfless
public servants who work to improve the lives of people around the world.
To Mark Lowcock and Geir Pedersen, my sincere gratitude for their untiring
efforts and those of their respective teams. They have, and they will continue to
have, the full support of the United States for their work to alleviate suffering and to
bring this conflict to a peaceful, negotiated solution.
The United States welcomes plans for the convening of the fifth round of the
Constitutional Committee next week in Geneva. The important work of drafting
a new constitution has been delayed for far too long. The Al-Assad regime must
meaningfully participate in the Committee’s work to deliver a constitution that
represents the entirety of the Syrian people. We also underscore Special Envoy
Pedersen’s authority to take measures he deems appropriate to facilitate the parties’
efforts to begin work on a new constitution itself.
We are under no illusions here. It is clear that the Al-Assad regime is
deliberately stalling the Committee’s progress to distract the international
community as the regime prepares to carry out a sham presidential election this
year. Any such election would be illegitimate. The vast majority of the international
community and reputable non-governmental organizations agree that the current
elections framework in the 2012 Syrian Constitution does not meet the most basic
international standards.
The United States will not recognize the elections as legitimate
per resolution 2254 (2015), a policy shared by nations on this call. Syria must undertake
steps, as unanimously agreed in resolution 2254 (2015), to enable the participation
of refugees, internally displaced persons and the diaspora in any Syrian elections that
occur pursuant to a new constitution.
Clearly, the Al-Assad regime hopes to use the 2021 Syrian presidential
elections to further the false narrative that the Al-Assad regime has participated
constructively in the political process per resolution 2254 (2015), that Al-Assad’s
rule is legitimate and that reconstruction and normalization should follow. That
could not be further from the truth.
This cynical ploy ignores the tragic realities faced by millions of Syrians
who have been uprooted from their homes, by the families whose loved ones remain
arbitrarily detained and are missing and by the civilians killed or injured by the
34/46

21-00885

S/2021/75

regime and its craven allies’ barbaric attacks. The United States will withhold
reconstruction funding until the United Nations political process is completed.
The Constitutional Committee is only one aspect of the necessary political
steps to be taken under resolution 2254 (2015), and we urge the Special Envoy to
redouble efforts to advance progress in the other aspects of the political file. As many
as 130,000 Syrians remain missing after being arbitrarily detained by the regime and
continue to suffer inhumane conditions without access to adequate health care.
We condemn the Al-Assad regime’s systematic campaign of arbitrary
detention, torture and mistreatment of prisoners. There must be an immediate and
serious effort led by the Special Envoy to secure the immediate release of arbitrarily
detained persons held by the Al-Assad regime, to provide information on missing
persons to their families and to allow humanitarian access to detention facilities.
The Syrian people should not have to wait one more day for action on the release of
detainees and missing persons.
Millions of Syrians have fled to Jordan, Lebanon and Turkey, and many
millions remain internally displaced since the beginning of the conflict. We thank
Syria’s neighbours for their incredible generosity.
I had the great privilege of meeting with the Syrian refugees in Turkey. These
are real people, not just numbers that we repeat each month in the Council. I recall
meeting the brave, selfless members of the White Helmets — Ammar, Isameel,
Abdulhadi, Maisaa and Afnan. They told me of the despair and suffering inside
Syria, the children without adequate food, the pregnant women without access to
health care and the communities living in terror. They pleaded for the world to wake
up to the horrors of this conflict and take action to restore Syria to a place of peace.
And I must say that we have to count on people — the honest press, like Sena
Alkan at CNN Turkey — to continue to be the voice of refugees and to continue to
highlight what Turkey has done in taking in Syrian refugees.
And each month our Russian colleagues tell us a very different story to this
body, a story breathtaking in its dishonesty and cynicism. To all those struggling to
survive the reality in Syria, displaced by the murderous regime and disregarded by
its allies, the United States says this: we are with you.
Last March, I visited the Bab Al-Hawa crossing to see the United Nations
humanitarian operation in action. From the points along the Turkish border you can
see people — internally displaced from their homes, their lives uprooted — living
in informal camps huddled against the fence that separates Turkish soil from Syria.
These are the people, the majority of whom are women and children, who have
entrusted us in the Council to keep them safe, to keep them alive.
When resolution 2533 (2020) is up for renewal, in July, I urge members not
to abandon the Syrian people. I urge them to do everything in their power to keep
this indispensable border crossing, Bab Al-Hawa, authorized for United Nations
deliveries of food, shelter and medical supplies to millions of Syrians. Failure to
renew that mandate will send a signal that the Council is not on the side of the Syrian
people, but rather supporting a regime that has terrorized and systemically starved
its people in the dogged pursuit of its own power.
The United States looks forward to working closely with the new co-penholders,
Ireland and Norway, and every member of the Council later this year to renew
resolution 2533 (2020). Anything short would be an abdication of our responsibilities.
The situation in Rukban continues to demand the attention of the Council. It
has now been 16 months since the Al-Assad regime allowed the last humanitarian
delivery to Rukban. Let me repeat that: 16 months. The Al-Assad regime and
21-0088535/46

S/2021/75

Russia must allow unhindered humanitarian access to the camp, including United
Nations humanitarian delivery convoys. This kind of politicizing and weaponizing
of aid should outrage the Council and trigger immediate action to deliver aid to this
community now.
My time as my country’s representative to this body comes to its close. There
is nothing more certain that I have learned in time: to everything there is a season.
For me it concludes as it began, with still the strongest conviction that the heart of
all Government is stewardship — not to rule, but to serve. That it is as agents and
delegates of the people that we hold what offices we fill. And it is by our fidelity to
the principles of freedom and democracy, upon which the security and welfare of all
our citizens are secured, that we will be measured.
We are surely, as the world most always is, in turbulent times. This body grew
out of a historic turbulence. The anxieties flowing from a pandemic very likely,
and only naturally, may detract somewhat from the mindfulness of the causes all
Governments must serve, and the values all Governments must cherish.
Of those, again I say, freedom and democracy are cardinal. As the wisest of all
our Presidents reminded my nation, in another period of terrible turbulence, both are
always being tested or challenged. Lincoln is a star in the firmament, and he surely
never shone more brightly that when, in the briefest of all presidential addresses, he
gave voice to the hope and prayer that “government by the people, for the people and
of the people” should not “perish from the earth.”
Freedom and democracy are always under test. That is why this body exists.
And from my personal viewpoint, it has been an incredible honour to serve here, and
to serve my country by doing so. I thank the Council for allowing me the opportunity
to serve with the finest club, I believe, in the world. And I am forever grateful and
will forever be watching and cheering the Council from the sidelines. And I just
know that it will continue to make differences for people who do not have a voice.

36/46

21-00885

S/2021/75

Annex 17
Statement by the Chargé d’Affaires a.i. of Viet Nam to the
United Nations, Pham Hai Anh
At the outset, I would like to thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and UnderSecretary-General Mark Lowcock for their informative briefings. I would also like
to welcome the representatives of Syria, Turkey and Iran to this meeting.
Let me begin our first statement of 2021 on this file by reaffirming our strong
advocacy for a comprehensive political solution that is led and owned by Syrians
themselves, facilitated by the United Nations and in line with resolution 2254 (2015),
and which fully adheres to international law and the Charter of the United Nations,
including full respect for sovereignty, territorial integrity and non-interference in
the internal affairs of Syria.
Ahead of the upcoming session in the framework of the Constitutional
Committee, our delegation urges the parties concerned to engage constructively. We
hope that the parties will also be able to agree on a timeline for further discussions
in order to consolidate trust and confidence.
Even though sporadic insecurity incidents have been happening, we take
note of the relatively calm situation on the ground as the ceasefire agreement in
Idlib continues to hold. This is a favourable opportunity for the parties to invest in
dialogue and negotiation in order to accelerate the broader political process, for the
sake of peace, stability and development for all Syrian people.
Viet Nam will continue to support the efforts of the United Nations, the
Special Envoy and all international partners in that regard. We call on all parties
to the conflict to create the most favourable conditions for a peaceful solution in
Syria by exercising maximum restraint and refraining from actions that could lead
to further escalation.
With regard to the humanitarian aspect, we are concerned about the continuously
deteriorating situation. Meanwhile, cases of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) keep
increasing, putting further pressure on the already dire socioeconomic crisis. There
is still no sign of improvement when it comes to the gravity of food insecurity and
shortage of basic goods.
In the current crisis, the people who suffer the most are those in vulnerable
groups — internally displaced persons (IDP), the elderly, women and children. It is
reported that an additional 50 per cent of the children in the north-west are dropping
out of schools because of impacts related to COVID-19. Many of them have to work
in order to support their families. Millions of them are internally displaced and
living in inadequate shelter conditions across the country.
We are also concerned over the impacts of fighting, improvised explosive
devices, terrorist activities and so on, which are causing serious protection challenges
in many regions, especially the north-west, the north-east and the south. Norms of
international humanitarian law must be fully respected.
Against the backdrop of overwhelming humanitarian needs across Syria,
we once again call for greater cooperation among the parties concerned in order
to ensure unimpeded humanitarian access and to facilitate humanitarian response
in all parts of the country. We call on the international community to continue its
assistance to the Syrian people in response to those needs.
The current alarming humanitarian situation also necessitates sustainable
solutions to address food and water insecurity as well as COVID-19 impacts,
21-0088537/46

S/2021/75

especially in various IDP camps. It is also important to make sure that sanctions do
not hamper the Syrian people’s capacity to respond to the pandemic.
The one and only sustainable way to end the decade-long predicament of the
Syrian people is through a political solution. To achieve that goal, the international
community’s unity in supporting Syria cannot be overemphasized. We sincerely
hope that 2021 will bring about tangible results.

38/46

21-00885

S/2021/75

Annex 18
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran to the United Nations, Majid Takht Ravanchi
I wish to thank Mr. Pedersen and Mr. Lowcock for their briefings.
We reiterate our firm position that the crisis in Syria must be settled
peacefully. In that context, we underline the importance and contribution of the
Astana format to launching a political process, including through the establishment
of the Constitutional Committee, which will hold its next session next week. We
wish its participants success.
Iran supports the current United Nations activities in Syria. Our Special
Envoy on Syria is working in close cooperation with Special Envoy Pedersen to
support his efforts in facilitating the work of the Committee, which must continue
its activities without any external interference or pressure or setting any artificial
deadline for its conclusion.
Concurrent with the work of the Constitutional Committee, serious efforts
must be made in other areas. The first and most important one is to continue fighting
all terrorist groups, as their presence and criminal activities not only threaten the
security and territorial integrity of Syria but also represent a threat to peace and
security in the region.
While the protection of civilians must be a guiding principle in combating
terrorist groups, they must not be allowed to consolidate their presence and conduct
their atrocious activities uninterrupted.
Likewise, fighting terrorism must not be used as a pretext to support any
separatist tendencies and illegitimate self-rule initiatives, or to violate Syrian
sovereignty. In that context, through the occupation of parts of Syria, the United
States continues to violate the territorial integrity of Syria. In fact, the United States is
pursuing its illegitimate geopolitical interests, including by shielding and supporting
certain terrorist groups. All such acts are in material breach of international law and
must come to an end immediately.
The imposition of unilateral sanctions on the Syrian people is yet another
unlawful act by the United States and some other countries. While the Syrians are
seriously suffering from terrorists acts and the coronavirus disease pandemic, such
inhumane sanctions are simply adding insult to injury, targeting the most vulnerable
people the most. We totally reject the imposition of illegal and illegitimate unilateral
sanctions and call for their immediate removal, as they prevent the return of refugees
and internally displaced persons and obstruct the reconstruction process of this
war-torn country.
Along the same lines, we strongly condemn Israel’s continued aggressions
against Syria. Such provocative military adventurism must stop now.
Iran will continue to support the people and the Government of Syria to
overcome the threats of terrorism and foreign occupation, rebuild their country and
ensure its unity and territorial integrity.

21-0088539/46

S/2021/75

Annex 19
Statement by the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates
and Permanent Representative of Syria to the United Nations
[Original: Arabic]
My delegation would like once again to express its thanks and appreciation
to you, Mr. President, for your successful and outstanding management of the work
of the Security Council this month. The Council’s agenda this month featured
important items and issues, including a panel discussion on the item entitled “Threats
to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts”, and the commemoration
of the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001) following
the criminal and abhorrent terrorist bombings that targeted New York City on
11 September 2001.
At the time, we had hoped that the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001) would
help to reorient our compass and point us towards the goal to which we all aspire,
namely, strengthening coordinated international cooperation under the auspices
of the United Nations and its mechanisms in order to counter terrorism and the
financing thereof, and to combat extremist ideology and the distorted and false
doctrines that promote terrorism. After adopting resolution 1373 (2001), the Security
Council adopted several resolutions concerning counter-terrorism. The aim of those
resolutions, as some believed, was to fill any gaps and address any deficiencies in
the previous resolutions or the implementation thereof and to address such issues as
preventing the payment of ransoms to terrorists, combating Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) and the Al-Nusra Front and the phenomenon of foreign terrorist
fighters or “terrorists without borders”, and countering the financing of terrorism,
including by severing ties between terrorist organizations and transnational
criminal networks.
Regrettably, it would later become evident that all those hopes were nothing
but pipe dreams, because Western States have exploited counter-terrorism. On some
occasions, they have used it to destroy States Members of the United Nations and
to attempt to eliminate their economic and cultural achievements and plunder their
wealth. On other occasions, they have used it to stigmatize Member States by falsely
accusing them of supporting terrorism, along the lines of the spurious charges
that were levelled against Cuba and Iran a few days ago. In yet other instances,
Western States have exploited counter-terrorism to cover up their own demonstrated
commitment to terrorism and the open sponsorship of terrorism by the Governments
of well-known States.
Politicization, selectivity, multiple standards and support for terrorism have
overshadowed this important issue, and the primary beneficiary of this have been
the terrorist organizations and their leaders, who now boast of such monikers as
“jihadists”, “freedom fighters”, “non-State moderate armed opposition” and the
“caliphate”, and who enjoy the support, patronage and free rein given them to kill,
sow chaos and destruction, while purporting to bring democracy to many of our
countries through such civilized methods as beheading, eating livers, destroying
archaeological relics, branding people as apostates and demeaning religions and
religious symbols.
We have repeatedly warned that those who seek to spread chaos and
devastation, adopt inflammatory and hateful rhetoric and promote such slogans as
“creative chaos”, heralded by a former United States Secretary of State and later
brought to fruition by her successor, will not escape the consequences of their
actions. Unfortunately, our warnings have been ignored, as confirmed by the recent
events that transpired in the capital of the host country of our Organization. What
40/46

21-00885

S/2021/75

happened there was the embodiment of chaos as policy and the fruit of spreading
havoc and inflaming tensions.
Of course, the terrorist acts recently perpetrated in Washington, D.C.,
would have been welcomed, supported and praised by the Governments of Western
countries if they had transpired in one of the capitals of many of our Member States.
They would have been called a “spring” or “colour revolutions” and characterized
as “an expression of democracy” and “the exercise of freedoms in all its splendour”.
However, because the events occurred in a prominent Western capital, they have
been met with a torrent of condemnation and criticism, and a call for social media
to condemn such behaviour and block the pages of those who endorse it. We do not
object to such calls, nor do we condone chaos, demagoguery or violence anywhere.
Nevertheless, we take notice of that selectivity and are astonished that Western
extremist groups continue to exploit the same social media sites to foment strife
and conflict, promote comparable subversive practices, violence and hatred, and
encourage terrorism without borders to target many of our Member States, relying
on hackneyed slogans devoid of moral substance.
We once again call for strengthening genuine, coordinated international
cooperation under the auspices of the United Nations to combat and eradicate
terrorism, and for support to be extended to the Syrian State and its allies in their
effort to combat the ISIL and Al-Nusra Front terrorist organizations and related
entities and individuals, entities that continue killing Syrians because the West
continues to cover up their crimes. An example of this occurred a few days when
terrorists attacked a bus in the Kabajib area on the road between Tadmur and Deir
ez-Zor, and fuel tankers and civilian vehicles on the Athriya-Salamiyah road, killing
dozens of civilians and military personnel. These terrorist attacks were carried out
by ISIL members who had come from the area controlled by the occupying American
forces in the occupied area of Tanf, where the Rukban camp is located. These are
the same terrorists who have previously carried out bloody terrorist attacks on
civilians in Suwayda’ Governorate and targeted the Syrian Arab Army and its allies,
gas pipelines and power lines. It is no secret that the occupying American forces
in north-eastern Syria also directed their proxies, the separatist so-called Syrian
Democratic Forces militias, to release ISIL members in their custody, in order to
revive that organization for use in Syria and Iraq. Hypocrisy has reached a heinous
new low. The American Administration claims to have eliminated the ISIL terrorist
organization, even as it is restructuring ISIL and deploying it to target my country.
In the north-west, terrorist entities, foremost among them the Levant
Liberation Organization/Al-Nusra Front and affiliated groups, continue to control
areas of Idlib Governorate and its environs, holding civilians hostage and using them
as human shields. Over the past few years, I have sent you hundreds of official
letters about the crimes of these terrorist organizations and those organizations’
sponsors and controllers. My most recent letter, dated 11 January and addressed
to the Secretary-General and the Security Council, contained information on the
terrorist groups operating under the auspices of and sponsored by the Turkish regime,
namely, the Sultan Murad Brigade, the Hamzat Division and the Al-Mu‘tasim Billah,
Ahrar al-Sharqiyah and Hasakah Shield groups. These groups operate in the area of
Ra’s al-Ayn and its countryside and as far as Tall Abyad and Ayn Isa in Al-Raqqa
governorate. They continue to kill, plunder, impose Turkification, forcibly displace,
smuggle, use chemical weapons and steal farmers’ wheat, barley and seed crops and
transport them to Turkey through the Ra’s al-Ayn and Tall Abyad border crossings.
This is in addition to the other crimes they have committed, all of which I cannot
recount now because there is not sufficient time to do that. The Governments of wellknown States have kept the Security Council from putting an end to those crimes
and holding the perpetrators and their controllers accountable.
21-0088541/46

S/2021/75

In spite of the global increase in coronavirus disease (COVID-19) cases, and
the catastrophic effects of the pandemic on the economies and vital sectors of the
majority of States Members of the United Nations, the United States of America and
the European Union continue to impose additional coercive measures on my country,
Syria, and on other countries, ignoring the calls to put an end to these illegal measures
that have been made by the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy for Syria and
dozens of senior representatives of the Organization. Meanwhile, the representatives
of the Western States that are pursuing policies of siege and collective punishment
of peoples continue to speak of alleged humanitarian and medical exemptions. Those
are nothing more than claims, as proven by the facts on the ground.
At the Arria Formula meeting convened by the Security Council on
25 November 2020, you heard a briefing by the Secretary-General of the Syrian
Arab Red Crescent, a non-governmental organization and the main partner of the
United Nations, the International Committee of the Red Cross and a number of other
intergovernmental and non-governmental relief organizations. He explained that
receiving funds from abroad to fund humanitarian work took months and entailed
a huge volume of paperwork and correspondence as a result of coercive measures,
hindering the purchase of medicines and humanitarian needs and the provision of
food baskets to beneficiaries. He said that the fuel embargo made it difficult to operate
humanitarian aid trucks and ambulances and deploy humanitarian workers and
medical personnel and noted that the coercive measures made it impossible to secure
many basic humanitarian supplies and manage warehouses. Instead of expanding
and strengthening support for noble humanitarian action and the enormous effort
of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, which lost 65 of its volunteers during the current
crisis, they chose to do harm to this venerable institution and tarnish its reputation.
This is just the tip of the iceberg when it comes to the repercussions of coercive
measures on the lives of all Syrians. Do we believe the accounts of my Western
colleagues about the alleged exemptions, or do we believe the tangible realities that
we observe on a daily basis?
Some are now warning that the economic harm caused by the COVID-19
pandemic will limit aid and funding for the humanitarian response, thereby reducing
the number of recipients of food aid. Meanwhile, certain Western Governments
continue to pursue policies that are based on domination, occupation and the plunder
of the livelihoods and resources of peoples, instead of taking action to overcome
such a monumental challenge, one that could cause human suffering in many
countries and drive more of their nationals to emigrate and seek asylum. This is
still see happening, as the occupying American forces continue to loot my country’s
oil, gas, archaeological relics and agricultural crops, burning and destroying what
they cannot steal. These crimes are also being committed in coordination with the
Turkish occupiers in parts of the north and north-west of my country All of this
is being done in partnership with terrorist organizations and entities and proxy
separatist militias, as I just mentioned. What do Mr. Lowcock and the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs make of that? Is it not more appropriate,
better and fairer for the Council to fulfil its responsibilities under the Charter by
putting an end to occupation and preventing the resources of peoples from being
plundered and their development capacities and gains from being destroyed? Is that
not preferable to allowing certain parties to loot that wealth and then to cover up
their crimes by praising them for generously financing your so-called humanitarian
efforts and allowing your cross-border convoys?
Today marks the end of a presidential term in the United States that was
characterized by extremism, aggression, sanctions, withdrawal from United Nations
system organizations and disavowal of international treaty obligations. We hope
42/46

21-00885

S/2021/75

that the new administration will be wise and realize that its status as a permanent
member of the Security Council is, above all else, a great responsibility that requires
it to fulfil its commitment to maintain international peace and security and uphold
the principles of international law and the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations. That responsibility also requires it to refrain from attacking and occupying
my country and plundering its wealth and obliges it to withdraw its occupying forces
and stop backing separatist militias, illegitimate entities and attempts to threaten the
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic.
The fifth round of meetings of the Constitutional Committee will take place in
a few days. As has been repeatedly stressed, the Constitution, which is the country’s
supreme law, is a purely national, Syrian affair. Likewise, shaping the future of
Syria is a purely national, Syrian affair. Consequently, my delegation reaffirms that
the political process facilitated by the United Nations is Syrian-owned and Syrianled. We stress that, in order for the Committee’s work to succeed, its agreed rules
of procedure must be respected, and any external interference in its work must be
rejected, as must any attempts by certain Governments to dictate the outcome of or
impose artificial timetables on the Committee’s work.

21-0088543/46

S/2021/75

Annex 20
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Turkey to the
United Nations, Feridun Sinirlioğlu
I thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this meeting. I also thank Special
Envoy Pedersen and Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for their briefings.
At the outset, I would like to join other colleagues and pay tribute to
Ambassador Kelly Craft for her personal dedication to highlighting the plight of
the Syrian people. I applaud her for walking the talk in advocating the rights of
all Syrians, including those who sought refuge in Turkey, as well as her personal
efforts for extending the United Nations cross-border mechanism, which is lifeline
for millions of Syrians.
The humanitarian situation in Syria remains extremely worrisome. The
Syrian people are caught between violence, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic and harsh winter conditions. People are suffering due to limited access
to health-care services, water and food. There are urgent needs for shelter and other
basic necessities.
In the north-west, with its indiscriminate military campaign, the regime
has rendered health services unprepared for the global health crisis. Recently, the
number of positive COVID-19 cases has risen steadily in north-west Syria, reaching
record levels.
While access to health and adequate sanitation in the context of continuous
displacement remains challenging, humanitarian organizations actively operate to
deliver life-saving assistance to the most vulnerable. We are in close contact with
United Nations agencies on vaccination planning for these people. Three million
internally displaced persons living in the north-west are in acute need of humanitarian
assistance and depend upon the aid channelled from Turkey.
The United Nations cross-border mechanism continues to be the only
instrument to meet the humanitarian needs. Since the adoption of the resolution
2533 (2020), around 4.000 convoys have channelled humanitarian assistance into the
region through the single crossing point of Bab Al-Hawa. We also continue to deliver
pandemic-related items in accordance with the recent trilateral agreement among the
Turkish Red Crescent, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and
the World Health Organization.
Let me repeat once again that there is no alternative that can match the scale
and scope of the United Nations cross-border operations. It is deplorable that the
Security Council failed to re-authorize the Bab Al-Salam crossing point, leaving
hundreds of thousands of people at the mercy of the Al-Assad regime. I am obliged to
remind the Council of the urgent need to reopen that gate, and I request the Security
Council to fulfil its responsibility in accordance with General Assembly resolution
75/193, on the human rights situation in Syria.
I have voiced in previous meetings that shelter is the most critical need in the
north-west. I am pleased to inform the Council that, as part of the ongoing national
project to alleviate shelter needs in Idlib, Turkey finalized the construction of more
than 27,000 housing units. Our aim is to provide shelter to more than 52,000 families
in the coming weeks. It is crucial that all international stakeholders and donors
prioritize funding such projects.
For more than a year now, electricity disruptions hindering the proper
functioning of the Allouk water station have been an issue of concern. As I have
explained on numerous occasions, deliberate interruptions by the Kurdish Workers
44/46

21-00885

S/2021/75

Party/Kurdish People’s Protection Units (PKK/YPG) terrorist organization continue
to put half a million innocent lives at risk and impede efforts to effectively combat
the pandemic. Although we have repeated our calls to all interested parties and
actively contributed to the efforts to restore the water supply, the problem remains
unsolved. And — no surprise — together with the PKK/YPG, the regime is also
doing its part, by grounding circuit interrupters on power lines to the Allouk water
system. We all know the perpetrators and their quest for tactical gains by not
ensuring the sustainability of the system and the provision of water to Al-Hassakeh
in full capacity.
Let me also touch upon the political situation. As the sole functioning
mechanism within the political process, the Constitutional Committee should
advance its work in an accelerated and productive manner. To that end, Turkey will
continue its collaboration with the United Nations and other relevant actors, as well
as its coordination within the Astana framework.
During the fifth round of meetings, scheduled for 25 to 29 January, the
Committee should focus on the constitutional principles, with a view to yielding
concrete results. That is critical for the effective functioning of the Committee. The
Syrian sides should be advised and warned accordingly. It is imperative to fend
off attempts at stonewalling. We support Special Envoy Pedersen’s efforts towards
advancing the political process.
We attach importance to the Astana process as a critical element of the overall
efforts at finding a political solution to the Syrian conflict. We are working on
rescheduling the fifteenth meeting of the Astana process in the coming weeks, which
had to be postponed due to the pandemic.
Preserving the ceasefire in Idlib is crucial for protection of civilians and
preventing new migration waves. Having said that, the regime continues its ceasefire
violations. In line with our efforts to maintain the ceasefire, and within the framework
of the 5 March additional protocol, we continue our technical engagement with the
Russian Federation.
Turkey also continues its resolute fight against terrorist organizations on
the ground. Thanks to our counter-terrorism efforts against Da’esh and the PKK/
YPG, 420,000 Syrians have voluntarily returned to the Syrian territories cleared of
terrorist threats. The PKK/YPG continues to carry out terrorist attacks targeting
civilians in northern Syria. Since October 2019 alone, the PKK/YPG has launched
over 300 terrorist attacks.
Most recently, the bomb attack it carried out in a marketplace in Rasulayn on
2 January resulted in the deaths of six people, including two children, and injured
11 people. Another terrorist attack carried out by the PKK/YPG with a bomb-laden
vehicle three days ago in a marketplace in Azaz killed at least one civilian, while
injuring several others.
Such bloody terrorist attacks continue to be largely ignored. The international
community must unequivocally condemn them and expose their perpetrators. A
collective fight must be waged against this terrorist organization. Otherwise, the
PKK/YPG will not cease its separatist actions against the territorial integrity of
Syria, or its heinous attacks against civilians.
It is time to end this ambivalent approach and call a spade a spade. The
international community must refrain from actions that would violate international
law and serve the separatist agenda of the PKK/YPG hiding behind the name of socalled “Syrian Democratic Forces”. Turkey will continue to stand against the PKK/
YPG’s attempts to gain legitimacy and its efforts to consolidate its totalitarian grip
over the north-east through oppression and economic incentives.
21-0088545/46

S/2021/75

Let me conclude by reiterating our strong determination to address the plight
of the Syrian people and actively contribute to a political settlement that will meet
their legitimate aspirations.
As to the previous speaker, I will not honour him with a reply. As I have stated
many times, I do not consider him as a legitimate representative of the Syrian people.

46/46

21-00885
