United Nations

A/RES/57/176

General Assembly

Distr.: General
30 January 2003

Fifty-seventh session
Agenda item 102

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/57/549)]

57/176. Trafficking in women and girls
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the principles set forth in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, 1 the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women, 2 the International Covenants on Human Rights, 3 the Convention against
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, 4 the
Convention on the Rights of the Child 5 and the Declaration on the Elimination of
Violence against Women, 6
Welcoming the adoption by the General Assembly of the two Optional
Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child, 7 in particular the Optional
Protocol on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography, which
entered into force on 18 January 2002,
Welcoming also the adoption by the General Assembly of the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women, 8 which entered into force on 22 December 2000,
Recalling all previous resolutions on the problem of trafficking in women and
girls adopted by the General Assembly, the Commission on the Status of Women,
the Commission on Human Rights and the Commission on Crime Prevention and
Criminal Justice, as well as the Convention for the Suppression of the Traffic in
Persons and of the Exploitation of the Prostitution of Others, 9 the conclusions on
violence against women adopted on 13 March 1998 by the Commission on the

_______________
1

Resolution 217 A (III).
Resolution 34/180, annex.
3
Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
4
Resolution 39/46, annex.
5
Resolution 44/25, annex.
6
See resolution 48/104.
7
See resolution 54/263.
8
Resolution 54/4, annex.
9
Resolution 317 (IV).
2

02 54978

A/RES/57/176

Status of Women at its forty-second session 10 and the recommendations of the
Working Group on Contemporary Forms of Slavery 11 adopted on 21 August 1998 by
the Subcommission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities 12
at its fiftieth session,
Recalling also the United Nations Millennium Declaration, 13 in particular the
resolve expressed by heads of State and Government to intensify efforts to fight
transnational organized crime in all its dimensions, including trafficking in human
beings,
Reaffirming the outcomes and commitments pertaining to trafficking in women
and girls of recent United Nations conferences and summits, including the World
Conference on Human Rights, 14 the International Conference on Population and
Development, 15 the World Summit for Social Development, 16 the Fourth World
Conference on Women 17 and the special session of the General Assembly on
children 18 and their follow-up processes,
Acknowledging the inclusion of gender-related crimes in the Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court, 19 which entered into force on 1 July 2002,
Welcoming the adoption by the General Assembly in November 2000 of the
United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime 20 and the
Protocols thereto, in particular the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish
Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children 21 and the Protocol against
the Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air, 22
Recognizing the need to address the impact of globalization on the problem of
trafficking in women and children, in particular girls,
Reaffirming that sexual violence and trafficking in women and girls for
purposes of economic exploitation, sexual exploitation through prostitution and
other forms of sexual exploitation and contemporary forms of slavery are serious
violations of human rights,

_______________
10

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1998, Supplement No. 7 and corrigendum
(E/1998/27 and Corr.1), chap. I.
11
See E/CN.4/1999/4-E/CN.4/Sub.2/1998/45, chap. II, sect. A, resolution 1998/19, and E/CN.4/Sub.2/1998/14,
sect. VI.B.
12
Subsequently renamed the Subcommission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights (see
Economic and Social Council decision 1999/256).
13
See resolution 55/2.
14
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
15
Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5–13 September 1994
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
16
Report of the World Summit for Social Development, Copenhagen, 6–12 March 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.8), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
17
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
18
Resolution S-27/2, annex.
19
Official Records of the United Nations Diplomatic Conference of Plenipotentiaries on the Establishment
of an International Criminal Court, Rome, 15 June–17 July 1998, vol. I: Final documents (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.02.I.5), sect. A.
20
Resolution 55/25, annex I.
21
Ibid., annex II.
22
Ibid., annex III.

2

A/RES/57/176

Seriously concerned at the increasing number of women and children from
developing countries and from some countries with economies in transition who are
being trafficked to developed countries, as well as within and between regions and
States, and acknowledging that the problem of trafficking also includes the
victimizing of boys,
Recognizing that victims of trafficking are particularly exposed to racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance,
Acknowledging that women and children who are victims of trafficking are
further disadvantaged and marginalized by a general lack of information or
awareness and recognition of their human rights and the fact that they are victims,
as well as by the obstacles they meet in gaining access to information and recourse
mechanisms in cases of violation of their rights, and that special measures are
required for their protection and to increase their awareness,
Recognizing the importance of bilateral, subregional and regional cooperation
mechanisms and initiatives of Governments and intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations to address the problem of trafficking in women and
children within their region, in particular girls,
Welcoming the efforts of Governments and intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations in developing programmes to combat trafficking in
human beings, in particular women and girls,
Acknowledging the work being done by intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations in compiling information on the scale and complexity of
the problem of trafficking, in providing protection and assistance for trafficked
women and children, and in effecting their voluntary return to their countries of
origin,
Recognizing that global efforts, including international cooperation and
technical assistance programmes, to eradicate trafficking in persons, in particular
women and children, demand the strong political commitment and the active
cooperation of all Governments of countries of origin, transit and destination,
Recognizing also that a comprehensive and multidisciplinary approach to
prevention, healing and reintegration is required and that all actors, including
judicial and law enforcement personnel, migration authorities, victims of trafficking
and their families, non-governmental organizations and civil society, should
collaborate in the development of such an approach,
Deeply concerned about the unabated use of new information technologies,
including the Internet, for purposes of exploitation of the prostitution of others and
for child pornography, paedophilia and any other forms of sexual exploitation of
children, trafficking in women as brides and sex tourism,
Gravely concerned at the increasing activities of transnational criminal
organizations and others that profit from international trafficking in women and
children without regard to dangerous and inhumane conditions and in flagrant
violation of domestic laws and international standards,
Stressing once again the need for Governments to provide standard
humanitarian treatment to trafficked persons consistent with human rights standards,

3

A/RES/57/176

1.

Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General; 23

2.
Welcomes the steps taken by human rights treaty bodies, the special
rapporteurs and subsidiary bodies of the Commission on Human Rights, the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, other United Nations
bodies and international, intergovernmental and governmental organizations, within
their mandates, as well as non-governmental organizations, to address the problem
of trafficking in women and girls, and encourages them to continue doing so and to
share their knowledge and best practices as widely as possible;
3.
Also welcomes the decision of the Commission on the Status of Women
to consider at its forty-seventh session the priority theme “Women’s human rights
and the elimination of all forms of violence against women and girls, as defined in
the Beijing Platform for Action and the outcome documents of the special session of
the General Assembly entitled ‘Women 2000: gender equality, development and
peace for the twenty-first century’ ”, 24 which will include issues relating to
trafficking in women and girls;
4.
Urges Governments to take appropriate measures to address the root
factors, including external factors, that encourage trafficking in women and girls for
prostitution and other forms of commercialized sex, forced marriages and forced
labour, in order to eliminate trafficking in women, including by strengthening
existing legislation with a view to providing better protection of the rights of women
and girls and to punishing perpetrators, through both criminal and civil measures;
5.
Also urges Governments to devise, enforce and strengthen effective
measures to combat and eliminate all forms of trafficking in women and girls
through a comprehensive anti-trafficking strategy consisting of, inter alia, capacitybuilding, legislative measures, prevention campaigns, information exchange,
assistance and protection for and reintegration of the victims and prosecution of all
the offenders involved, including intermediaries, and to draw up, as appropriate,
national action plans and programmes to improve the protection of trafficked
women and girls;
6.
Further urges Governments to consider signing and ratifying relevant
United Nations legal instruments such as the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime 20 and the Protocols thereto, in particular the
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women
and Children, 21 the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women 2 and the Convention on the Rights of the Child,5 the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women 8 and the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography, 7 as well as
the Convention concerning Discrimination in respect of Employment and
Occupation, 1958 (Convention No. 111) and the Convention concerning the
Prohibition and Immediate Action for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child
Labour, 1999 (Convention No. 182), of the International Labour Organization;
7.
Encourages Member States to conclude bilateral, subregional, regional
and international agreements, as well as to undertake initiatives, including regional
initiatives, to address the problem of trafficking in women and girls, such as the
_______________
23

A/57/170.
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2002, Supplement No. 7 (E/2002/27), chap. I,
sect. B, draft decision III.
24

4

A/RES/57/176

Action Plan for the Asia-Pacific region of the Asian Regional Initiative against
Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, 25 the initiatives of the
European Union on a comprehensive European policy and programmes on
trafficking in human beings, as expressed in the conclusions of the European
Council at its meeting held at Tampere, Finland, on 15 and 16 October 1999, 26 and
the activities of the Council of Europe, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and the International Organization for Migration in this field;
8.
Calls upon all Governments to criminalize trafficking in women and
children, in particular girls, in all its forms, to condemn and penalize all those
offenders involved, including intermediaries, whether local or foreign, through the
competent national authorities, either in the country of origin of the offender or in
the country in which the abuse occurs, in accordance with due process of law, while
ensuring that the victims of those practices are not penalized for being trafficked,
and to penalize persons in authority found guilty of sexually assaulting victims of
trafficking in their custody;
9.
Invites Governments to consider setting up or strengthening a national
coordinating mechanism, for example, a national rapporteur or an inter-agency
body, with the participation of civil society, including non-governmental
organizations, to encourage the exchange of information and to report on data, root
causes, factors and trends in violence against women, in particular trafficking;
10. Encourages Governments and relevant United Nations bodies, within
existing resources, to take appropriate measures to raise public awareness of the
issue of trafficking, particularly in women and girls, as well as the laws, regulations
and penalties relating to this issue, and to emphasize that trafficking is a crime, in
order to reduce the demand for trafficked women and children;
11. Urges concerned Governments, in cooperation with intergovernmental
and non-governmental organizations, to support and allocate resources for
programmes to strengthen preventive action, in particular education and campaigns
to increase public awareness of the issue at the national and grass-roots levels;
12. Calls upon concerned Governments to allocate resources, as appropriate,
to provide comprehensive programmes for the physical, psychological and social
recovery of victims of trafficking, including through job training, legal assistance
and health care, and by taking measures to cooperate with non-governmental
organizations to provide for the social, medical and psychological care of the
victims;
13. Encourages Governments, in cooperation with intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations, to undertake campaigns aimed at clarifying
opportunities, limitations and rights in the event of migration so as to enable women
to make informed decisions and to prevent them from becoming victims of
trafficking;
14. Also encourages Governments to intensify collaboration with nongovernmental organizations to develop and implement programmes for effective
counselling, training and reintegration into society of victims of trafficking, and
programmes that provide shelter and helplines to victims or potential victims;
_______________
25

See A/C.3/55/3, annex.
See Tampere European Council, Presidency Conclusions (SN 200/99). Available on the Internet at
www.europa.eu.int.
26

5

A/RES/57/176

15. Calls upon Governments to take steps to ensure that the treatment of
victims of trafficking, especially women and girls, as well as all measures taken
against trafficking in persons, in particular those that affect the victims of such
trafficking, are applied with full respect for the human rights of those victims and
are consistent with internationally recognized principles of non-discrimination,
including the prohibition of racial discrimination and the availability of appropriate
legal redress;
16. Invites Governments to take steps, including witness protection
programmes, to enable women who are victims of trafficking to make complaints to
the police or other authorities, as appropriate, and to be available when required by
the criminal justice system, and to ensure that during this time women have access
to protection and social, medical, financial and legal assistance, as appropriate;
17. Also invites Governments to consider preventing, within the legal
framework and in accordance with national policies, victims of trafficking, in
particular women and girls, from being prosecuted for their illegal entry or
residence, bearing in mind that they are victims of exploitation;
18. Further invites Governments to encourage Internet service providers to
adopt or strengthen self-regulatory measures to promote the responsible use of the
Internet with a view to eliminating trafficking in women and children, in particular
girls;
19. Invites the business sector, in particular the tourism and
telecommunications industries, including mass media organizations, to cooperate
with Governments in eliminating trafficking in women and children, in particular
girls;
20. Stresses the need for a global approach to eradicate trafficking in women
and children and the importance, in this regard, of systematic data collection and
comprehensive studies using common methodology and internationally defined
indicators, which need to be developed, to make it possible to gather relevant and
comparable figures, and encourages Governments to develop systematic datacollection methods using such common methodology and indicators and to update
continuously information on trafficking in women and girls, including the analysis
of the modus operandi of trafficking syndicates;
21. Urges Governments to strengthen national programmes to combat
trafficking in women and girls through sustained bilateral, regional and international
cooperation, taking into account innovative approaches and best practices, and
invites Governments, United Nations bodies and organizations, intergovernmental
and non-governmental organizations and the private sector to undertake
collaborative and joint research and studies on trafficking in women and girls that
can serve as a basis for policy formulation or change;
22. Invites Governments, once again, with the support of the United Nations,
and taking into account current research and materials on traumatic stress and
gender-sensitive counselling techniques, to formulate training manuals for law
enforcement and medical personnel and judicial officers who handle cases of
trafficked women and girls, with a view to sensitizing them to the special needs of
victims;
23. Urges Governments to provide or strengthen training for law
enforcement, immigration and other relevant officials in the prevention of
trafficking in persons, which should focus on methods used in preventing such
trafficking, prosecuting the traffickers and protecting the rights of victims, including
6

A/RES/57/176

protecting the victims from traffickers, to ensure that the training also takes into
account the need to consider human rights and child- and gender-sensitive issues,
and to encourage cooperation with non-governmental organizations, other relevant
organizations and other elements of civil society;
24. Invites States parties to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination against Women, the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the
International Covenants on Human Rights 3 to include information and statistics on
trafficking in women and girls as part of their national reports to their respective
committees and to work towards developing a common methodology and statistics
to obtain comparable data;
25. Requests the Secretary-General to compile, as reference and guidance,
successful interventions and strategies in addressing the various dimensions of the
problem of trafficking in women and children, in particular girls, based on reports,
research and other materials from within the United Nations, including the Office on
Drugs and Crime 27 of the Secretariat, as well as from outside the United Nations,
and to submit a report on the implementation of the present resolution to the General
Assembly at its fifty-ninth session;
26. Also requests the Secretary-General to include in his report to the
General Assembly at its fifty-ninth session proposals for a future
international/United Nations year against trafficking in persons, especially women
and girls, with a view to protecting their dignity and human rights.
77th plenary meeting
18 December 2002

_______________
27

Formerly known as the Office for Drug Control and Crime Prevention.

7
