General Assembly --Thirty-eighth Session

230

------------------------

social conditions and to pay particular attention to overcoming problems of unemployment, public housing,
health care, education and crime and, in that connection,
notes with satisfaction the efforts to revitalize health care
programmes and to discouragc juvenile delinquency, the
measures to improve crime prevention and the action
taken to expand and upgrade school facilities:
13. Considers that the possibility of sending a further
visiting mission to the United States Virgin Islands at an
appropriate time should be kept under review;
14. Requests the Special Committee to continue thc
examination of this question at its next session, including
the possible dispatch of a further visiting mission to thc
United States Virgin Islands at an appropriate time and in
consultation with the administering Power, and to report
thereon to the General Asscmbly at its thirty-ninth scssion.

3. Requcsts thc administering Powers concerned to
transmit, or continue to transmit, to the Secretary-General
the information prcscribed in Article 73 e of the Charter,
as well as the fullcst possiblc information on political and
constitutional developments in the Territories concerned,
within a maximum period of six months following the
expiration of the administrative year in those Territories;
4. Rcquests the Special Committee to continue to discharge the functions entrustcd to it under General Assembly resolution 1970 (XVIII), in accordance with established procedurcs. and to report thcreon to the Assembly
at 1ts thirty-ninth session.
86th plenary meeting
7 Decemher /983

Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the
Charter of the United Nations

Activities of foreign economic and other interests which are impeding the implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
in Namibia and in ali other Territories under
colonial domination and efforts to eliminate
colonialism, apartheid and racial discrimination in southern Africa

The General Assemhly,
Having examined the chapter ofthe report ofthe Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the lmplementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted
under Article 73 e ofthe Charter ofthe United Nations 21
and the action taken by the Committee in respect of that
information,
Having a/so examined the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the question, 26
Recalling its resolution 1970 (XVIII) of 16 December
1963, in which it requested the Special Committee to
study the information transmitted to the SecretaryGeneral in accordance with Article 7 3 e of the Charter and
to take such information fully into account in examining
the situation with regard to the implementation of the
Declaration,
Recalling a/so its resolution 3 7/29 of 23 Novembcr
1982, in which it requested the Special Committee to continue to discharge the functions entrusted to it under resolution 1970 (XVIII),
Noting the decision of the Government of the United
Kingdom ofGreat Britain and Northern Ireland to resume
transmission of information with respect to Anguilla,
under Article 73 e of the Charter, 27
l. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the lmplementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted
under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations;
2. Reaffirms that, in the absence of a decision by the
General Assembly itself that a Non-Self-Governing Territory has attained a full measure of self-government under
the terms of Chapter XI of the Charter, the administering
Power concerned should continue to transmit information
under Article 73 e ofthe Charter with respect to that Territory;

rhc e,'en eral Asscmh/_1·.
Having considcrcd the item entitled "Activities of forcign economic and other interests which are impeding the
implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples in
Namibia and in ali other Territories under colonial domination and efforts to eliminate colonialism, apartheid and
racial discrimination in southern Africa",
Having examined the chapter ofthe report ofthe Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting oflndependence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to this question, 28
Taking into consideration the relevant chapter of the
rcport of the United Nations Council for Namibia, 29
Having considcred the report ofthe United Nations Centre on Transnational Corporations, 30 relating to the preparation of a register indicating the profits that transnational corporations derive from their activities in colonial
Territories, submitted in pursuance of General Assembly
resolution 37 /31 of 23 November 1982,
Recalling its rcsolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 2621 (XXV)
of I 2 October 19 70, containing the programme of action
for the full implementation ofthe Declaration, and 35/118
of 11 December 1980, the annex to which contains the
Plan of Action for the Full Implementation ofthe Declaration, as well as ali other resolutions of the United Nations
relating to the itcm,
Rea_tfirming the solemn obligation of the administering
Powers under thc Charter of the United Nations to promote the political, economic, social and educational
advancement of the inhabitants of the Territories under
their administration and to protect the human and natural
resources of thosc Territories against abuses,
Taking into account the relevant provisions ofthe Paris
Declaration on Namibia and the Programme of Action on
Namibia, 31 adopted at the International Conference in

86th plenary meeting
7 Decemher 1983

38/49.

25 /bid., chap. VII.
26 N38!477.

27 See Officia/ Record., of the <ieneral Assemhh·, Th,rtv-ei¡;hth Se.rnon,

su¡¡iement No. 23 (A/38/23). chap. Vil, para. 8
!bid., chap. V.

38/50.

29 /bid., Supp/emcnr V,1 :'4 (A/38124), part lwo, chap. IV.
lO A/381444. annex.
\1 Repon of the lntcrnational Conferen,·e ,n Support of the Strugg/e o( th,•
Vamihian l'cop/efi,r lndepcndcnce, Pari.1·. :,5.:,9 .·1pnl /983 (Al('ONF.1201
11). paras. 165-195 and 220-242.

VIL

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fonrth ('ommittee

231

····- ---~-----··---

Support of the Struggle of the Nam1bia11 Pcople for Independence.
Reaj/irming that any cconomic or othcr activity which
impedes the implementalion ol the Declaration on lhe
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and obstructs efforts aimed at lhe elimination of
colonialism, apartheid and racial discrimination in southern Africa and other colonial l erritories is in dircct violation ofthe rights ofthe inhabitants and ofthe principies ot
the Charter and ali rclcvant resolutions of the !Jnited
Nations,
Reaffirming that thc natural resources of ali Tcrritories
under colonial and racist domination are the heritage of
the peoples of those Territories and that thc exploitation
and depletion of those rcsources by foreign economic
interests, in particular in Namibia, in association with thc
occupying régime of South Africa, constitutc a direct v10lation of the rights of the peoples and of the principies of
the Charter and ali relcvant 1csolutions of thc U nitcd
Nations,
Bearing in mmd the relevan! provisions of thc Economic Declaration and other documenls of thc Seventh
Conference of Heads of Statc or Guvernment uf NonAligned Countries. held al Nl·w Dclhi frorn 7 lo 12 March
1983, 32
Taking into account lhc rclcvant provisions uf the
Arusha Declaration and Programmc uf Action on
Namibia, 33 adopted by the United Nations Council for
Namibia on 13 May 1982 at its extraordinary plenary
meeting held al Arusha, United Republic of Tanzania.
Noting with projuund conccrn that the colonial Powers
and certain States, through thcir activitics in thc colonial
Territories, have continued tu disregard U nitcd Nations
decisions relating to the item and that thcy have failed to
implement, in particular, the relevant provisions of General Assembly resolutiuns 2621 (XX V) and 3 7/31. by
which the Assembly called upon ali Governmcnts that had
not yet done so to take legislative, administrative or uthcr
measures in respect of their natiunals and thc bodics corporate under their jurisdiction that own and operatc enterprises in colonial Territories, particularly in Africa. which
are detrimental to the interests uf the inhabitants uf thosc
Territories, in order to put an end to such enterprises and
to prevent new investments that run countcr to the interests of the inhabitants of those Territorics.
Condemning the intensified activities of those foreign
economic, financia! and other interests which continue to
exploit the natural and human resources of the colonial
Territories and to accumulate and repatriate huge profits
to the detriment ofthe interests oflhe inhabitants, particularly in the case of Namibia, thercby impeding the realization by the peoples of the Territories of their legitimate
aspirations for self-determination and independence.
Strongly conde11111ing the support which the racist
minority régime of South A frica continues to receive from
those foreign economic. financia) and othcr interests which
are collaborating with it in the exploitation of the natural
and human resources of thc international Territory of
Namibia, in the further entrenchment of its illegal racist
domination over the Tcrritory aml in lhe strengthening or
its system of apartheid,
Strongly condemning the investment of foreign capital
in the production of uranium and the collaboration of certain Western States and other States with the racist minority régime of South Africa in the nuclear ficld which. hy

providing that régime with nuclear equipment and technology. cnable it to develop nuclear and military capabilities and to become a nuclear Power. thereby promoting
South Africa·s continucd illegal occupation of Namibia,
l<cathn11i11g that thc resources of Namibia are thc inviolable heritage of the Namibian peoplc and that the
cxploitation uf those rcsourees by foreign economic intercsts under the protection of the illegal colonial administration. in violation of thc Chartcr. ofthe relevan! resolutions
of thc General Assembly and thc Security Council and of
Dccree No. 1for the Protection ofthe Natural Resourccs of
Namibia. enacted by thc United Nations Council for
Namibia on 27 Septcmher 1974, 14 and in disregard ofthc
advisory opinion ofthc lntcrnational Court ofJustice of21
Junc 1971," 1s illcgal and contributcs to thc maintcnancc
of the illegal occupation régime.
( ·011cerncd about thc conditions in other colonial Tcrritories. including certain Territories in the Caribbean and
thc Pacific regions, wherc foreign economic. financia! and
othcr interests continue to depri ve the indigenous populations of the1r rights ovcr the wealth of their countries. and
where the inhahitants of those Tcrritories continue to suffcr from a loss of land ownership as a result of thc failure
of the administering Powers concerncd to restrict the sale
of land to foreigners. dc~pitc the I epeatcd appeals of the
(icncral Asscmbly.
( 'onscwus ofthe continuing need to mobili1e world public opinion against thc involvcment of foreign economic,
financia) and other intercsts in the exploitation of natural
and human resources. which impedes the independence of
colonial Tcrritorics and thc climination of racism, particularly in southern Africa,
1. Rcaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples of
dependent Territories to self-determination and independence and to the enjoyment of the natural resources of
their Territories, as wcll as their right to dispose of those
resourccs in thcir best inlercsts;
'
Reitcra1c1 that any administering or occupying
Power that depnvcs thc colonial peoples of the exercise of
their lcgitimate rights over their natural rcsources or subordinates the rights and interests of those peoplcs to forcign economic and linancial intercsts violates the solcmn
obligations it has assuuicd under the ( 'hartcr of the l Jnited
Nations;
3. RcaJjirms that. by their depletive exploitation of
natural resources. the continued accumulation and repatriation of huge profits and the use of those profits for the
cnrichment of foreign scttlers and thc entrenchmcnt of
colonial domination and racial discrimination in the Territories. the activitics of foreign economic, financia) and
other interests operating at present in the colonial Territories. particularly in southern Africa, constitutc a majar
obstacle to political indept'ndence and racial equality, as
well as to the enjoyment of the natural rcsources of thosc
Territories by the ind1genous inhabitants;
4. Condcmns the activitics of foreign economic and
other interests in the colonial Territories impeding the
implcmentation of thc Declaration on the Granting of
lndependcncc to Colonial Countries and Peoples. contained in General Asscmbly resolution 1514 (XV). and the
efforts to eliminate colonialism. apartheid and racial discrimination;
5. Condemns thc policies of Governments that continuc to support or collaborate with those foreign economic and othcr intcrests engaged in exploiting the natural

32 See A/38/ 132-S/l 56 7'í and Corr. 1 ,wd 1 annex.
D Otficial Record, u/ thc Umaal 1w·111/•/1 f h11ú .\CW'lllh \n\lOfl, ,\u¡,

l:'1 !,cgal ( ·1111w'qUer1cc.,· t(,r \'tu/e.\ o(rhe ( ·ontrnued Pre.W.'IWC o{5touth :l/Í'i<'a
,n ,\11m1hw (,\·outh H ·es! .·1.f;•¡, ·t1J ,wrwah,111nd1ng Set unry ( ·owi,·,/ Rn11/111inn
.?~(1 r /<r01', lrlil\"01T ()¡n,111•n /_( . ./ 1?.c¡1orts /()7 /. p. ló.

{Jiemeiil No. 24 (AIJ7Í24_1, ¡mrn. 767
34 lhid .. J"h,rt¡-)1/ih Sc,11,,11, \'11p¡1/c111m1 .vo .'4 1,\-,'i 1 ,l \ , »l. l. annn 11

232

General Assembl) - Thirty-dghth Session

and human resourccs of thc rerritories. including, in particular. illegally exploiting Namibia's marine rcsources.
violating the politicaL economic and social rights and
intcrcsts of the indigenous peoplcs and thus obstructing
the foil and speedy implementation of thc Dcclaration in
respect of thosc Territories;
6. Strongly condemns the collusion of the Governments of certain Western Statcs and other States with thc
racist minority régimc of South A frica in thc nuclear field
and calls upon those and ali other Governments to rcfrain
from supplying that régime, direetly or indirectly. with
installations that might enable it to produce uranium. plutonium and othcr nuclear materials. rcactors or military
equipment:
7. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the lmplementation of thc Declaration on
the Granting of Independcnce to Colonial Countries an<l
Peoples to continuc to monitor closely the situation in
other Non-Self-Governing Territories so as to ensurc that
ali economic activities in thosc Territories are aimed at
strengthening and diversifying their economies in the
interests of the indigenous peoples and their speedy accession to independencc and that thosc pcoplcs are not
exploite<l for politicaL military and other purposes detrimcntal to thcir intercsts:
8. Strongly mndemns those Western Statcs and ali
other States, as well as the transnational corporations.
which continue their investments in. and supply of armaments and oil and nuclear tcchnology to, the racist régimc
of South Africa. thus buttressing it and aggravating thc
threat to world peace;
9. Cal/.1· upon ali States, in particular ccrtain Western
States, to take urgent, effectivc measures to termínate ali
collaboration with South Africa in the political, diplomatic, economic, trade, military and nuclear ticlds and to
refrain from entering into other relations with the racist
régime of South Africa in violation of the relevant resolutions of the Unitcd Nations and of the Organization of
African Unity;
1O. Ca/Is once again upon ali Govemments that havc
not yet done so to take legislative. administrative or other
measures in respect of their nationals and the bodies corporate under their jurisdiction that own and operate cnterprises in colonial Territories, particularly in Africa, which
are detrimental to the interests of the inhabitants of those
Territories, in order to put an cnd to such cnterprises and
to prevent new investments that run counter to the intcrcsts of the inhabitants of those Territories:
11. Ca/Is upon ali Statcs to termínate. or cause to havc
terminated, any investments in Namibia or loans to thc
racist minority régime of South A frica and to refrain from
any agreements or measures to promote trade or other economic relations with that régimc:
12. Requests ali States that have not yet done so to take
elfective measures to end the supply of funds an<l other
forms ofassistance, including military supplies an<l cquipment, to the racist minority régimc of South Africa. which
uses such assistancc to repress the people of Namibia an<l
their national liberation movement:
13. Strongly condemns South Africa for its continued
exploitation and plundering of the natural resourees of
Namibia, in complete disregard of the legitimate intcrests
ofthe Namibian peoplc, for the creation in the Territory or
an economic structure dependent essentially upon its mineral resources and for its illegal extension of the territorial
sea and its proclamation of an cconomic znne offthe coast
ofNamibia:
14. Ca/Is upon those oil-producing and oil-cxporting
countries that have not yet done so to takc cffcctive meas-

urc~ against thc rnl companics concerncd so as to termínate thc supply of nudc oil ami petroll'um products to thc
racist régimc of South A frica:
15. Rei1cratc.1 that thc cxploitation and phmdering ol
thc natural resourn's or Namibia hv South African and
othl'r foreign economic intcrests, incl~ding thc activities or
those transnational corporations which are cngaged in thc
cxploitation and cxport of the Territory's uranium ores
and other rcsourcc~. in violation of thc relevan! resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council
and of Decrec No. 1 for thc Protcction of the Natural
Resources of Namibia. are illcgal an<l contributc to the
maintcnance ol the illcgal ocrnpation régimc:
16. ( 'a//.1· 11¡1011 the (iovernmcnts of ali States. particularly those whosc c·tlrporations are involved in the mining
and processing or I\Jamibian uranium. to takc ali appropriatc measures in compliance with the provisions of Decrec
No. 1 for thc Protect1on or thc Natural Resources of
Namibia, including the practice of requiring negative ccrtiticatcs oforigin. lo prolubit ami preven! Statc-owned and
other corporation~. together with their subsidiarics. from
dcaling in Namib1an uranium and from engaging in uranium prospecting activitics in Namibia:
17. Rcq11n·11 ali Statcs to takc lcgislative. administrallvc ami othcr measures. as appropriatc. in order effcctively to isolatc ",outh Africa politically, cconomically.
militarily and rnlturally. in accordancc with General
Assembly rcsolut1ons ES-8/2 of 14 Septembcr 1981, 36/121
B of 10 Dcccmbcr 1981 and 3 7 '2J3 A or 20 Dccember 1982;
18. ( ·at/s onff aga111 11po11 ali Sta tes to discontinuc ali
cconomic. tinancial and tradc relations with the racist
minority régime of South Africa conceming Namibia and
to refrain from entcring into any relations with South
Africa. purporting to act on hehalf of or conceming
Namibia. which may lend support to its continued illegal
occupation of that Tnritory:
19. hmtcs ali ( iovernments and organizations of the
l 1nited Nations system. ha ving rcgard to the rclevant provisions of thc Dcclaration on the Establishment of a New
Intcrnational Economic Ordcr. contained in General
Assembly resolution 3201 (S-Vl) ofl May 1974, and ofthe
Charter of Economic Rights an<l Dutics of Statcs, contamed in Assembly resolution :1281 (XXIX) of 12 Dccember 1974. to ensure. in particular. that thc perrnanent sovercignty of the rnlonial Territorics over their natural
resourccs is fully rcspectcd and ~atcguardcd:
20. ( 'a//.1' 1/flOII the a<lrninistering Powers to abolish ali
discriminatory and unjust wage ~ystems and working conditions prevailing in the Territorics undcr their administration and to apply in each Tcrritory a uniform system of
wages to ali the inhahitants without an} discrimination;
2 l. Rcqucsts the Sccrctary-Ciencral to continue.
through the Department of Public Information of the Secretariat. a sustained and broad campaign with a view to
informing world puhlic opinion of the facts conccrning the
pillaging or natural resourccs in colonial Tcrritories and
thc exploitation or their indigcnous populations by foreign
monopolies and. in respect of Namibia, the support thcy
render to thc racist minorit~ régime of South A frica;
22. :lpflcals t,1 ali 11<111-governmental organizations to
rnntinue their campaign to mobilize intcrnational public
opinion for the enforcement of economic ::m<l other sanctions against the Pretoria régime;
23. /'akcs norc of the registcr prepare<.! by the I Jnitcd
Nations Centre nn ·1 ransnational n,rporations ami
requests the Spel·ial Committee on tlw Situation with
regard to the lmplemcntation of the Declaration on thc
( ,ranting nf lndc1wmll'ncc to Colonial ( 'ountries and Peo-

VI l.

------ - - --

Rl.'solutions adnpted on the reports nf the Fourth CommiH,·,·

ples to take due account of the rcgister 111 connection with
its consideration of the relatcd items:
24. Requests the Special Committcc to continuc to
examine this question and to report thcreon to the (ieneral
Assembly at its thirty-ninth scssimi.
86th p/enary meeting
7 /)l'Ccmher /983

38/51.

Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized agencies
and the international institutions associated
with the United Nations

The General Assemhly,
Having examined the item entitled "lmplementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Indepcndencc to Colonial Countries and Peoples by thc specializcd agencies and
the intemational institutions associated with the l/nited
Nations",
Recalling the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in its
resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 Deccmber 1960, and the Plan
of Action for the Full lmplementation of the Declaration,
contained in the anncx to its resolution 35/ 118 of 11
December 1980, as well as ali other relevant resolutions
adopted by the General Assembly on this subjcct, in particular resolution 36/52 of 24 Novemhcr 1981 on thc item
and 37/233 of 20 December 1982 nn thc question of
Namibia,
Having examined the reports submitted on the itcm by
the Secretary-General, 16 thc Economic and Social Council 37 and the Special Committce on thc Situation with
regard to the Implemcntation of thc Declaration on the
Granting of Independencc to Colonial Countries and Pcoples, 38
Taking into account the relevant provisions of the Paris
Declaration on Namibia and the Programme of Action on
Namibia 31 adopted at the Intemational Conference in
Support of the Struggle of the Namibian People for Independence,
Bearing in mind the relevant provisions of thc Political
Declaration adopted by thc Seventh Conference of Heads
ofState or Govemment of Non-Aligned Countries, held at
New Delhi from 7 to 12 March 1983, ·12 and other documents of the Co-ordinating Burcau of thc Non-Aligncd
Countries,
Aware that the struggle ofthe people ofNamibia for self'..
determination and independencc is in its crucial stagc and
has sharply intensified as a consequence of the stcpped-up
aggression by the illegal colonialist régime of Pretoria
against the people of the Territory and the increased general support rendered to that régimc by certain Western
countries, especially the Unitcd States of America and
Israel, coupled with efforts to deprive thc Namibian people
of their hard-won victories in the liberation struggle, and
that it is therefore incumbent upon the en tire international
community decisively to intensify conccrted action in support ofthe people ofNamibia and their sole and authentic
representative, the South West Africa People's Organization, for the attainment of their goal.
Deeply conscious of the critica! need of the Namibian
people and their national liberation movement, the South
West Africa People's Organization, and of the pcoples of
36 N38/ 111 and Add. l and 2. Add.3 and ( ·orr. l and Add.4
37 Officia/ Rccords o(thc (ieneral .l,wlil/,/\ //11r1,· ,-,~!,¡!, S,•,11,,11. \"upp/,·
ment No. 3 (A/3813). ,haps. 1 and VI.

other colonial Territorie~ for concrctl' assistance from thc
specialized agencies and other organi1.ations of the llrntcd
Nations ~ystcm in their \lrugglc for liberation from n,lonial rule and in their etforts to achieve and consolidate
thcir na1ional indcpendcnce.
Rea/finning the responsibility ofthe specialized agencies
and other organizations of the llnited Nations systcm to
1akc ali thc neccssarv mcasurcs, within 1hcir respective
sphcres of compete11cc, to rnsurc thc full and spcedy
implcmcntat10n or the Declaration on the ( ,ranting of
Indepcndence to Colonial Countries ami Pcoples and othcr
relevan! resolutions of the United Nations. particularly
thosc relating to the prnvision of moral and material
assistance, on a priority hasis. to thc pcoplcs of the colonial Territories and their nat1onal liberation movemcnts,
Deeplr conccrned that although there has been progress
in the extension of assistance to refugecs from Namibia,
the action taken hitherto hy the organizations concemed in
providing assistancc to the people of thc Territory through
their national liberation movcment the South Wcst Africa
People's Organization. still remains inadequatc to nwet
the urgent and growing needs of the Namibian peoplc.
l:xpressing 1/s con/idcnt hope that closcr contacts and
consultations between thc specialized agencies and other
organizations of the l lnited Nations system and the
Organization of Afriean l lnity and the national liberation
movement concerned ~ill help to overcoml' procedural
and other difficulties which have impeded or delayed thc
implementation of sorne assistance programmes.
Recal/ing its resolution 371233 C of 20 Deccmber 1982.
re4uesting ali specialized agencies and other organintions
and conferences of the l nited Nations system to grant full
membership to the Unitcd Nations Council for Namibia
as the legal Administering Authority for Namibia,
J:.wrcssing its apprecic1tio11 to the General Seeretariat of
the Organization of A frican l lnity for the continued cooperation and assistancc ntended by it to the speciah1ed
agencies and other organi1ations of the United Nations
system in conneetion with thc implementation of thc relevan! resolutions of the l lnited Nations.
l:"xpressing its apprecrnlio11 a/so to the Governments of
the front-line States for the steadfast support extended to
the people of Namibia and their national liberation movement, the South West Africa People's Organization, in
their just and legitimate struggle for the attainment of freedom and independence, despite increased armed attacks
by the forces of the racist régime of South Africa. and
aware of the particular necds of thosc Govcrnments for
assistance in that connection.
Noting the cfforts of the llnited Nations Development
Programme in the extcnsion of assistance to the national
liberation movements and commending its initiativc in
establishing ehannels for closer periodic contacts and consultations hetwecn the specialized agencies and other
organizations of the l lnited Nations system and thc
Organization of African Unity and the national liberation
movcmcnts in thc formulation of assistanee programmes.
l\'oting a/so the support given by the specialized agencies
and other organizations of the llnited Nations system to
the implementation of the Nationhood Programme for
Namibia, in accordance with General Assembly resolution
12/9 A of 4 Novcmber 1977,
Dcplonng the continued links with and assistance rendered to South Africa h) certain specialized agencies in the
t1nanciaL economic. technical and other fields, in contravention of thc relevan! 1csol11tinns of the l Jnited Nations.
---

--

l8 l/,1r/ .. \u¡~elnnl'nt \'o. :!3 ( \ -~X ~-'L chap V1.
