TWENTY-SIXTH

YEAR
rd
MEETING: 30 NOVEMBER 197 1

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Pm;
hmisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l 603) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Adoption

of the agenda . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . , . . . . . , . , . , . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Complaint by Guinea:
Report of the Security Council Special Mission to the Republic of Guinea
.................
established under resolution 295 (197 1) (S/l 0309)

1

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
(a) Letter dated 24 November 1971 from the Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/l 0396);
fbl Fourth report of the Committee established in pursuance of Security Council
resolution 253 (1968) (‘S/l0229 and Add.1 and 2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

8

S/PV. 1603

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SIXTEEN

HUNDRED

AND

THIRD

Held in New York on Tuesday, 30 November
President: Mr. E. KUJ./AGA (Poland).
- Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, China, France, Italy, Japan,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Syrian Arab
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United
States of America.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l603)
Adoption

of the agenda.

Complaint by Guinea:
Report of the Security Council Special Mission to the
Republic
of Guinea established under resolution
295 (1971) (S/10309).
Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
(al Letter dated 24 November 1971 from the Perma.
nent Representative of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/10396);
lb) Fourth
report of the Committee established in
pursuance
of Security
Council
resolution
253 (1968) (S/10229 and Add.1 and 2).
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Complaint by Guinea
Report of the Securitv
Reputilic
of Guika
295 (1971) (S/10309)”

Council Suecial Mission to the
establishid
under resolution

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation f?orn French): On
3 August 1971, at its 1573rd meeting, devoted to consideration of the present item on its agenda, the Security
Council decided to invite the representative of Guinea to
participate without the right to vote in the debates of the
Security Council. In accordance with that decision, I now
invite the representative of Guinea to take a seat at the
Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Abdoulaye Tour6
(Guin~) took a place at the Security Council table.
* Subsequently issued as Qfficial Records of the SecuritY COUld
Twenty-sixth

Yeat Special Supplement No. 4 (S/10309/Rev.l).

MEETING
1971, at 10.30 a.m.

2. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): In its
resolution 295 (1971) the Security Council decided to
dispatch a Special Mission to the Republic of Guinea to
consult the authorities of Guinea and to submit an
immediate report on the situation.
3. At its 1576th meeting,on 26 August 1971, the Council
adopted a consensus
in accordancewith which the Special
Mission was to consistof two membersof the Council. In a
note issuedon the sameday [S/10299], the Presidentof
the Security Council and the Secretary-Generalindicated
that the Special Mission would be composed of the
representativesof Argentina and Syria.
4, The Special Mission, consistingof AmbassadorGeorge
J. Tomeh of Syria and Minister Julio CdsarCarasalesof
Argentina, was in Guinea from 30 August to 2 September
1971. The report of the Special Mission was publishedin
document S/10309.
5. On behalf of the Security Council, and with the
authorization of its members,I wish to makethe following
statement;
“It will be recalled that on 3 August the Security
Council decided to dispatch a Special Mission to the
Republic of Guinea. The Special Mission, consistingof
the representative of Syria, Ambassador George J.
Tomeh, and the deputy representative of Argentina,
Minister Julio CesarCarasales,visited Guinea from 30
August to 2 September 1971 and held extensive consultations with officials of the Government of Guinea.
“In those consultations,the Guinean authorities cooperated fully with the SpecialMissionand extended to it
all the facilities necessaryfor the successfulachievement
of its task.
“Upon its return to New York, and in accordancewith
its terms of reference,the SpecialMission submitted its
report to the Security Council, circulated as document
S/10309. The Council beganits first examination of the
report of the SpecialMissionat its 1586th meeting on 29
September 1971.
“It is evident from this report that there is continuing
concern in Guinea regardingthe possibility of renewed
acts against that country’s territorial integrity and political independencesimilarto those which led to the events
of November 1970. In this respect, the view has been
expressed by the @>vernment of Guinea that action
should be taken ‘by the Security Council to prevent

Portugal from violating the territorial
political independence of Guinea.

integrity and

‘12. In conclusion I should like to expressmy happiness at
seeing among us once again my friend Ambassador Tomeh,
after the illness that has kept him away from the Council.
We clearly recall that the last time he attended a Council
meeting was when he introduced the report of the Mission
that this body sent to Guinea and that at that time, in a
lengthy statement and with that special eloquence characteristic of all his statements, Ambassador Tomeh brought
out everything the Mission had done, We are pleased to see
him among us again, and we wish him a complete recovery,

“It is also clear that the failure by Portugal to apply the
principle of se!f-determination, including the right to,
independence, in Guinea (Bissau) is having an unsettling
effect on conditions in the area.
“The Security Council, having taken note with appreciation of the report of the Special Mission and of the
representations made by the Government of Guinea,
reiterates operative paragraph 1 of its resolution
295 (1971), which affirms that the territorial integrity
and political independence of the Republic of Guinea
must be respected.”

13. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (translated from Chinese):
In November 1970 the Portuguese colonialists flagrantly
sent mercenaries to launch a sudden attack on the Republic
of Guinea by piratical means in a vain attempt to subvert
the Government of the Republic of Guinea, headed by
President Sekou Tourd and throw the Guinean people back
into the dark days of colonial rule. The Chinese Government and people express utmost indignation at that naked
act of aggression and strongly condemn it.

6. Mr. BUSH (United States of America): I shall make a
very brief statement. My delegation would like to express
its appreciation to the members of the Special Mission
which visited Guinea and to you, Mr. President, for your
successful efforts in drawing up the consensus which has
been unanimously approved. We have taken particular note
of the phrase, in the sixth paragraph, which coincides with
the United States view that the exercise of self-detexmination can result in various alternatives, including independence.

14. Under the command of President Sdkou Tour4 the
heroic Guinean people, filled with indignation against the
enemy, dealt heavy blows to the invaders and victoriously
defended their State’s sovereignty and national independence. The Chinese Government and people warmly praise
the Guinean people for their revolutionary spirit in defying
brutal force, upholding unity and resisting the enemy with
concerted efforts, and hail the victories achieved by the
Guinean people in its struggle against aggression.

7. Mr, ORTIZ DE ROZAS (Argentina) (interpretation
jkom Spanish): The delegation of Argentina wishesfirst to
emphasize its satisfaction at the speed with which this
Council acted on the complaint of the Government of
Guinea. It is fitting to recall that on the very day on which
the note on the matter was received from the permanent
representative of the Republic of Guinea, Ambassador
Toure, the President of the Security Council convened a
meeting, which was held in the afternoon of that day,
3 August.

15. It is particularly worth mentioning that when the
Guinean people was subjected to aggression the great
majority of African countries and peoples, united as one,
gave powerful support to the Guinean people, thus setting
an example for mutual support and assistance among the
oppressed peoples and nations in their struggle against
colonialism and neo-colonialism,

8. We wish to extend special thanks to the then President
of the Security Council, Ambassador Piero Vinci of Italy,
for his prompt action and effectiveness in guiding the
debate on the matter. We hope that that precedent will not
be forgotten in future practices of the Council.

16, Although the Portuguese colonial authorities @no*
miniously failed in their armed invasion, the nature of the
colonialists and neo-colonialists will not change. They will
continue to conduct their last-ditch struggles. The facts
prove that they have never for a moment ceased to plot
aggression against the Republic of Guinea and recently they
have been contriving a new scheme to invade Guinea again.
That has been irrefutably proved, with abundant evidence,
by the Government of the Republic of Guinea, which has
called the attention of the Security Council to that scheme,
requesting it to take the measures necessary to prevent the
recurrence of large-scale invasion. That request of the
Guinean Government is just, and we firmly SUppOd 3.
Countless facts prove that the colonialist policies pursued
by the Portuguese authorities constitute a threat to the
sovereignty and security of independent African State%a
challenge to the African peoples’ right to national independence and a grave violation of the spirit of the United
Nations Charter. How can the Portuguese colonialists, who
are corrupt in the extreme, dare to perpetrate such glaring
acts of aggression and now be preparing for military
adventures on an even larger scale? Because they have the
support and connivance of other imperialists. It is net
difficult to see that their aim is not only to subvert the
Government of the Republic of Guinea but also to suPPress

9. Secondly, we wish to express our appreciation for the
cordial and efficient manner in which the Government of
Guinea received this Council’s Mission, of which Minister
Julio Cesar Carasales, deputy representative of Argentina,
had the special honour of being a member.
10. We are pleased to see that the work of the Mission,
which was presided over so brilliantly by the permanent
representative of Syria, Ambassador George Tomeh, has not
been in vain and that the spirit of the report is reflected in
the consensusthe Council has just adopted.
11. Let this experience provide an opportunity to reaffirm
once again here and now the inalienable right of all States
to full respect for their sovereignty and independence. Let
this be a vivid example of what the representatives of
Argentina have so marry times stated: that the survival of
colonial situations will always be likely to engender
anachronistic conflicts given the present situation of mankind.
2

I

the national liberation movement, vigorously developing in
Africa. Therefore the significance of the Guinean people’s
struggle far exceeds the limits of Guinea. The Guinean
people are fighting not only for the independence and
sovereignty of their motherland but also for the independence and sovereignty of other African States, and they are
giving support to all the countries of the world that treasure
their own independence and sovereignty.

22. My delegation believes that this Council must take
careful note of the fact that the threat to Guinea takes the
form of political and military sabotage carried out by
mercenary soldiers employed by Portugal. These elements
were in evidence in the Portuguese-led attack against
Guinea in November 1970, and the Guinean intelligence
services are convinced that a similar attack has been
planned for the near future.

17. The Guinean people is by no means isolated in its
struggle. All the peoples of the world that uphold justice
firmly support them; the Chinese people firmly supports it.
Victory surely belongs to the Guinean people, who uphold
justice, heighten their vigilance and persevere in their fight.

23. The consensus which this Council has reached does
not, in the view of my delegation, go as far as it should. It is
the very minimum that can be offered by way of a reply to
Guinea. But since it also represents the maximum amount
of agreement that can be arrived at in the present
circumstance and since it recognizes the main elements of
the situation in question, my delegation has given it our
approval ,

18. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): In his final statement to the
Security Council’s Special Mission to Guinea, President
Sekou Tour& summed up the matter before us quite simply
when he said: “The purpose of our recourse to the Security
Council is to ensure that our right to livp in peace will be
respected.” (S/l0309/Rev.,.I, p. 41.1 This Council would be
failing in its most essential function if it did not respond to
President Tour6’s appeal in a positive manner.
19. The key to peace and security for Guinea, as it is for
that border Portuguese-held
colonies in Africa, is for Portugal to grant, or be made to
grant, to the peoples under its colonial rule their right to
self-determination
and independence in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 15 14 (XV). In any event,
Portugal must be left in no doubt that it stands condemned
in the eyes of the international community as a source of
injustice, of unrest and of aggression, and that the Security
Council will be keeping close watch on the situation which
has given rise to grave apprehension in the Republic of
Guinea.

Senegal and other Territories

20. President Tour6 has thrown into bold relief the
problem faced by small States &ich are under direct or
indirect threat of aggression and whose only recourse is to a
body influenced by other considerations besides a strict
regard for accepted international law. He asked, quite
legitimately, what the Council’s attitude would have been
had the Portuguese aggression of November 1970 been
successful. With an understandable cynicism he said he
believed that the Council would simply have recorded the
brutal fact and done nothing about it. Yet, like the Heads
Of State of many other African countries, he has confidence
in the Security
Council despite his awareness that its
Constitution
and its method of operating still fall very far
short of what he regards as “. . . the basis for a true
international
equilibrium for the lasting and effective
protection of the legitimate rights of every people” [ibid.].
21. The consensus which this Council has reached on the
question of Guinea’s complaint does not, in the view of my
delegation, go as far as it should, but at least we are in
agreement that the people of Guinea are under threat of
aggression; that that threat emanates from the Portuguese
authorities
in Africa; that its basic cause is Portugal’s
oppression of the African people under its rule; and that
the Security Council continues to stand by its affirmation,
contained
in resolution 295 (1971), that the territorial
independence of the Republic of Guinea must be respected.

24. Mr. FREELAND (United Kingdom): My delegation in
its turn would like to express its gratitude for the
contribution made by the Council’s Special Mission. We
have readily associated ourselves with the consensus statement that you, Mr. President, have made on behalf of the
Council this morning.
25. However, with regard to the penultimate paragraph of
the consensus we feel bound to reiterate a view which is I
am sure familiar to the other members of the Council.
Although we fully endorse the principle of self-determination, including the right .to independence, for all NonSelf-Governing Territories, we consider that responsibility
for the implementation of that principle and its timing rests
with the administering Power.
26. Mr.
TERENCE
(Burundi)
(interpretation
from
F’rerzchj: My delegation is pleased to see that the representative of Syria, who was Chairman of the Special Mission of
the Council in Guinea, is here among us again. We are very
happy to see him and that he has recovered from the illness
that confined him to his bed for some weeks, during which
we were unfortunately deprived of his presence. We wish to
tell him how very grateful we are to him for the success he
achieved during his mission together with his colleague the
representative of Agentina.
27. On several occasions, in regard to the problem of
security as well as in regard to decolonization, we have
made our position known, namely, that for the African
countries security is closely tied to complete decolonization. That is why we should briefly like to deal with the
substance of the problem. For the events in Guinea and in
Senegal reflect an over-all insecurity in the region and this
over-all insecurity is due exclusively to the fact that
Portuguese domination is being perpetuated in the region.
Hence, if we wish to succeed in having the political
independence and national sovereignty of every State-particularly Guinea and Senegal-respected, the Security Council must contribute to the extirpation, to the final
eradication of the causes which are at the root of the evil,
namely, the continued presence of Portugal in Guinea
(Bissau).
28. Members of the Pfcurity Council realize that Portugal
has repeatedly tried to clear itself of the blame for its

attacks against Guinea. But we. for our uart. sav that if
Portugal withdrawsfrom Guinea (B&au), the &a&on now
prevailing would no longer exist.
29. At any rate, it is for the Security Council to bet
everything in motion to ensure respect for the right to
sovereignty and independence of countries which are
already independent. But since the situation is directly
related to the fact that Portugal continues to dominate
Guinea (Bissau), it is equally indispensable that that
country accede to independence and that the entire region
finally be protected from the continous threats to which it
has been subjected.
30. Mr. TAYLOR-KAMARA (Sierra Leone): My delegation has already expressedthanks and appreciation to the
Special Mission which visited the Republic of Guinea for
the excellent report it submitted in document S/10309 of
15 September 1971. The report was ably presented to the
Security Council by Ambassador George Tomeh of the
Syrian Arab Republic, one of the members comprising the
Mission, and debated at some length by the Council.

35. Mr. ISSRAELYAN (Union of Soviet Socialist Rep&
lies) (translated from Russia): During-the past year the
Security Council has frequently been forced to meet to
consider acts of aggression by Portugal against independent
African States. Only a few days ago the Council considered
the situation created by Portugal’s policy against the
Republic of Senegal. Today the Council has on its agenda
an item related to the latest intrigues of the Portuguese
colonialists against another African State, the Republic of
Guinea.
36. As in the case of Senegal, where a Security Council
mission reached a conclusion on Portugal’s responsibility
for an attack on a sovereign African State, so in this case
the Security Council has before it a report from its Special
Mission which, as a result of a visit to Guinea, has presented
the Council with factual evidence of the intrigues of the
imperialist forces, and, above all, of Portugal, against the
existing order in the Republic of Guinea and against that
country’s sovereignty and territorial independence and
integrity.

31. A close study of the report and other previous reports
on Guinea has disclosed that there have been constant
Portuguese armed interventions against Guinea as far back
as the year 1961. It apparently follows that all these years
the Government of Portugal has constantly been planning,
for no just causeor causes,to interfere with and change the
lawful Government of the Republic of Guinea by unlawful
means.

37. In this connexion the Soviet delegation would like to
point out that the Security Council’s Special Mission to the
Republic of Guinea, which was composed of the distinguished Permanent Representative of Syria, Ambassador
George Tomeh, whose return today after his illness we
welcome and to whom we wish long life and strength, and
the distinguished representative of Argentina, Mr. Carasales,
honourably discharged the task entrusted to it by the
Council.

32. My delegation is of the opinion that those illegal and
unconstitutional acts, tantamount to clear acts of aggression, trespassand assault, culminated in interference in the
sovereignty, integrity and security of the Republic of
Guinea. In circumstances such as these, the Security
Council should waste no time in taking appropriate action,
as provided for in the United Nations Charter, against
Portugal to redressthe grievances of the Republic of Guinea
and to make it desist forthwith from carrying out any
further act or acts which would interfere in the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the Republic.

38. Having studied the material provided by the Mission, it
is with great concern that we note that the line taken by
Portugal with respect to the Republic of Guinea has not
changed in the slightest-I repeat, in the slightest-since the
Security Council considered the question of Portugal’s open
aggression against the Republic of Guinea in November
1970, approximately one year ago. I should like to remind
you that on the basis of the information submitted at that
time by the Special Mission, the Council adopted resolution
290 (1970), in which it solemnly warned the Government
of Portugal that:

33. As in the case of Senegal, since Guinea has at no time
been at war with Portugal, it seems to my delegation that it
is the duty of the Security Council, once a casehas been
made and proved, to prevent Portugal from attempting
further to carry out consistently its illegal and unconstitutional acts against the Republic of Guinea. In this connexion I beg to reiterate what my delegation, through our
Prime Minister, has stated before: that there are various
ways of changing a government. The world has, however,
now developed towards the stage where there are accepted
democratic ways, working democratically through the
people; not by using money, force and mercenaries in order
to induce those who are the leaders lawfully chosen by the
people.

“in the event of any repetition or armed attacks against
independent African States, the Security Council shall
immediately consider appropriate effective steps or measures in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations”,
One would have thought a warning to the Portuguese
colonialists from the highest organ of the United Nations,
the Security Council, would be sufficient to discourage
them from encroaching on the sovereignty of independent
African States. However, that was not the case, and, as 1s
shown by the facts submitted by the new Security Co~nd
Special Mission to the Republic of Guinea established under
resolution 295 (1971) of 3 August 1971, this is still not the
case.

34. In the light of these considerations, my delegation
agreesto associateitself with the statement of the President
of Guinea in the hope that the same will be accepted in
toto by the members of the Security Council and acted

39. Portugal’s latest acts, which were investigated by the
Security Council Special Mission to Guinea, show that lt is
unwilling to ceaseencroaching on the independence of the
African countries bordering on its colonies, in which it 1s

upon.

4

employing barbaric methods to put down the national
liberation movement. In other words, Portugal stubbornly
continues to pursue its colonialist policy on Africansoil,
2 million square kilometres of which still lie beneath
Lisbon’s colonial yoke in flagrant violation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Peoples
and Countries. Portugal continues to crush the African
peoples and uses the territory of its own colonies as a
bridge-head for aggressive attacks against independent
African States. It is a well-known fact that it is not only
Guinea and Senegal which have frequently been subjected
to attacks by Portuguese armed forces, but also other
African States including Zambia, the United Republic of
Tanzania and Zaire.

colonialism, In the programme of the struggle for peace and
international co-operation drawn up by the Twenty-Fourth
Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, one
of the main aims of the foreign policy of the Soviet Union
is described as follows, and I quote: “to give an immediate
and firm rebuff to any acts of aggression and international
arbitrariness. For this, full use must also be made of the
possibilities of the United Nations.”
44. The complete elimination of the last vestiges of
colonialism and of the canker of racism in Africa would be
in the interests of the preservation and strengthening of
universal peace and the security of all peoples.
45. The First Secretary of the Central Committee of the
Conununist Party of the Soviet Union, Leonid llyich
Brezhnev, in his report to the Twenty-Fourth Congress of
the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, stressed that
“the United Nations decisions on the abolition of the
remaining colonial regimes must be fully carried out .”

40. Portugal’s policy of imperialist aggression against
Guinea and the other African States clearly shows the
urgent need for the speedy and complete elimination of
colonial and racist regimes and for the removal of the threat
which colonialism represents to the peace and security of
the African nations, It is now clearer than ever before that
as long as even one colonial regime remains on the African
continent and until all armed forces have been removed and
all the colonialists’ military bases have been dismantled,
there will be a continuing threat to the peaceful and free
existence and development of the States of Africa.

46. The Soviet delegation believes that, in connexion with
the matter under discussion, the Security Council should
take all possible measures to protect the political independence and the territorial integrity of Guinea, as well as of
other African countries, from the aggressiveschemes of the
Portuguese colonialists.

41, The growing alliance in Africa between international
imperialism and Portuguese colonialism and South African
and Southern Rhodesian racism is being strengthened by
the common goal of the struggle against the national
liberation movement in order to preserve the political,
economic and strategic interests of imperialism, colonialism
and neocolonialism.
The effects of this co-ordinated action
by the imperialists,
colonialists and racists are clear to
everyone and, above all, to the African States. It is a policy
of plots and coups d’&zt, a policy of aggression and
shameless interference in the affairs of the independent
countries of Africa.
42.

The President

47. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Fmzch): I
should like to speak briefly now in my capacity as the
representative of POLAND.
48. First of all, I should like to extend our congratulations
and gratitude to the representative of the Syrian Arab
Republic, Mr, George Tomeh, whom we welcome back
after a long and much regretted absence, and also to the
deputy permanent representative of Argentina, Minister
Cdsar Carasales, for their report on the consultations they
held with the representatives of the Government of the
Republic of Guinea from 30 August to 2 September of this
year.

of the Republic of Guinea, Mr. Sekou

Tour6, made an absolutely clear and unambiguous state.
ment on the policy of the imperialist countries during his

49. The delegation of Poland had the honour of participating in the Special Mission of the Security Council which,
after going to Guinea in November 1970, unanimously
concluded that Portugal was responsible for the aggression
committed on 22, 23 and 24 November 1970 against the
Republic of Guinea.1 We accordingly paid the most serious
attention to the most recent Guinean complaint and treated
it with full comprehension.

talks with the members of the Special Mission. I shall take
the liberty of quoting an extract from this extremely
interesting conversation, President SBkou Tour6 said, and I
quote:
“ . . . these nations would prefer to use brute force to
impose the system of their choice and thus to obtain the

unrestricted use of Guinea’s resources. The root problem
IS that these nations have not adapted themselves to the
exigencies of peace and security, that they are not willing
to regard international law and the right of self-determination of every nation as a genuine force. They would
still like to impose their will by brute strength. This is the
tragic situation which has its impact on Guinea’s relations
with certain NATO countries.” [S/10309/Rev.l, pp 40

50. The report now before us clearly indicates that a
situation of direct threat to the territorial integrity and the
political independence of the Republic of Guinea continues
to exist. This report by the members of the Special Mission
also concluded that in Guinea there is genuine and
completely justified concern over the latent possibility of
new acts of aggression.

and 41.1

51. We subscribe, even though we would have preferred
firmer language, to the observation in the consensus of the
Council which we have just adopted that

43.

The Soviet Union consistently supports the struggle of
and other peoples for national liberation and
for the strengthening of the independence of young States
in the face of the intrigues of colonialism and neothe African

1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Twenty-fifth
Special Supplement No, 2, chap.III.

5

Year,

tations on a matter which falls exclusively
subject of the maintenance of international
security.

“the failure by Portugal to appIy the principle of
self-determination, inchIding the right to independence,
in Guinea (Bissau) is having an unsettling effect on
conditions in the area”.

peace and

60. The Government of the Republic of Guinea, in
agreeing to receive on its territory the special advisory
mission of the Security Council, demonstrated once again
its great respect for and confidence in the organ of the
United Nations entrusted with the maintenance of peace
and security throughout the world. However, the reality is
that this confidence and respect which we, the African
countries, place in the Charter of the United Nations and its
most important organ are unfortunately not shared by
certain Member States, including Portugal, although those
countries have subscribed to the Charter.

52. In the opinion of the delegation of Poland the
Security Council must bear in mind that the continued
existence of Portuguese colonialism in Africa and its
colonial wars against the African peoples are a permanent
threat and constant source of aggression against the
independent African States. Only the final liquidation of
colonialism and racism in Africa and the accession to
independence of all the colonized peoples can create the
necessary conditions for the establishment of security in
that region, which is an essential guarantee of the territorial
integrity and political independence of the independent
African States.

61. For that reason we state with conviction that one of
the ills that beset the African continent is the stubbornness
and obstinacy of Portugal in .violating the Charter deliberately and with impunity, by maintaining under its domination millions of Africans in Angola, Mozambique and
Guinea (Bissau).

53. At the same time T wish to assure the representative of
the Republic of Guinea, Ambassador Tour& and the
members of the Security Council that Poland, in accordance with its traditional attitude, will spare no effort to
contribute to the complete and prompt attainment of those
objectives.
54. AS PRESIDENT,
Guinea.

within the

62. Obstinately, Portugal continues to consider African
territories as an extension of its metropolis, the metropolis
wherein brave sons and daughters of the Portuguese people,
solidly organized within the army of revolutionary and
anti-colonialist action, are striking powerful blows at the
bases of Portuguese fascism in Lisbon and other Portuguese
cities. These brave fighters for freedom have attacked,
directly and effectively, various installations and sites from
which the Portuguese fascist Government derives its
strength and power. The Portuguese fascist Government,
through its colonial armies, terrorizes the African populations by sowing death and devastation, ‘by burning our
forests and our crops.

I now call on the representative of

55. Mr. TOURE (Guinea) (iavpretation
from Fremh):
Mr. President, I am very happy to see you presiding over
the Security Council for the month of November, The
relations of fruitful co-operation which exist between the
People’s Republic of Poland and the Republic of Guinea are
too well known for me to have to refer to them here. I have
had the pleasure of knowing you for more than a decade;
we met when you and I represented our respective
countries in another friendly African country, At that time
I became aware of your great human qualities, your
competence and your vast knowledge of diplomatic matters, both African and international.

63. This is the place to bring to the attention of members
of the Security Council the message which the Secretary.
General of the Liberation Movement of the African
Independence Party of Guinea and the Cape Verde Islands,
our brother and friend Amllcar Cabral, addressed to the
United Nations Committee on decolonization2 and to the
Fourth Committee of the General Assembly, in connexion
with an escalation in the crimes of the Portuguese colonialist army:

56. As you said a few minutes ago, Mr. President, you
were a member of the mission of inquiry of the Security
Council which visited my country last November. We
remember in this connexion the very important role which
you, together with your eminent colleagues, played on that
mission.
57. Finally, fate-which arranges things so well-has given
us the opportunity today of seeing you in the Chair of the
Security Council in this new month of November, one year
after the criminal aggression of Portugal against my
country, the Republic of Guinea.

“Desperate in the face of the great victories brought by
our party during this year, the criminal Portuguese
colonialists have launched a wave of savage air bombings
since August against the peasant population in Our
liberated areas. As of the end of October, 38 villages were
destroyed, 7 women and 8 children killed and 28
wounded.

58. In the general agreement whose text you read out a
few moments ago, Mr, President-an agreement which, as
far as the delegation of the Republic of Guinea is
concerned, is only the minimum to which many delegations
have referred-the
Security Council has drawn its conclusions from the report of the Special Mission sent to the
Republic of Guinea as a result of its request of 3 August
197 1 p/1 0280],

“They have not succeeded in terrorizing or demoralizing our people in their determination to pursue the
just struggle for liberty, peace and progress. I bring to
your attention that the Portuguese colonialists are feverishly preparing to spread toxic chemical products in order
2 SpecialCommittee on the Situationwith regardto the ImPlementationof the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to

59. The Guinean delegation wishes to submit certain
observations which it has drawn from your lengthy consul-

Colonial Countries and Peoples.

6

to destroy our crops before the next harvest. The goal is
clearly to stop our struggle by famine. We face dismal
prospects resulting from these preparations.

target of imperialism, in view of the riches of the soil and
sub-soil of Guinea.
71. In order to cover up the repetition of the aggression of
November 1970, all means are being mobilized by imperialism to discredit the Republic of Guinea and its democratic
and popular institutions. .In order to try to have the
criminal Portuguese aggreSsion of November 1970 forgotten, the imperialist press will publish its various poisonous and untrue reports. But 22 November 1970 was a
call to vigilance for the African peoples and all progressive
peoples.

“We request you to take all measures in your reach to
denounce, and condemn in advance this monstrous crime
against Africa and humanity.”
64. The Portuguese Government blindly and obstinately
persists in the absurd fiction of trying to transform into

Portuguese citizens-despite their own wishes-African populations which possesstheir own languages and their own
culture.

72. The African continent, long subjected to the systematic exploitation of its human and material resources, needs
total peace and full security in order to rebuild itself
through its various entities carved up by colonialism, We
need security on our borders and peace in our villages to
catch up on the technical delay imposed upon us by
colonialism and which imperialist exploitation wishes to
maintain and perpetuate. The peace and security indispensable for the development of our potential are denied to us
by mediaeval Portugal, supported by its allies.

65. We reaffirm here that there is no quarrel between the
African peoples and the Portuguese people.
66. In the light of the lesson that we have learned from
belligerent and aggressiveattitude of the
fascist colonialist Government of Portugal, it is not naive to
believe-taking into account the noble ideals of the Charter-that the maintenance and safeguarding of the peace
and security of independent African countries is weighed
differently, on the basis of criteria which escape us and
always at our cost.
the continuously

73. We are obliged today to note with frustration that the
United Nations and, in addition, the Security Council seem
as the years go by to be more and more powerless to
impose on the fascist and colonialist Portuguese Government the recognition of the right to self-determination and
independence of colonial countries and peoples.

67. The colonialist Portuguese Government, in its hateful
determination to block the progress of history, attacks the
Republic of Guinea and other independent African States.
If the armed aggressions against an African State are
designated, in accordance with the miscalculations of our
opponents, to delay the date of their eviction, which has
become inevitable, from the African territories that they
still occupy, they actually are contributing to mobilizing
the will of the Africans in their struggle for their freedom
and dignity and true independence.

74. As we did so at the twenty-fourth, twenty-fifth and
the current sessions of the General Assembly, we reaffirm
today before the Security Council that the colonialist
Government of Portugal is feverishly and actively preparing
a new armed aggression against the Republib of Guinea. The
criminal Portuguese aggression of November 1970 against
Guinea took place despite our justified warnings-warnings
that were given in time to alert international public
opinion.

68. The people of Guinea will never forget 22 November
1970. Towards the end of the night of 22 November 1970,
Portuguese warships-which were claimed to be pleasure
yachts-under
cover of thick fog entered, our territorial
waters and landed military units at Conakry, our capital.
Both Portuguese military units and mercenaries recruited
by Portugal among Cmigrdsand other men of all nationalities ready to serve for money took part in that
bandit-like attack against the Republic of Guinea. The
Immediate purpose of the aggression was to overthrow the
progressive regime of Guinea and deal a serious blow against
the liberation movement of the independence African party
of Guinea and of the islands of Cape Verde led by Amilcar
Cabral.

75, We provided the Special Mission of the Security
Council with proof of the machinations that are now under
way on the territory of Guinea (Bissau), which is under
Portugal’s control. It is unnecessary to repeat them today
before the members of the Council. The report of the
Special Mission has made them sufficiently clear.
76. What we can add in this conne’xion is that on 10
November 1971, between 10.30 and 11.05 GMT, six
Portuguese military aircraft violated our air space in the
frontier areas of Bokt?, Gaoual and Koundara, in the
north-west of Guinea. Moreover, a white mercenary calling
himself Chayeux, a citizen of a Western European country
captured on our borders on 8 November 1971, told us that
he wished to reach the territory of Guinea (Bissau), where,
according to him, commando units to which he belonged
were actively preparing to launch within a few days an
armed action against the Republic of Guinea from the
territory of Guinea (Bissau), which is controlled by
Portugal.

69. The whole world remembers the defeat suffered by
the Portuguese aggressors on 22,23 and 24 November 1970

in Conakry and on 26 and 28 November 1970 at Koundara
and Gaoual.
70. We know by experience that the focal point of the
undermining
activity of imperialism, which supports Portuguese colonialism,
is directed first of all against the
progressive African States and against all those continu-

ously and resolutely struggling against imperialism. The
choice of the Government of the Republic of Guinea for a

non-capitalist

development

77. What my Government requests and demands of the
Security Council is the protection of our independence by

has made of it the primary
7

the Council and respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Republic of Guinea by Portugal.

85. Mr. TOMEH (Syrian Arab Republic) [interpretafio!l
Porn French): Very briefly, Mr. President, I should like to

78. The Government of the Republic of Guinea hopes that
concrete measureswill be adopted to prevent Portugal from
once again flouting the provisons of the Charter by
violating the independence and territorial integrity of
Guinea and to ensure that Portugal shall not again
undertake a complex, hostile operation against Guinea and
shall no longer make use of military means and open
aggression against Guinea from a territory under Portugal’s
control.
79. If the statements we have made to the Special Mission
and reiterated before the Council are challenged, it is up to
the Security Council-which is charged with the maintenance of peace and security throughout the world-to carry
out an inquiry in Guinea (Bissau) and to bring pressureto
bear by all possible means on Portugal in order that
Portugal shall commit itself not to use a territory controlled
by it for the preparation and the carrying out of a new
aggression against the Republic of Guinea such as the one
perpetrated on 22 November 1970.

thank you, personally, as well as my eminent colleagues and
friends the representatives of Argentina, Burundi, Sierra
Leone and the Soviet Union, for the congratulations and
kind words addressed to me on the occasion of my
resumption of my duties.
86. As regards the congratulations on the work of the
Special Mission which was made up of the Deputy
Permanent Representative of Argentina and myself, it goes
without saying that both of us share whatever successmay
have been achieved.
87. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): There
are no more names on the speakers’ list. With the adoption
of the consensuswhich I had the honour to read out at the
beginning of the meeting, and having heard the statements
of various delegations, including the statement of the
representative of the Republic of Guinea, the Council has
completed its consideration of the second item on its
agenda.
Questionconcerningthe situation in SouthernRhodesia:
(a) Letter dated 24 November 1971 from the Permanent
Representativeof Great Britain and Northern IreIand
to the United Nationsaddressedto the Presidentof the
Security Council (S/10396);
(b) Fourth report of the Committee establishedin pursuance of Security Council resolution 253 (1968)
(S/10229 andAdd.1 and 2)”

80. It is out of our desire to mdntain peace throughout
the world that we make this appeal to the members of the
Security Council, the organ of the United Nations entrusted
with the preservation of peace and the maintenance of the
security of all States, small or large.
81. In its latest undertakings Portuguese colonialism has
continued to exercise its policy of hate against the
population of Guinea (Bissau). In its barbaric repression of
the legitimate struggle of the popular masses of Guinea
(Bissau), the Portuguese colonialist army has perpetrated
the worst of tortures against the peopIe of that country.

88. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): The
representatives of the United Republic of Tanzania and
Kenya have addressed letters (S/l0399 and S/10400] to
me requesting that they be allowed to participate, without
the right to vote, in the Council’s debate on the present
item. If there is no objection, I shall invite the representatives of those two countries to take the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber in order to
participate in the debate without the right to vote.

82. The Secretary-General of PAIGC has just sent two
persons to the United Nations, here in New York, who have
suffered criminal acts at the hands of the Portuguese
colonialists. One of them-Sambe Fono, 25 years of
age-after having his throat slit and being left for dead,
suffered the loss of both ears,which the Portuguese cut off
as trophies for their Bissau trophy museum. The secand-Sambe Zambale, 24 years of age-bears horrible scars
from burns caused by Portuguese napalm. Those two
victims, whom everyone will be able to see, will soon be
meeting with the international press here in New York.

At the invitation of the President,Mr. S.A. Salim(-D&d
Republic of Tanzania) took the place reservedfor him at
the sideof the Council chamber.
89. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Frerzch): Be-

fore calling on the first speaker I should like to inform
members of the Council that, as will be recalled, at the
1602nd meeting the representative of the Soviet Union,
supported by the delegation of Somalia, proposed that we
invite Mr. Nkomo of ZAPU and Mr. Sithole of ZANU to
addressthe Council in regard to the question on the agenda.
At the same meeting I indicated that I would undertake the
customary negotiations in that connexlon and would
inform members of the Council of the results. I have carried
out consultations on the subject, but have not been able to
complete them. Some delegations have indicated that they
agree, while other delegations are not yet able to give a fins1
reply. The consultations will therefore continue, and
Council members will, of course, be informed of the results.

83. In conclusion, I would stress the philosophy of the
Guinean Government by quoting Comrade Ahmed SBkou
Tour& Chief of State and supreme leader of the Guinean
revolution:
“Any valid historical enterprise, to be solid and durable,
must of necessity be based upon the will and just
aspirations of the people. The fact that the Guinean
people is at the centre of all the essential activities of our
regime convinces us that the regime will remain invulnerable, despite the permanent plot directed against it by
imperialism and its vile instruments”.
84. The PRESIDENT (interpretation
frarn French): I
thank the representative of the Republic of Guinea for the
kind words he addressedto me.

* Subsequently issued as Official Records of the SeCtMy C’o~/cil~
Twenty-sixth Year, Special Supplement Nos. 2 and Corrigetldl~l~l
and 2.4.

8

90.

I now invite the representative of the United Republic

National Assembly on Tuesday, 14 December 1965, my
President, Mwalimu Nyerere, inter dia made the following
pertinent remarks on Britain’s responsibilities:

of Tanzania to take a place at the Council table and to

make his statement,
91. Mr. SALIM (United Republic of Tanzania): Mr. President, in thanking you and the members of the Council for
giving my delegation an opportunity to address you on this
important question, allow me very briefly to express our
satisfaction at seeing you preside over the Security CounciPs deliberations as it begins consideration of a matter so
vital to the African continent. Your credentials as a friend
and supporter of those of our brethren fighting against alien
domination for freedom and independence need no further
elaboration; and the role of your country, the Polish
People’s Republic, in support of decolonization is appreciated by us all. We have particularly valued the co-operation between your delegation and ours in the Committee of
decolonization in pursuit of our common objective, namely, the implementation
of the historic Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples.

“Southern Rhodesia is a British colony; its Constitution
is subject to the will of the British Parliament. As an
international entity Southern Rhodesia does not exist.
Internationally, by both law and custom, there exist only
Britain and its colony. The colony of Southern Rhodesia
has been self-governing since 1923; for 43 years, increasing de facto power has been exerted by a Government based in Salisbury.
“But the Constitution under which that Government
operated reserved certain powers to the British Government and Parliament in London. The fact that successive
British Governments did not use their powers to prevent
acts which were contrary to the interests of the African
people does not alter the existence of these ‘reserve
powers’, nor the ultimate responsibility of the British
Government for the actions of the Southern Rhodesian
Government”,

92. The Security Council is dealing with a very grave
matter. Indeed, it would not be exaggerating to state that
the Council and the international community as a whole are
faced with one of their greatest challenges. The HomeSmith Agreement, which was simultaneously presented on
Thursday, 25 November, to the British Parliament by the
British Foreign and Commonwealth Secretary, and to this
Council by Sir Colin Crowe, the British Permanent Representative, is a tragic and shocking culmination of the British
Government’s long record of betrayal of the African
peoples of Zimbabwe. To understand this unmistakable
sell-out of the African interests one must not fail to trace
the ignominious history of inconsistency, inaction and
double-talk
on the part of Her Majesty’s Government
towards the British colony of Southern Rhodesia.

95. Britain allowed the white Rhodesians substantially to
run their own show in 1923 when it gave the colony
self.government. This was the beginning of what was to
prove to be an evolution of systematic betrayal of the
Africans in Southern Rhodesia. It was the British Government that was responsible for the imposition of the
much-hated Central African Federation in 1953, comprising
Southern Rhodesia, the then Nyasaland, now Malawi, ?nd
present-day Zambia, then Northern Rhodesia. When the
efforts to perpetuate white-settler domination in the three
territories finally crumbled in 1963, thanks to the undiminishing struggle of the African peoples of the so-called
Federation, what did Britain do? It handed over the
effective war machine-the military equipment, the airplanes, the administration of the land forces and the air
force-to the white Rhodesians. And members of this
Council will remember that, following the dissolution of
the Federation, the United Kingdom effectively blocked
the proposal by the delegation of Ghana in the Security
Council [1069th meeting] which, if adopted, would have
prevented the Southern Rhodesian Government from taking over the air force built by the defunct Central African
Federation. Thus, Britain conveniently transferred this
important instrument of power to the Southern Rhodesian
racists. Yet we now hear proclamations of how limited
British capability has been to act in the Rhodesian problem.

93. It is therefore small wonder that we listened with great
attention to the statement made by the representative of
the United Kingdom explaining the deal made by Sir Alec
with Ian Smith. If we lamented the scenario of the Security
Council being specially convened to hear the United
Kingdom representative more or less repeat what his
Foreign Secretary was informing the British Parliament of,
we nevertheless paid undivided attention, since the issue
involved is a matter of the gravest concern to my
Government. We have also studied the document circulated
containing the so-called proposals for settlement.3

96. The history of the British Government’s appeasement
of the white settlers is ingloriously long. Even after Prime
Minister Macmillan had made his famous speech in South
Africa on the winds of change sweeping throughout the
continent, the Colonial Office in London was still making
more concessions to the racists in Salisbury. Thus, while the
Central African Federation was on the verge of its
inevitable collapse, the white settlers secured from the
British the 1961 Constitution, which essentially provided
for the entrenchment of minority rule in Southern Rhodesia while giving a superficial impression of taking into
account some African interests. For the provisions of the
1961 Constitution were not democratic and provided no
protection to the constitutional rights of the African

94. In carefully examining the explanation of events given
by the representative of the United Kingdom leading to the
present situation, one is struck by one outstanding feature:
the United Kingdom’s interpretation of these events is at
best an apologia for British inaction and, at worst, a clumsy
justification for its treachery, double standards and perhaps
pre-planned impotence. Let us not confuse the issue. It is
an exercise in sheer futility to attempt to exonerate the
British Government from the acts perpetrated by the
minority authorities in Salisbury. Addressing the Tanzanian
3 See Official Records of the Security Council, Twenty-sixth
Year, Supplemenr for October, November and December 1971,
document s/10405.

9

people. But the saga of unfailing accommodation to the
demands of the 250,000 whites in Southern Rhodesia in
contrast to callous indifference to the legitimate rights and
aspirations of the 5 million blacks highlights the whole
conduct of British irresponsibility in Zimbabwe.

particularly unique in the Southern Rhodesian tragedy is
that here we have independence being given to a minority,
that is to say, to the 250,000 whites, to lord it over the
majority, namely the 5 million blacks. The feelings of
affinity and solidarity with their kith and kin have
prevented the British authorities from taking the usual
measures for leading one of the British colonies towards
democratic independence.

97. Britain’s application of double standards, its alarming
inconsistencies, became more apparent with the events
leading to and following the unilateral declaration of
independence.

102. Much has already been said about the British failure
to quell the rebellion and to restore legality under
conditions which would lead the people of Rhodesia to
exercise their right to self-determination and independence
based on majority rule through universal adult franchise.
The African States and indeed the great majority of the
Members of this Organization have repeatedly called on the
British Government to use force. This course of action was
consistently refused, In this connexion we again note that
in his address to the Security Council the British chief
delegate made use of the occasion to rationalize his
Government’s inaction by the rhetorical assertion that the
application of force was neither feasible nor desirable.

98. Thus, even when Mr. Smith was making noisy rumblings demanding independence and threatening illegal
action, Her Majesty’s Government’s reaction wasfar from
meeting the requirements of the situation. Of course,there
was plenty of talk. For example, on 27 October 1964, the
then British Prime Minister stated quite appropriately that a
unilateral “declaration of independence would be an open
act of defiance and rebellion, and it would be treasonable
to take steps to give effect to it”. Yet, as history proved,
these were mere words. For even when the British Prime
Minister had made such a valid declaration, on a number of
occasions British Ministers, referring to the prospect of a
unilateral declaration of independence, timidly declared,
“We shall not use force to impose a constitutional solution”
to the Rhodesian situation, If Ian Smith and his fellow
racists needed any green light to go ahead with their
complete usurpation of power, this was certainly it; for the
attitude of the British authorities was like telling a
would-be murderer: “Murder is a serious crime, but even if
you should commit one, no effective punitive action is
contemplated against you”.

103. We are indeed overwhelmed by such assertions. Is it
really credible that Great Britain would not be in a position
to bring back law and order in its colony simply becausea
few white settlers were earlier armed, trained and equipped
by the British themselves? That is all right as a fairy tale.
We do not wish here to mention examples of the British
Government having had to use sheer force in more
complicated and unwarranted situations. But we must ask:
“Why this special treatment of the Southern Rhodesian
colony? ” Lectures on British abhorrence of violence
notwithstanding, British colonial history is by no means
peaceful. If the British authorities have forgotten Kenya
and Aden, to mention two examples, the Afro-Asian world
has not. We also have the fresh memory of little Anguilla to
remind us that as recently as 1969 the British Government,
using paratroopers and military police, invaded a little
Caribbean island.

99. I do not really need to repeat here what happened
after the unilateral declaration of independence. We are all
familiar with the assurancesgiven by the British Prime
Minister that the rebellion would be crushed within weeks.
And when weeks became months and months became
years, we know of the unprecedented and, to saythe least,
despicable exercisesin attempting to woo the rebels. Gone
were the legal principles; forgotten were the descriptions so
adequately applied to Mr. Smith and his henchmen as
“rebels” and “traitors” to the British Crown, The world
witnessed the incredible spectacle of a British Prime
Minister negotiating with a traitorous element from Her
Majesty’s own colony. We had the Niger and the Fearless
talks; we had a series of British Ministers visiting Salisbury
for the same purpose, namely, to find a formula which,
though a sell-out in essence, would at least retain a
semblance of honour and respectability. This task has now
been attempted by the Conservative Government through
Sir Alec Douglas-Home.

104. Much ado is also made of the fact that Southern
Rhodesia was an internally self-governing Territory. Yet
self-government did not prevent the action of the Conservative Government of Sir Winston Churchill suspending the
Constitution of then British Guyana on October 1953 and
expelling the Government then in office. That, incidentally,
was only six months after a popularly elected Government
was voted into power and swore allegiance to the British
Crown, in April 1953.
105. Yet it is not just the refusal of the United Kingdom
to bring down the rebellion by force that has made the
British authorities a target for constant condemnation. lt is
‘the whole negative attitude of the British Government
towards meeting its responsibilities and obligations that has
infuriated international public opinion and has parCicnlarlY
disturbed African States. For while pretending that rs*
course to force is anathema to British tradition, the United
Kingdom has not taken serious alternative measures to
achieve the objective of bringing down Ian Smith. In his
address on 25 November Sir Colin Crowe rightly stated that
sanctions have not been without their effect, as was
recognized when the sanctions Committee produced its last

100. That then, very briefly, is the summary of events
leading to the present situation in which the British
Government has decided on legalizing the usurpation of
power by the Smith regime in Southern Rhodesia,
101. It is therefore a cruel joke for the delegation of the
United Kingdom to try to rationalize the sell-out by such
irrelevant escapism as: “Enough is known of the history of
British decolonization to show that we are here dealing
with an exceptional and not a typical case” [1602nd
meeting, para. 19/. The only thing, we submit, which is
10

report, They have severely hampered the expansion of the
Rhodesian economy and, as Mr. Smith has himself admitted, they have compelled Rhodesia to buy at a premium
and sell at a discount.

Council when he presented the proposals. But the world,
and indeed this Council, is entitled to ask what is so
honourable about these proposals. What has honour to do
with an outright sell-out? What is so fair in this unabashed
betrayal of the Africans of Zimbabwe by the British
conservative authorities and their capitulation to the forces
of oppression and racial bigotry? To the British Foreign
and Commonwealth Secretary, fairness and honour are
apparently measured by how satisfied his Rhodesian racist
friends are. For definitely there is nothing honourable or
fair in the proposals in so far as the future and interests of
the 5 million. Africans of Zimbabwe are concerned, while
Mr. Smith was reported to bubble over with joy at the
outcome of the talks. Smith is indeed a happy man. And
from the short-term point of view he has every reason to
rejoice, for, after all, he has recruited to his cause the
support of the United Kingdom Government.

106, Admittedly, the sanctions have not bitten so deep,
but we all know that the fault lies not in the sanctions but
in violations of them. Yet when the General Assembly
repeatedly demanded that the principal sanction-bustersSouth Africa and Portugal-must adhere to the decision of
the Council or face the consequences it has alwaysbeen the
British Government that has been in the forefront in
defence of those sanction-busters. Furthermore, we all
recall how, subsequent to the assumption of so-called
republican status by the Smith rdgime on 2 March 1970,
the British Government frustrated the efforts of the
Security Council to adopt more meaningful mandatory
sanctions against Southern Rhodesia. Instead of co-operating, as an administering Power should were it genuinely
interested in securing a return to normalcy in its own
colony, the United Kingdom, finding that the majority of
the members of the Security Council would adopt appropriate measures against the tyrants in Salisbury, exercised
its veto. And to our regret it was joined in that negativism
by the United States. It is therefore the sincerity and
credibility of the United Kingdom Government that have
been constantly questioned.

109. The British Foreign Secretary will definitely have a
special place in the history of Anglo-African relations. He
will be remembered by present and future generations as a
distinguished British leader who unscrupulously stuck to his
principles and negotiated an ugly deal behind the backs of
the African populations, and he will be remembered as a
man who perhaps more than anyone in post Second World
War British history left no stone unturned to alienate .>
African understanding for and friendship with Britain.

107. May I at this juncture point out that it is the height

110. The Africans in Zimbabwe through their liberation
movement have denounced in advance any settlement
outside the principle of No Independence Before Majority
Rule (NIBMAR). The African States have clearly supported
this legitimate position of our suffering African brethren in
Zimbabwe and the international community has equally
endorsed, without equivocation, the principle of NIBMAR
as the indispensable element for any settIement on South;
ern Rhodesia. Indeed it is significant to recall here that as
recently as 22 November of this year the General Assembly
in its resolution 2769 (XXVI), expressing the great concern
of the overwhelming majority of its Members at the talks
which were then under way between the British Foreign
Secretary and the Smith regime, reaffirmed “that there
should be no independence before majority rule in Southern Rhodesia”. The voting on this resolution was overwhelming: 102 States voted for, while only 3 voted against.
The 3 were Portugal, South Africa and the United Kingdom. But in spite of this preponderant international
concern, the British authorities went ahead and made a deal
outside the principle of NIBMAR.

of absurdity, typical of the approach maintained by Britain

in its mishandling of the Southern Rhodesian problem, for
the British representative to make a submission quoting the
reported recent statement of Sir Alec Douglas-Home in the
British Parliament that “the only reason we are in this
business at all is that we want to help the Africans towards
a better future than they are otherwise likely to have”
fibid., para. 521. The world knows better than to accept
such a dramatic oversimplification of the issue. No, sir: the
reason the United Kingdom is in this business is that it is
responsibIe for the whole mess. It was the British Govemment which gradually but surely sanctioned the evolution
of the minority regime to its present position. It is the
3ritish Government which has callously disregarded the
rights of the African people of Zimbabwe. It is Her
Majesty’s Government which bears the primary responsibility for the plight of the Africans in that unhappy land. It
is the British Government which has jealously protected the
interests, privileges and even the wild dreams of the racist
minority in Southern Rhodesia. It is this very Government
which without a semblance of shame capitulated to the
forces of racism and fascism in Southern Rhodesia and
thereby charted a collision course against the African
people of Zimbabwe. The masses of Zimbabwe ahd,the
liberation movement cannot, certainly, be expected to
provide the chorus while Lord Home and the racist Smith
jointly sing a song of joy over the deal reached behind the
backs of the Africans. Indeed, it is that Government which
has embarked on a confrontation with free Africa.

111. In insisting on the principle of no independence
before majority rule, the Zimbabweans, Africa and the
international community were stressing an imperative prerequisite to ensure democratic independence in Southern
Rhodesia. There was and is also the obvious concern that
once independence is accorded to a minority regime it is
sheer fantasy to anticipate that rkgime’s voluntary relinquishing of power to the black majority. If there wasany
doubt as to the validity of this concern, one has to recall
simply the utterances of Mr. Smith following the announcement of the proposals for a settlement. The leader of the
racist clique in Salisbury is reported to have assured the
white community not to worry, for Southern Rhodesia will
continue to be ruled under civilized hands. And this

108, The agreement that Ambassador Malik of the USSR
has rightly called a racist-imperialist deal has been described

by its principal

architect, Sir Alec Douglas-Home, as fair

and honourable. Such sentiments of satisfaction were
echoed by the United Kingdom representative in the

11

Council certainly needs no elaboration of Mr. Smith’s
concept of civilization. Incidentally, perhaps, Sir Alec has
forgotten the gloating remark made by Ian Smith some
time ago to the effect that for as long as he, Smith, lived
there would be no majority rule. What Mr. Smith can now
satisfactorily add is that for as long as he lives there will be
no parity of representation either.
112. However, the representative of the United Kingdom
invited the Council to judge his Government’s recent
agreement with the leader of the rebel settlers on the basis
of the so-called “five principles” which the present British
Government committed themselves to uphold.
113. It is clear that the so-called new settlement contains
nothing new. It is old cliches dressed in complex terms. The
only new element is the drama which we have witnessed
here in New York, repeated in London as well as in
Salisbury, on 25 November-incidentally,
hardly a fortnight
after the sixth anniversary of UDI. This Council is not being
called upon to deliberate on a set of proposals for a
settlement but to deliberate on a sell-out. It is indeed
ironical that in the document which the British delegation
circulated to members of the Security Council we read
towards its conclusion: “The above proposals are acceptable to the British and Rhodesian Governments”. The
Security Council cannot fail to see the dangerous conse.
quences, the threat to peace and security in the African
continent by the creation and legalization of another
apartheid State inherent in what Mr. Smith and Home have
accepted. The administering Power must not be allowed to
abdicate its responsibilities and thereby render the international community liable to future regrets. We in Tanzania
never accepted that any such settlement with the rebels
should be based on the so-called “five principles”; nor did
Africa or the rest of the international community. But,
since the British Ambassador invites us to judge the
agreement on that basis, let us assess how well his
Government has fulfilled its promises.
114. The first commitment was that the principle of
unimpeded progress to majority rule should be maintained
and guaranteed. How does the settlement ensure this? It is
provided for in a labyrinth of figures and hypotheses. The
starting point is the present lower legislative chamber, the
African composition of which is to be gradually transformed from the present minority of slightly less than a
third, into a majority. No doubt this complexity was for a
very good reason, However, we may try to thread our way
through the arithmetic labyrinth and reach certain clear
conclusions.

reaches 5,280, which is 6 per cent of the present registered
European voters. Of course, it should be presumed that as
the levels of African income and education rise, so will
those of the Europeans, perhaps in geometric proportion.
Hence, it will probably be not 5,280, but double that figure
that the African “higher roll” voters must reach before the
African membership in the House of the Assembly gets its
first increase. And how big will be that increase when it is
eventually given? Two seats. The first step to majority rule
will therefore result in an increase in the size and
composition of the membership from 50 Europeans and 16
Africans to 18 of the latter.
116. We then look at the next step. This will be taken
when there is an additional 6 per cent increasein the
number of African qualified voters on the “higher roll”,
However, in this case,the additional two African members
in the Houseof Assembly will be “indirectly electedunder
the existing system”. And what is the existing systemof
indirect elections?-through electoralcolleges,consistingof
chiefs, headmen, and district councillors within the rurai
area who after all are controlled by the settlers, It is
therefore obvious that it would be a better descriptionto
describethe proposednext changein the membershipand
composition of the Houseof Assembly asa stepbackward
rather than forward.
117. The Council was informed that the compositionof
the Houseof Assembly would changefrom the presentbase
line of 50 whites and 16 Africans to a parity of 50 whites
and 50 Africans. The Senate will not change.That is not
too crucial, for the House of Assembly is the most
important legislative body in the country. The question
arises:when will that parity be reached?Will it be reached
in accordancewith an agreedtime-table of, say, 10,20,30
or 100 years? Or will it be reachedat the deliberatespeed
and pleasure of Ian Smith and his white minority fcl.
lowers? The truth of the matter is that the stepto parity
will be a long and arduous one. That is, assuming
that
Smith and his successorsallow sucha step to be takenat
all.
118. Parity of Africans with Europeansin the Houseof
Assemblyis supposedto be achievedwhen therehavebeen
17 progressive6 per cent increasesin African incomeand
education. This would representa 102 per cent requisite
increase,but, for reasonswhich I have set out previously,
the requisite increasewill probably be about 10 timesthat
amount. Assuming, nevertheless, that that increaseis
achieved, it should be borne in mind that the resultant
parity will consist of 50 directly elected Europeans,
8 elected by African “lower roll” voters, 18 directly elected
by African “higher roll” voters and 24 Africans indirectly
elected. One may surmisewithout the slightestfear cf
contradiction that the 50 Europeanswill retain control cf
the House of Assembly, sincethe 24 indirectly appointed
Africans will be individuals who are approvedby the racist
minority regime.

115. The first step towards the goal of majority rule will
be taken when the number of African voters on the new
“higher roll” to be created equals 6 per cent of the
European voters on the roll. Now this time will most
probably not be too soon because of the qualifications for
the “higher roll”. These qualifications will be: income of
$2,700 a year or property worth $5,400-or, if they are
secondary school graduates, $1,800 in income or $3,600 in
property. We all know the present level of African income
in Zimbabwe and the state of educational facilities, so it
requires no great stretch of the imagination to see how long
it will be before the number of qualified African voters

119. However, what is the next stage?Will there thenbe
another progressive change of African membershipand
composition of the House of Assembly if there is a
correspondingincreasein the levels of African incomeand
education? Not so. There must be held at suchtime sa
12

inquiry by an “independent commission”, to determine
whether the creation of seats is acceptable to the Rhodesian
People and, if not, what alternative arrangements would
command support. It is to be noted that the commission
will not determine whether the 5 million Africans want
additional seats. A separate referendum will be held among
the African voters to determine the future of the 24
indirectly elected African seats. What the commission will
determine is whether “the Rhodesian people”-that is to
say, the Europeans as well as the Africans-agree to have
additional seats in the House of Assembly. This is not
considered sufficiently democratic. There is, apparently, a
further requirement that the legislature should approve the
proposed increase by a two-thirds
majority vote. That,
surely, gives the whites an effective veto.

“affording protection to the fundamentalrights and freedomsof the individual and conferringa right of access
to
the High Court for the purposeof obtainingredresson any
Personwho allegesthat its provisionshave been contravenedin relation to him”. The new Constitution, we are
told further, will alsocontain “specially entrenchedprovisions”,which will not be susceptible
to amendmentuntil
after the creationof the first two directly electedAfrican
%&her roll” seatsor until three years have elapsed,
whichever is the sooner, The “especially entrenched”
provisions will include certain key provisions of the
Electoral Act. Naturally, no onehere could be sonaive as
not to expect that the lapseof three years will be the
sooner.At ‘suchtime the speciallyentrenchedclausesmay
be amendedwith the approvalof a majority of the African
representativesin the House of Assembly-the so-called
“blocking mechanism”.

120. Where, then, is the unimpeded progress to majority
rule promised by the present British leaders? May not the
required 17 increases of levels of African income and
education be described as hurdles? May not the prescribed
inquiry as to whether the European voters agree to the
post-parity
creation of 10 common-roll seats be called an
impediment?
And what term can one use to describe the
requirement
of a majority approval in a Parliament of
which Europeans constitute half of the membership except
“a white veto”?

125. It is to be noted that considerableemphasis
is being
laid on the possibilitiesof seekingredressfrom the High
Court of the Territory. None,havingwitnessedthe acquiescenceof the Europeanjudiciary to the rebel regimeof Ian
Smith during the years sincethe unilateral declarationof
independence,will have any confidencein the ability of
such a High Court to defend the fundamentalrights and
freedomsof the Africans.

121, It is clear that this complex franchise and electoral
arrangement can never bring about unimpeded progress
towards majority rule, My Government believes that the
whole agreement is objectionable and calls into question
the very humanity of our 5 million African brothers of
Zimbabwe.
It is, above all, contrary to the very tenets of
the system of elections which the British authorities claim
to champion.
122. The right to vote cannot be qualified in terms of
property or education. The history of England,which now
seeks to impose this system on the people of Zimbabwe,
has recorded a systematic struggleon the part of the British
masses against the confinement of the franchise to the
propertied class,Britain prides itself in suchlofty termsas
universal franchise. Not all British voters have a four-year
secondary education, nor property of any description.The
representative of the United Kingdom knows full well that
any citizen of a country should have a right to vote. The
qualification has never been property or education, but
whether a citizen hasmatured at the ageof 18 or 21.

126, But the greatestdefect behind even those’clearly
unsatisfactoryprovisionsis that their implementationrelies
mainly on the reliability and dependability of Ian Smith
andhis collaborators.There is no guaranteethat all or any
of those electoralprovisionsand the Bill of Bights will be
followed once the British Governmenthasconferredlegal
independenceon Rhodesia.As AmbassadorFarah, the
representativeof Somalia,pertinently askedthe Security
Council on 25 November,“Who is goingto guaranteethose
guarantees?
” [1602nd meetingpara 141.1
127. Whena country becomesindependentit canthen do
whatever it likes with the independenceconstitution.
Countries have changedtheir constitution severaltimes.
The right to amend or abrogatea constitution is the
sovereignright of a nation and the affairs of a nation are
within the exclusivejurisdiction of that nation. That, after
all, is what independence
is all about. That isthe conceptof
sovereignty, as understoodby all of us-not excluding, I
believe,the Britishdelegation.

128. That bringsme to the third of’the five principles:
that there would haveto be immediateimprovementin the
I23, The British Government, in acceptingthat arrange- political statusof the African population. Such improvemerit, is seriously compromisingthe principleswhich time
ment, accordingto the permanentrepresentativeof the
and again England claims to uphold, In this regardthe only
United Kingdom,is to be found in the proposedextension
way to give expression to unimpeded progresstowards in the franchisequalificationsfor the African lower roll.
This proposedextensionmay result in a larger numberof
majority rule for the people of Zimbabwe is to ensurefor
its 5,s million Rhodesiansone man one vote. Any clumsy Africans being permitted to vote for African Membersof
manoeuvre such as the one Lord Home and Smith have Parliament. But since it is not proposed in the new
agreed upon will clearly impede and prevent the application Constitution to make any increasein the number of
Membersof Parliamentelected on the African lower roll,
of that so-called principle.
how canthis be regardedby anyone asan improvementin
124. I turn now very briefly to the secondof the five
the political statusof the African population, immediateor
principles, which was that there would be guarantees otherwise?
against retrogressive amendment of the Constitution. Are
129. I now tum to the fourth principle: that therewould
there any such guarantees? They will, we are told, be
have
to be progresstowards endingracial discrimination.
found in a new and strengthened Declaration of Bights
13

How is such progress to be ensured? By the “new and
strengthened Declaration of Bights which will be enforceable in the Courts”, we are told. I have already shown how
illusory such protection is. Also, we are told, by the setting
up of an independent commission which will be required:
“to consider existing legislation and to make recon-nnendations to the Rhodesian Government on waysof making
progress towards ending racial discrimination. There will
be included in the functions of the commission a special
duty to scrutinize the provisions of the Land Tenure Act
and to consider the possible creation of an independent
and permanent land board to preside over the long-term
resolution of the problem involved” [ibid., pura. 4.5/.
130. Here are a lot of nice words and lofty promises
regarding the ending of racial discrimination, But what does
it all boil down to? A commission whose recommendations
the rebel regime is not even bound to carry out. The phrase
“except where there are considerations which any Government would regard as overriding” [ibid.] gives the rebel
leaders a loophole, of which men as unscrupulous as they
have shown themselves to be will not hesitate to take
advantage.
131. Are we seriously being asked to believe that men
who, when they had the unremitting focus of world
opinion directed on them, blinked not at steadily imposing
upon the African majority a series of measures increasingly
undistinguishable from the ignoble system of apartheid will
not, once that world scrutiny is diverted, hide behind the
respectable facade of “interference in domestic affairs” in
passing unmistakably and unashamedly into a Full apartheid
system?

acceptance of the proposals is a sine qua non of the whole
exercise which cannot begin until this is ascertained”
[ibid., para. 521.

134. But if that assertion of the British Government is to
have any credible results, then certain conditions have to be
fulfilled in Rhodesia before a real test of opinion can be
held. First the rebellion has to end and a British or
international administration effectively established, That
administration must control the army, the police and the
security machine.
135. Conditions permitting freedom of association and
expression are a “must” if the test of acceptability is not to
be a mere facade. The detained leaders, including Joshua
Nkomo and Ndabamingi Sithole, must be liberated and
allowed to lead their people. In this connexion my
delegation wishesto endorse fully the proposal made by the
representative of the Soviet Union to the effect that those
two leaders should be invited to take part in the debatein
the Security Council on this vital question. The prescribed
political organizations, the Zimbabwe African People’s
Union and the Zimbabwe African National Union, must be
allowed to operate freeIy. The state of emergency must be
lifted and all Rhodesians, regardless of the pigment of their
skin, race, or creed, and free from intimidation and
persecution, should be in a position to pronounce themselves on this vital question affecting their future and their
destiny.
136. In this connexion, in common with the international
community we were shocked to note that the legitimate
liberation of all political detainees has been made condi.
tional upon the conclusion of the so-called test of accept.
ability. Indeed the proposals have never spoken of a total
release but of a review. The least that Sir Alec DouglasHome could have achieved, we submit, was the uncondi.
tional and immediate release of all men and women who
have been illegally detained through repressive legislation.

132. The very least one would have expected wasa gesture
of good intention, a commitment to the repeal of the
notorious Land Tenure Act, criticized by the churches of
every denomination, But all we have included in the
agreement is that the commission will scrutinize the
provisons of the Land Tenure Act; that the rebel regime
will make additional land available to Africans as the need
arises; and a lot of fanfare that the Rhodesian minority
regime will not for the time being proceed with its plan to
evict Africans from Epworth and Cheishawasha. But the
proposals are completely silent on the present unsatisfactory discriminatory and unjust state of affairs where the
white settlers, who are outnumbered by the black population by 20 to 1, control 50 per cent of the land, and most
of the best land at that. What about the thousands of
Africans who have been evicted from their lands following
the promulgation of this apartheid legislation? The proposals are silent on this. What about the case of Chief
Nangwena and his tribe who have been living in cavessince
their expulsion from their land? Again silence.

137. Such are the proposals which the United Kingdom
has submitted for the information of the Security Council,
And, lest we forget, they are termed honourable and fair+
Not only that, the British permanent representative, in his
enthusiasm to demonstrate how honourable these proposals
are, tried to rationalize that somehow they conform with
paragraph 2 of Security Council resolution 288 (1970).
This particular paragraph, as the representative of the
United Kingdom correctly pointed out, calls upon Britain
as the administering Power to take effective measures tc
end the rebellion in Southern Rhodesia “and enable the
people to exercise their right to self-determination, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and h
conformity with the objectives of General Assembly rcsclution 15 14 (XV) of 14 December 1960”. Anyone who
speaks of the Smith-Home proposals, which not only
deprive the African majority of their inalienable r&hts but
also, to the best of our understanding, entrench parmanently minority rule in Southern Rhodesia, and then refers
either to the Charter provisions or to the historic Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples for justification, can only be compared with a
person who, having committed one of the most ccademnable sins, resorts to scripts from the Bible cr the
Koran to justify his actions.

133. Finally, let us turn to the fifth principle, that the
basis proposed for independence should be acceptable to
the people of Rhodesia as a whole. The British permanent
representative in a remarkable concluding sentence said:
“Their participation”-that
is, the participation of the
people of Rhodesia-“in every respect is essential to the
successof the proposals. It therefore follows that their
14

138. To sum up, the so-called settlement is a settlement in
favour of white oppression and domination in Southern
Rhodesia. The proposals are in flagrant negation of the
principles of freedom, human equality, justice and democracy. They suit perfectly the interests of the privileged
minority.
139, Britain is about to complete the ugly process it
initiated 48 years ago, when it handed self-government to
the white settlers of Southern Rhodesia. That Britain
should now not only openly sanction racism but indeed
connive at the creation of another apartheid State in the
heart of Africa demonstrates the indignities and prejudices
which an African has to fight against. Yet it would be an
inexcusable error to underestimate the determination of the
African people of Zimbabwe to fight for their rights, to
fight for their freedom and to fight for their humanity and
to liberate themselves and their land from the shackles of
the tyrannical white minority oppression.
140, No doubt the struggle will be a difficult one; but the
road to freedom and human dignity has never been an easy
one. In this perilous path confronting the combatants of
Zimbabwe, the one thing they do not need is hypocritical
expressions of sympathy for their plight. For the British
Government to give an impression that it is concerned at
the alternative facing a Zimbabwean-“unless it is to
sacrifice his life in vloIent protest”-is tantamount to
shedding crocodile tears. In the light of the whole sad
history of British mishandling of the Rhodesian situation,
the Zimbabweans are at least entitled to request that they
not be subjected to paternalistic feelings of concern from
the very authorities who are responsible for the present
sufferings of the masses of the African people,
141. But what of the role of the international community,
and more particularly the Security Council, in this whole
episode? The Council must not only reiterate firmly its
previous decisions on Southern Rhodesia: it must also, and
above all, strive to strengthen the enforcement measures
against the racist regime. That regime, with or without the
support of the British Government, must continue to be
isolated and all pressure must be brought to bear on it until
the legitimate interests of the African people are fully
realized and this racial tyranny, expressions and repressions
are finally eradicated. The Council must also resolve to call
for further assistance to the liberation movement in
Zimbabwe until its objective which is our common goalfreedom and independence in full justice-has been realized.

to ask a number of other questions, in the hope of eliciting
as much information as possible so as to enable us to have a
full idea of what the terms of settlement are all about.
144. First, is it the intention of the United Kingdom
Government to make available or publish the record of the
representations made by African political leaders to Sir
Alec Douglas-Home while he was in Southern Rhodesia? It
has come to our attention that several of the main political
parties submitted very important memoranda, and in view
of the importance of those memoranda it would certainly
be most pertinent for this Council to have them before it.
145. Second, my delegation would like to have it affirmed
by the representative of the United Kingdom that, despite
all that is said in this Council, it is the firm intention of the
United Kingdom Government to go ahead with the test of
acceptability. If that is the firm intention, then, naturally,
the direction of our debate will have to be charted
accordingly. But in connexion with the so-called test of
acceptability my delegation would like to know what
would be the position of the British Government if the
‘people of Rhodesia rejected the terms. Would it then revert
to its current position-that is, that it will maintain strict
political and economic hostility towards the rebel regime in
Southern Rhodesia, or what?
146. Third, is it the intention of the British Government
to dispatch the commission to conduct the test of
acceptability in the near future and, if so, has it deeided
upon the period which it feels should be allowed in the
Territory before such a test is conducted? In other words, I
am thinking about the preparatory period.
147. I noted from the statement of the representative of
the United Kingdom that he said that such ascertainment
would be “full, free, and fair” and that it would be “under
the direct control of the British Government, not of the
Rhodesians” (ibid., paru. 241. In such conditions, is it the
intention of the United Kingdom Government to arrange
for the removal of the apparatus of the police State that
currently exists in the Territory and which, as we all know,
tyrannizes the African people and deprives them of their
liberty and freedom? Is it the intention of the British
Government to arrange to take control of public order
during this important and crucial period?

make a formal statement of its position on the terms of

148. There is one proposal which my delegation would
like to make. Yesterday we received a copy of the biIl of
rights which is to accompany the terms of settlement. In
view of its importance, my delegation believes that a
document of this nature should be examined by the legal
experts of the United Nations and assessedand evaluated so
that we can see whether the provisions of the bill of rights
compare favourably with what this Organization has been
attempting to promote ever since it came into existence.

settIement announced by the British Government, but in
view of the lateness of the hour it will reserve its right to
make the statement at the next meeting. However, at the
last meeting my delegation did ask the representative of the
United Kingdom a number of questions and it had hoped
that at this meeting he would have been in a position to
provide some of the information requested. In addition to
the questions it asked at that meeting, my delegation wishes

149. Sir Colin CROWE (United Kingdom): Those are very
important and very relevant questions that the representative of Somalia has asked, as indeed were the other
questions that were put previously in the Council. I have
not yet received all the answers from my Government, and
these, of course, are a new set of points, It will be realized
that some of them are not things I can answer “off the

142. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): I
thank the representative of the United Republic of Tanzania for the remarks which he addressed to me personally.
143. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): My delegation had hoped to

I would, therefore, request you and the next President nf
the Council, who, from 1 December, will be our d&hguished colleague, the representative of Sierra Leone, 13
speed up these consultations so that at the next meetingdi
the Council on the subject of Rhodesia a vote may be taben
to determine who is in favour of and who is against al&
proposal, since, if the consultations are dragged out. I&
only solution will be to take a vote.

cuff’. But I do assure you, Mr. President, that it is my
intention to answer the questions that have been put as
fully as possible. I thought of doing so a little later on in
the debate, rather depending upon how many other
questions were asked and so as to try to pull some of them
together. I can assurethe Council that I will do my best to
answerthe questions as soon as possible.
150. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

151. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): EC&C
assure the representative of the Soviet Union that until lhe
end of my term as President-and I am certain that 1 am
speaking also for my successor,the representative of Sier~
Leone who will assume this office on 1 December-the
consultations that were begun after the last meeting of th
Council will be continued until successhas been achie+ei?,

(translated from Russian): At the last meeting devoted to

this matter the Soviet delegation proposed that the leaders
of two African parties in Southern Rhodesia should be
invited to participate in meetings of the Security Council,
in order that we might hear their opinion on the HomeSmith agreement. I was unfortunately absent, but I have
been informed that at the beginning of the meeting you
notified the Council that consultations were continuing. It
seems to me that the consultations are dragging somewhat.

The meeting rose at 1.25 pm

6

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

may be obtained
bookstore
or write

from bookstores
ond distributors
to: United
Nations,
Soles Section,

COMMENT

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

SE PROCURER

H3jlAHHR

COMO

PUBLICACIONES

CONSEGUIR

Nations,

New York

throughout
New York

UNIES

Notions
Unier
sont en vente
dons
Ier Ilbroirias
et Ies ogencec
antier.
Informer-vow
ouprbs
de votre librairie
ou odressez-vow
61
des venter,
New York ou Genive.

KAK llOJlY’4blTb

Las publicociones
en todoc porto
Ventor,
Nuevo

in United

PlJBllCATlONS

United
Notions
publications
the world.
Consult
Your
or Geneva.

Las pubticotionr
der
deporitoires
du monde
Nations
Unies, Section

Litho

NATIONS

OPTAHHSA~HK

DE LAS NACIONES

de lar Nocioner
Unidos
erton
del mundo.
Conrulte
a su librero
York o Gincbro.

Price:

$U.s.

06bEAHHEHHblX

HAlJblA

UNIGAS

en vet-to en librerios
y cosos distribuidoros
o dirljose
or Nociones
Unidas,
Seccidn

1.00 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

de

82190-October

1973-2,05°
