S/2015/700

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
11 September 2015
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on Abyei
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 27 of Security Council
resolution 2230 (2015), in which the Council requested me to continue to inform it
of progress in the implementation of the mandate of the United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) and to bring to its immediate attention any
serious violations of the Agreement between the Government of the Republic of the
Sudan and the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement on temporary arrangements for
the administration and security of the Abyei Area, of 20 June 2011 (S/2011/384,
annex). It provides an update on the situation in Abyei and on the deployment and
operations of UNISFA since the issuance of my previous report, of 16 June 2015
(S/2015/439), as well as on progress made in the implementation of the additional
tasks mandated to UNISFA under Council resolution 2024 (2011) relating to the
Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism.

II. Security situation
2.
The overall security situation in the Abyei Area remained stable but
unpredictable during the reporting period, with no major clashes between the Ngok
Dinka and Misseriya communities. The Government of the Sudan continued to
maintain between 120 and 150 oil police personnel inside the Diffra oil complex in
northern Abyei, in violation of the Agreement of 20 June 2011 and multiple Security
Council resolutions. In addition, the presence of small numbers of suspected armed
personnel of the Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA) and armed Sudanese
police personnel was observed, in contravention of the same Agreement and Council
resolutions. UNISFA continued to implement its multifaceted conflict prevention
and mitigation strategy aimed at preventing intercommunal clashes during the rainy
season.
3.
Reverse migration continued in most parts of the northern and central sectors
of Abyei, with the Awlad Umran, Awlad Kamil and Mizaqina Misseriya subclans
migrating northwards with their livestock and properties. The migr ation has resulted
in a significant reduction in the number of Misseriya migrants present in the Abyei
Area. During the year 2014-2015, approximately 12,980 Misseriya migrants entered
the Abyei Area, and the remaining balance of about 3,300 migrants is mos tly located
in the vicinity of Diffra.

15-15044 (E)

110915

*1515044*

S/2015/700

4.
UNISFA facilitated 36 Joint Security Committee meetings with traditional and
community leaders in the Abyei Area, conducted 3,752 day, night and special
patrols and undertook 599 escorts. Company Operating Bases re mained deployed in
Dokura and Abyei in the central sector; Marial Achak, Athony, Banton, Tajalei and
Agog in the southern sector; and Farouk, Diffra and Todach in the northern sector.
5.
A number of violations of the Agreement of 20 June 2011 occurred during the
reporting period. On 10 June 2015, UNISFA troops on patrol in the general area of
Mabil heard gunfire originating from Dare, about 4 km away. On reaching the area,
the patrol observed a group of armed men, suspected to be SPLA soldiers, who
immediately fled upon sight of the patrol. While conducting a detailed search of the
area, the patrol found one Dinka fatality.
6.
On 10 August, UNISFA received information that four men had bee n killed
and two injured in Shegeg, approximately 70 km east of Diffra. A patrol was
launched to verify the information and, on reaching the Shegeg area, found one
PG-7 anti-tank rocket, two small light vehicles and one damaged motorcycle. The
rocket was taken into the temporary custody of UNISFA in the Diffra Company
Operating Base, and an investigation into the incident is under way.
7.
On 23 August, a UNISFA patrol observed excavation work being carried out
with 20 excavators and four bulldozers in the general area between Kabdud and
Mekines. Thirty-one armed Sudanese police personnel were also present in the area.
On further enquiry, UNISFA was informed that the work was being conducted on
instructions from the Government of the Sudan in order to fortify defences for the
protection of the Diffra oil facility from armed groups. UNISFA requested that
construction be stopped, but it continues, however. Further investigations are in
progress.
8.
The United Nations Mine Action Service continued to clear, surv ey and
dispose of explosive hazards throughout the Abyei Area, facilitating freedom of
movement for United Nations personnel, humanitarian actors and local
communities. The Service carried out non-technical surveys in various communities
within Abyei, resulting in the removal of one anti-tank mine and 12 items of
abandoned unexploded ordnance. During the period under review, one anti -tank
mine, six mortars, two rocket-propelled grenades, one hand grenade, three rockets
(various), one rocket motor, two mortar fuses and 22 rounds of small arms
ammunitions were destroyed. The United Nations Mine Action Service also
completed the construction of a weapons and ammunition management storage
facility in Dokura. It contains weapons storage facilities and weapon-cutting shears.
9.
Despite the total vacuum in law and order institutions, the crime rate in Abyei
has fallen 11 per cent compared to the previous reporting period, with 62 criminal
incidents reported, compared to a monthly average from January to June 2015 o f 74
criminal incidents reported. Major criminal incidents during the reporting period
include theft, assault, fraud and public disturbance.
10. On 9 July, UNISFA was informed by a trader from the Sudan about an attack
on a caravan of traders in the general area of Shegeg, approximately 70 km east of
Diffra. A patrol was launched from Diffra to investigate and, on reaching the scene
of the incident, found two fatalities and three wounded men. The wounded were
given first aid and later transported to Diffra Local Hospital for further treatment.
They stated that they were traders from El Muglad, located 150 km north of the

2/12

15-15044

S/2015/700

Abyei Area, and had been travelling to Mayom, Unity State, South Sudan , to sell
their merchandise. They claimed that on reaching the gener al area of Shegeg, they
were ambushed and attacked by unknown assailants, who robbed them of their
money and merchandise. The Mission is investigating this incident. The identity of
the assailants could not be ascertained.
11. On 22 July, UNISFA observed seven suspected thieves siphoning fuel from a
storage tank in an oilfield in the general area of Baloom. On seeing the UNISFA
patrol, the thieves fled, leaving their motorcycles and other belongings behind.
UNISFA pursued and managed to arrest one suspected thief, who was handed over
to the local community in Diffra together with five motorcycles and four empty
barrels of fuel. On 27 July, 10 intruders were caught by the UNISFA Quick Reaction
Force while trying to enter the UNISFA Force Headquarters compound to commit a
theft. The individuals were handed over to the Community Protection Committee.
12. Currently, 24 UNISFA police personnel are deployed at three team sites in the
towns of Abyei, Agok and Diffra, conducting daily patrols jointly with the military
for security observation and community interaction. The UNISFA police component
continues to train UNISFA military personnel in crowd-control management and in
countering sexual and gender-based violence. A new concept of operations for the
UNISFA police component, which focuses on its support to strengthening the
capacity of the community protection committees in accordance with Security
Council resolution 2205 (2015), has been developed, and an operational manual is
being prepared.
13. During the reporting period, 130 new members of the Community Protection
Committee in Agok, southern sector, were provided with basic training by the
UNISFA police on statement-taking, the role of the community protection
committees in crime prevention, beat and mobile patrols in local communities,
arrest and search of persons, crime scene management, human rights during
detention, station records management and sexual and gender-based violence issues.
The training has been conducted through co-location and on-the-job mentoring in
the areas of criminal investigation and public order management. The members
provided safety and crime prevention awareness campaigns to the population and
managed law and order issues. UNISFA police also trained 36 females in the Abyei
Area on promoting awareness of sexual and gender-based violence, including the
importance of reporting incidents of such violence. Currently, UNISFA is engaging
with Diffra community leaders and the Government of the Sudan on the
establishment and operationalization of the Community Protection Committee.

III. Political developments
14. Following the postponement of the traditional leaders’ dialogue meeting from
the last week of April and then to the second week of May, the meeting was
rescheduled for 20 to 23 June in Addis Ababa. It was again cancelled, however,
owing to differences between South Sudanese officials concerning the participation
of the Ngok Dinka delegation, despite President Salva Kiir having given his
approval for the delegation to attend the meeting. Regardless of the cancellation, the
Misseriya delegation arrived in Addis Ababa to demonstrate its commitment to the
dialogue and await the arrival of the Ngok Dinka delegation. UNISFA and

15-15044

3/12

S/2015/700

participants from the African Union also travelled to Addis Ababa for the planned
meeting.
15. Further to the cancellation of the traditional leaders’ dialogue mee ting, the
Head of the UNISFA Mission visited Juba on 29 and 30 June for meetings with
influential Ngok Dinka political leaders to ascertain the reasons behind the Ngok
Dinka delegation’s failure to attend the Addis Ababa meeting. During the
discussions, some of them argued that the meeting had not been prepared properly,
and that the requisite prior coordination among political leaders in Juba and in
Abyei had not been adequately carried out.
16. An alternative date for the traditional leaders’ dialogue me eting is yet to be
set. However, both the Misseriya and Ngok Dinka communities acknowledge the
importance of the meeting as an opportunity to make progress on peace and
reconciliation. UNISFA will focus its efforts on exploring ways to further expedite
grass-roots-level dialogue at the end of the rainy season in preparation for a larger
reconciliation conference at a future date.
17. Following the cancellation of the traditional leaders’ dialogue meeting, the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union met on 31 July to discuss the
Abyei situation. The Government of the Sudan reaffirmed its commitment to
previously signed agreements and to cooperating with UNISFA and the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism. The representative of the Sudan noted his
country’s satisfaction with the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee as an effective
mechanism, and reiterated the Sudan’s commitment to the dialogue of traditional
leaders. The representative, however, insisted in his remarks that construction work
at Athony airport must not continue.
18. The representative of South Sudan expressed appreciation for the work of
UNISFA, but rejected any discussion on matters concerning the joint administration
of Abyei, claiming that in a summit meeting in November 2014 President Omar
al-Bashir and President Salva Kiir had agreed to abolish the joint administration.
The representative informed the Council that the South Sudanese delegation did not
participate in the planned June traditional leaders’ dialogue meeting because it had
not been coordinated with the Government of South Sudan. He stated that the
investigation report into the killing of the Paramount Chief should be released
before any such meeting, and that there had been ongoing violence in Abyei in May,
and therefore a meeting immediately afterwards in June would have been premature.
He further reaffirmed the right of the people of Abyei to self-determination. He
called on the Peace and Security Council of the African Union to assume its
responsibility with regard to Abyei more seriously, including by taking measures to
expedite agreements on the proposal to determine the final status of Abyei put
forward by the African Union High-level Implementation Panel on 21 September
2013.

IV. Humanitarian situation
19. United Nations agencies, funds and programmes and non-governmental
organizations continued to provide humanitarian and recovery assistance to some
88,000 internally displaced persons and returnees in central and southern areas of
Abyei, including 6,840 people displaced from Unity State in South Sudan.
Meanwhile, the delivery of humanitarian and recovery assistance was extended to

4/12

15-15044

S/2015/700

some 15,000 vulnerable agro-pastoralist Misseriyas and around 35,000 seasonal
migrants in the northern areas of Abyei in the health, water, sanitation and hygiene,
education, nutrition, and food security and livelihoods sectors. Planning for the
delivery of humanitarian assistance to people in need during the rainy season has
been completed, and food rations have been pre-positioned in warehouses. Planning
is under way to move from general food distribution to more recovery-oriented
intervention through conditional support with food for assets projects throughout the
Abyei Area.
20. Owing to the ongoing conflict in South Sudan, more displaced persons are
expected in Abyei. Since early June 2015, around 1,000 co nflict-affected displaced
South Sudanese persons from Unity State used Diffra in the north of Abyei as a
transit point before proceeding to their final destinations in the Sudan. As the influx
of displaced populations continues, the humanitarian community has provided them
with basic food and non-food assistance through a local partner on the ground
during their stay.
21. Internally displaced persons also arrived from Warrap State, fleeing
intercommunal violence. The intercommunal clashes and cattle raids since the
signing of the Reconciliation Agreement two months ago between the Dinka Apuk
and Dinka Aguok have increased tensions in Gogrial County of Warrap State in
South Sudan, triggering ongoing population movements. As a result of the clashes,
approximately 1,200 displaced persons have arrived in Abyei with more
displacements anticipated in the coming weeks. Although the population comprises
members of both the Aguok and Apuk clans, the displaced people have assured
authorities they intend to live together in peace. Urgent needs of the displaced
persons include temporary shelters, emergency household supplies, mosquito nets,
water, food and health services. Humanitarian actors on the ground are currently
providing assistance to the displaced from their co ntingency stocks in Abyei.
22. Efforts to support livelihoods continued alongside the provision of food aid.
Key activities included vocational training and the provision of agricultural inputs
and equipment. During the reporting period, a total of 290 people were trained in
skills such as best agricultural practices, food processing, carpentry, masonry and
tailoring. The graduates have started businesses within Abyei and there are at least
eight new stalls in the Abyei town market operating successfully. M eanwhile, at
least 7,200 households received agricultural inputs, including hand tools and an
early maturity variety of seeds.
23. In the health and nutrition sectors, 19 health facilities, including two hospitals,
continued to provide basic health and nutrition support services throughout the
Abyei Area. The Agok hospital received approximately 900 cartons of medicine,
and drugs are being pre-positioned in Mayon Ngok, Awal, Rumamier and Mijak
public health clinics. Health personnel are also running variou s health education
classes in the southern part of Abyei in an attempt to prevent the current outbreak of
cholera in Juba from gaining a foothold in Abyei.
24. In the south of Abyei, 340 vulnerable families, particularly widows, disabled
and elderly persons, received kits of non-food items. In the meantime, five
boreholes were rehabilitated, and hand-washing facilities were installed in 16 childfriendly spaces and four primary schools. Funding shortfalls, floods caused by
heavy rains, and delays in the issuance of security, route and travel clearances by

15-15044

5/12

S/2015/700

the Government of the Sudan remain key operational challenges to the delivery of
humanitarian assistance in northern Abyei.
25. Activities to ensure the protection of the most vulnerable from violence,
exploitation and other abuses also continued throughout the Area. The United
Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and a local partner maintained 36 child -friendly
spaces, 22 community-based child protection networks, 26 community protection
networks and a community policing mechanism; and trained 40 community
caseworkers and 60 child-friendly spaces animators in family tracing and
reunification, mine awareness and child protection and psychosocial data
management. Some 100 members of the community-based child protection
networks were trained in monitoring, reporting, follow-up and response against the
abuse of children.

V. Status of the Joint Border Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism
26. As a follow-up to the assessment of the Joint Border Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism and recommendations presented in my report of 16 June
2015, the Force Commander held consultations with the Government of the Sudan
and the African Union High-level Implementation Panel to consult the parties on the
conclusions of the initial assessment and on a possible way forward.
27. The Force Commander visited Khartoum on 30 June. Sudanese officials called
for the full operationalization of the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism sectors, expressed their Government’s general agreement on the
findings of the assessment, and underscored the importance of operationali zing the
Mechanism as well as the need for progress in resolving the dispute over the Safe
Demilitarized Border Zone and border demarcation. The officials also called for an
early resumption of the Joint Political and Security Mechanism, which has not met
since May 2013. It is envisaged that the meeting, when held, will allow UNISFA to
discuss recommendations of the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism assessment with the Government of the Sudan.
28. On 3 August 2015, the Force Commander met with the Chairperson of the
African Union High-level Implementation Panel, President Thabo Mbeki, as well as
with the Panel member, President Abdulsalami Abubakar. The Force Commander
emphasized the need for the Panel to intensify its efforts in encouraging the parties
to address the impediments that prevent the full realization of the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism, and to make the necessary political
commitment and investment for progress on the centreline and the Safe
Demilitarized Border Zone. At the request of the Governments of the Sudan and
South Sudan, the African Union High-level Implementation Panel called for the
convening of a meeting of the Joint Political and Security Mechanism in Addis
Ababa on 24 August. On 20 August, however, the meeting was postponed to a later
date at the request of the Government of South Sudan.
29. The Force Commander is awaiting confirmation of meetings with the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs of South Sudan
for detailed discussions on Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism

6/12

15-15044

S/2015/700

findings and other matters, including the way forward. Meetings have also been
sought with the Sudanese Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
30. Meanwhile, the Government of South Sudan continues to deny UNISFA/ Joint
Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism landing permissions, in violation of
Security Council resolutions 1990 (2011) and 2024 (2011) and the Status of Forces
Agreement signed with the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan in 2012. On
14 July, the deployment of a force protection company from Kadugli to Gok Machar
was suspended owing to the refusal of landing permission by the SPLA Brigade
Commander in that area. The deployment had begun with the first group of 19
troops arriving safely in Gok Machar. The Local Commissioner and the Brigade
Commander had both been informed of the deployment and the rotation sched ule by
the UNISFA Sector Commander a week earlier. During the reporting period, several
other scheduled aerial monitoring missions of the Mechanism were cancelled for the
same reason.
31. The United Nations Mine Action Service continued its support to the Joint
Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism. In preparation for planned ground
patrols, the Service delivered various training modules on integrated ground patrols
for Mechanism national monitors, international military observers, and elements of
the UNISFA Force Protection Unit.
32. In my last report, of 16 June 2015 (S/2015/439), I indicated that I would
provide more detailed findings of the Mechanism’s assessment conducted from 17
to 29 May 2015. Further to the preliminary conclusions of the assessment, UNISFA
and the Secretariat reviewed in further detail the Joint Border Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism concept of operations and operating procedures. Following
are a number of adjustments that I would propose to make in order to increase the
operational effectiveness of the Mechanism. It should be noted that some of these
improvements should only be undertaken if the parties make genuine progress in
demonstrating their political investment in the Mechanism, along the lines outlined
in my last report, as such progress should be a sine qua non for any improvement in
the Mechanism’s efficiency.
33. First, Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism monitoring should
be conducted with an improved capability to conduct aerial patrolling. The United
Nations should explore the procurement of appropriate surveillance aircraft for
Mechanism operations. These aircraft would be capable of accommodating a six person Mechanism monitoring team and would be equipped with high-resolution
digital cameras capable of capturing images for subsequent analysis. Improved
imagery would assist in determining the need for follow-up verification and
investigation patrols, and would help to avoid disagreements between t he parties
resulting from unclear imagery of personnel and hardware on the ground. In
addition, satellite imagery should be used to enhance information -driven Joint
Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism operations, giving the Mechanism a
greater ability to conduct operations on the basis of analytical data, rather than
relying solely on planned aerial patrol routes. Past utili zation of satellite imagery by
the Mechanism has been extremely useful in assessing the situation on the ground.
34. Secondly, rather than conducting Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism verification operations using team sites as previously planned,
monitoring should be conducted by air, and then followed by ground verification
and investigation teams dispatched directly from the sector headquarters if required.

15-15044

7/12

S/2015/700

Undertaking verification and investigation from sector headquarters would be more
operationally effective. Additionally, conducting verification and investigation
patrols from the sector headquarters would obviate the requirement to build the
majority of the 10 envisioned team sites. This adjustment would reduce the
investment cost for the Mission and the requirement to ma intain the sites during the
rainy season, when no ground patrols would be possible. Ground patrols from the
team sites, in a terrain devoid of tracks and that is potentially mined, would be
extremely slow and would not meet the intent of the Mechanism. The monthly costs
associated with their maintenance would contribute to a greater economy i n
Mechanism operations, despite the additional costs related to procuring satellite
imagery and flying hours.
35. Thirdly, parties should end the practice of requiring the approval of monthly
aerial patrol plans, which defeats the purpose and intent of monitoring and
verification missions in the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone. Instead, notification of
aerial patrols should be provided to the Parties 48 hours in advance. Similarly, the
procedure for seeking confirmation from both sides to authorize ground patrols 72
hours in advance should be changed to a notification provided 24 hours in advance.
This arrangement would allow sufficient time for the deployment of Force
protection ahead of verification and investigation patrols that would need to be on
the ground to conduct their work. Should the adjustments be endorsed by the
parties, the Force protection requirement for the Joint Border Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism may be reduced by one company.

VI. Personnel deployment and Mission support
36. During the reporting period, the UNISFA military component stood at 4,338
personnel (116 military observers/staff officers and 4,222 troops), of an authori zed
strength of 5,326. The strength of the UNISFA police component stood at 24 police
officers (19 men and five women) from six police-contributing countries, of an
authorized strength of 50. The total number of civilian staff stands at 226. The
Government of the Sudan issued 118 visas for UNISFA personnel; 102 visas remain
pending.
37. UNISFA, in support of the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism, provided logistical support to the rotation of Force protection
companies as well as the deployment of its headquarters and two companies (total,
557 troops) from Ethiopia to Kadugli from 8 June to 3 July 2015. Although the
refusal of landing permissions from the Government of South Sudan is likely to
have an adverse effect on the provision of United Nations rations to the troops at
Gok Machar, the newly inducted Force Protection Headquarters and Force
Protection Company have been successfully deployed and accommodated at
Kadugli. Necessary construction works, including office accommodation and voice
and data communications, have already been provided for the Gok Machar Sector 1
Headquarters Force Protection Company. Temporary tent ablutions are to be utili zed
until hard-wall ablutions are prepared; the contract for this work has been awarded.
The helipad at Gok Machar and the road from the town of Gok Machar to the
UNISFA camp have been completed. However, the fuel tank and the associated fuel
services distribution point, although constructed, are not yet operationali zed.

8/12

15-15044

S/2015/700

38. In the southern sector, UNISFA completed the rotation of 969 troops for their
deployment from five dry season camps at Um Khariet, Alal, Noong, Dungop and
Agany Toak to the wet season camps. The transformation of Marial Achak dry
season camp into a wet season camp with a capacity of 57 troops has been
completed.
39. Meanwhile, the work at Athony airport remains suspended because of the
opposition of the Government of the Sudan to having it continue.

VII. Financial aspects
40. The General Assembly, by its resolution 69/294 of 25 June 2015, appropriated
the amount of $268.3 million for the maintenance of the Force for t he period from
1 July 2015 to 30 June 2016. As at 25 August 2015, unpaid assessed contributions to
the Special Account for UNISFA amounted to $83.5 million. Total outstanding
assessed contributions for all peacekeeping operations at that date amounted to
$4,404.2 million. Reimbursement to the contributing Government for troop and
contingent-owned equipment costs has been made for the period up to 31 May 2015
and 31 March 2015, respectively, in accordance with the quarterly payment
schedule.

VIII. Observations and recommendations
41. Tension in the border areas between the Sudan and South Sudan has risen in
recent months, with both countries accusing the other of supporting, sponsoring and
harbouring each other’s rebel movements. In view of the internal conflicts within
the Sudan and South Sudan, both Governments have paid limited attention to
restoring their dialogue over the management of Abyei and implementing th eir
border security agreements. The resolution of the dispute over the final status of
Abyei and the implementation of the Agreement of 20 June 2011 and the agreements
of September 2012 on border security remain, however, paramount to the
consolidation of peace and stability between the Sudan and South Sudan. I hope that
the regional unity displayed in recent weeks over the completion of the South Sudan
negotiation process, led by the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, and
the signing by Riek Machar, the former detainees and President Kiir of the
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan on 17
and 26 August 2015, respectively, will also have a positive impact on relations
between the Sudan and South Sudan and lead to the resumption of their cooperation.
UNISFA, in partnership with my Special Envoy for the Sudan and South Sudan, will
continue to encourage and support stable and peaceful relations between the two
countries and engage with both Governments to encourage progress on outstanding
bilateral issues.
42. The Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan must do more to respect and
implement their Abyei Agreement of 20 June 2011. Both countries have continued
to violate the Agreement and related Security Council resolutions through the
presence of their armed personnel within the Abyei Area. The Sudan has continued
to deploy some 120 to 150 armed oil police around the Diffra oil complex. UNISFA
continues to observe incursions by armed suspected SPLA personnel inside the
southern parts of the Abyei Area. There is a need for both parties to the Agreement

15-15044

9/12

S/2015/700

of 20 June 2011 to respect their accord, related Security Council resolutions, and the
resolution adopted at the 9th Abyei Joint Oversight Committee meeting on
30 March 2015, in which the meeting “reiterated the need that the Abyei Area be a
weapons-free zone”.
43. With the extension, on 14 July, of the UNISFA mandate for a further five
months (see Security Council resolution S/223 (2015)), I believe that the Mission
will be able to build on what has been achieved so far. This includes enhancing
engagement and dialogue with the Ngok Dinka and Misseriya communities, i n close
collaboration with the African Union, the Governments of the Sudan and South
Sudan, the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee and other stakeholders to assist in the
implementation of international agreements concerning Abyei.
44. There can be no substitute for dialogue. The Governments of the Sudan and
South Sudan must allow the traditional leaders to meet and discuss their grievances
face to face. Both Governments must ensure that the Abyei Joint Oversight
Committee meets regularly to work towards the full implementation of the Abyei
Agreement of 20 June 2011. I continue to urge both parties to do everything
possible to ensure that the Abyei Area is demilitarized and becomes weapons-free. I
also call upon the African Union High-level Implementation Panel to intensify its
efforts in engaging with the parties, together with UNISFA, in order to generate the
necessary momentum to move forward. The ongoing conflicts in the Sudan and
South Sudan also continue to have an impact on the peace and stability of the Abyei
Area, as demonstrated by the influx of displaced persons into the area. UNISFA will
continue to monitor the movement of displaced persons, ensure security in the
Abyei Area and work closely with the various humanitarian and other actors to
facilitate assistance to the most vulnerable.
45. The Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism has been subject to
frequent denials of freedom of movement by officials from the Government of
South Sudan in relation to its mandated activities in the region of Gok Machar. This
calls into question the Government of South Sudan’s commitment to implementing
the Mechanism. In its latest resolution, 2230 (2015) of 14 July, the Security Council
made continued investment in the Mechanism contingent on a set of conditions,
which included the granting of full freedom of movement to the Mechanism and
related personnel. I urge the Government of South Sudan to provide unrestricted
freedom of movement without delay to UNISFA flights. I also urge the Government
of South Sudan to meet with UNISFA at the earliest opportunity to discuss the
Mechanism assessment and proposals.
46. The postponement of the planned Joint Political and Security Mechanism
meeting on 24 August is disappointing. UNISFA stands ready to attend the meeting
when it is rescheduled and, as requested, to provide its assessment on the status of
the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism. I urge the parties to
reconvene Joint Political and Security Mechanism meetings as soon as possible, and
to find an agreement on the exact location of the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone
centreline. UNISFA is ready to formally present the outcome of the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism assessment to the parties at its next
meeting.
47. As I have done consistently, I continue to call on the Sudanese authorities in
Khartoum to provide increased levels of support to UNISFA. This includes the

10/12

15-15044

S/2015/700

timely issuance of visas and the granting of necessary permissions to conclude
construction work at the Athony airstrip.
48. Lastly, I wish to extend my gratitude and appreciation to the Head of Mission ,
Haile Tilahun Gebremariam, and to the Force Commander, Lieutenant General
Birhanu Jula Gelalcha, for their diligence and engagement in the search for peace
and stability in the Abyei Area. I also wish to thank my Special Envoy, Haile
Menkerios, the former President of South Africa and Chairperson of the African
Union High-level Implementation Panel, Thabo Mbeki, the African Union
Commission and the Government of Ethiopia for their sustained engagement,
support and diligence in the search for peace in the Abyei Area.

15-15044

11/12

S/2015/700

12/12

15-15044
