United Nations

A/RES/59/296

General Assembly

Distr.: General
15 August 2005

Fifty-ninth session
Agenda item 123

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 22 June 2005
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/59/532/Add.1)]

59/296. Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing
of the United Nations peacekeeping operations:
cross-cutting issues
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 49/233 A of 23 December 1994, 49/233 B 31 March
1995, 51/218 E of 17 June 1997 and 57/290 B of 18 June 2003,
Having considered the general report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions on the report of the Board of Auditors
concerning the administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of the United
Nations peacekeeping operations, 1
I
1.
Appreciates the efforts of all peacekeeping personnel in dealing with the
current unprecedented surge in peacekeeping operations;
2.
Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the general
report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,1
subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
3.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit an annual overview report on
the financing of peacekeeping missions, reporting, inter alia, on trends in the size,
composition and funding of the peacekeeping missions, relevant developments in
peacekeeping operations, efforts to improve the management and functioning of
peacekeeping operations and the management priorities for the coming year as well
as actions taken to implement the provisions of the present resolution;
Also requests the Secretary-General to provide relevant information in
4.
the individual budget submissions of peacekeeping operations for the financial
period 2006/07 on the efficiencies resulting from the implementation of the
applicable provisions of the present resolution;

_______________
1

04-49489

A/59/736.

A/RES/59/296

II
Results-based budgeting
1.

Reaffirms its resolution 55/231 of 23 December 2000;

2.
Recognizes the continued progress in the presentation
peacekeeping budgets using results-based budgeting techniques;

of

the

3.
Decides that the progressive implementation of results-based budgeting
shall be in full compliance with its resolution 55/231;
4.
Recalls that in paragraph 9 of its resolution 55/231, the General
Assembly requested the Secretary-General to ensure that, in presenting the
programme budget, expected accomplishments and, where possible, indicators of
achievement are included to measure achievements in the implementation of the
programmes of the Organization and not those of individual Member States;
Notes that some indicators of achievement reflected in the budgets and
5.
budget performance reports appear to measure the performance of Member States,
and requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the purpose of the indicators of
achievement is not to assess the performance of Member States but, where possible,
to reflect the contributions by peacekeeping missions to the expected
accomplishments and objectives in keeping with their respective mandates;
Requests the Secretary-General to submit his future budget proposals in
6.
full compliance with its resolution 55/231;
7.
Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to refine the existing
results-based budgeting framework and to provide clearer financial information on
all components of the missions;
Requests the Secretary-General to integrate operational, logistical and
8.
financial aspects fully in the planning phase of peacekeeping operations by linking
results-based budgeting to the mandate implementation plans of peacekeeping
operations;
III
Budget presentation
1.

Reiterates paragraph 5 of its resolution 57/290 B;

2.
Notes with concern the unevenness in the quality of presentation in the
documentation submitted, and reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to
provide in the budget documents the necessary information available that fully
justifies his resource requirements;
Reaffirms rule 153 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly,
3.
and requests the Secretary-General, in the context of the overview report, to provide
detailed information on major policy changes having an impact on resource levels,
human resources management policies or operational requirements that require the
approval of the Assembly;
Welcomes the use, in the proposed budgets for 2005/06, of a new
4.
methodology for budgeting international staff costs;
5.
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations of the Secretariat and all missions make every effort to

2

A/RES/59/296

introduce strict budgetary discipline and enforce adequate controls over budget
implementation;
6.
Also requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Office of Internal
Oversight Services of the Secretariat with conducting a business process review of
the preparation of peacekeeping budget proposals, including the respective roles of
staff in missions and at Headquarters and to submit its findings, including
recommendations to streamline the process, to the General Assembly in the context
of the report requested in section IV of the present resolution;
Decides that, in view of the critical importance of budgets for the
7.
effective functioning of missions, the submission of budget proposals from missions
to Headquarters should constitute part of the leadership and accountability functions
of the Head of Mission/Special Representative;
Reaffirms the necessity to provide peacekeeping operations with
8.
adequate financial resources, especially in their start-up and expanded phases, to
enable the timely, full and effective implementation of their mandates in accordance
with the relevant resolutions of the Security Council;
Affirms that budget submissions should, to the extent possible, reflect
9.
management improvements and efficiency gains to be achieved and articulate future
strategies in this regard;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to undertake the review of the functions
of the posts as an ongoing exercise and to determine the level of posts according to
changing operational requirements as well as the actual responsibilities and
functions performed, with a view to ensuring the most cost-effective use of
resources;
IV
Review of the management structure of all peacekeeping operations
Recalling its decision 59/507 of 29 October 2004,
Having considered the note by the Secretary-General on the review of the
management structure of all peacekeeping operations, 2
1.
Recalls its previous request for several complex peacekeeping operations
to review their structures, bearing in mind the complexities, mandates and
specificities of each, and notes that some operations have undertaken the revision,
and requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the remaining complex operations
conduct the requested review and streamline their structures and to report thereon in
the context of the relevant budget submissions;
Requests the Secretary-General to monitor the evolution of structures in
2.
individual peacekeeping operations to avoid the duplication of functions and an
excessive proportion of higher-grade posts, bearing in mind the mandates,
complexities and specificities of each mission;
3.

Recalls, in this context, its resolution 59/272 of 23 December 2004;

4.
Requests the Secretary-General, as a matter of priority, to entrust the
Office of Internal Oversight Services with a comprehensive management audit to

_______________
2

A/59/794.

3

A/RES/59/296

review the practices of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and to identify
risks and exposures to duplication, fraud and abuse of authority in the following
operational areas: finance, including budget preparation; procurement; human
resources, including recruitment and training; and information technology, and to
report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixtieth session;
Also requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Office of Internal
5.
Oversight Services, in the light of the increasing demands with which the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations is faced and the burden this is putting on its
functioning, with carrying out a review of the management structures of the
Department, while taking into account the Security Council mandates and existing
recommendations formulated on previous occasions by the Office of Internal
Oversight Services 3 and the Board of Auditors and paying specific attention to the
interaction, coordination and cooperation of the Department with other Secretariat
departments and offices, including but not limited to the Department of Political
Affairs, the Department of Public Information, the Office of Programme Planning,
Budget and Accounts and the Department of Management, as well as the relevant
funds and programmes, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixtyfirst session;
Urges the Secretary-General to review, streamline and simplify
6.
procedures, on a continuing basis, as well as to recommend changes to regulations
and rules, as appropriate, in order to support more effective and efficient
administrative processes, with a view to achieving economies in requirements for
human and other resources;
Notes the observation of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
7.
Budgetary Questions regarding the need for the full and timely implementation of
recommendations of all oversight bodies, and urges the Secretary-General to
expedite the establishment of the high-level follow-up mechanism and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its sixtieth session;
Stresses the need to improve the cooperation and coordination between
8.
the peacekeeping missions and Headquarters with regard to lessons learned and
areas of common interest that could be used by all missions;
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that all relevant financial
9.
regulations and rules, staff regulations and rules and administrative issuances are
fully complied with by all missions and that appropriate disciplinary actions are
taken in all cases of non-compliance;
10. Also requests the Secretary-General to finalize the process for the
establishment of guidelines for the enforcement of basic standards of conduct and
behaviour for all United Nations system personnel;
11. Encourages the Secretary-General to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel under the auspices of the United Nations
participating in peacekeeping missions, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of
Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of 26 August 2003;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to review the level and functions of the
protocol officers, bearing in mind the relevant observations of the Advisory
Committee, and to report thereon in the context of the relevant budget submissions;

_______________
3

4

Including those contained in its report in document A/58/746.

A/RES/59/296

V
Shared funding of posts of Deputy Special Representatives
of the Secretary-General
1.
Takes note of paragraph 62 of the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,1 and in this regard decides that the
position of the Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General, who heads
the humanitarian pillar and serves as Resident Coordinator, will be funded through a
cost-sharing arrangement with the United Nations Development Programme;
Requests the Secretary-General to report, in the context of the overview
2.
report, on the outcome of the exchange of letters, specifying agreed generic job
profiles, organizational structure and cost-sharing arrangements with the United
Nations Development Programme;
Also requests the Secretary-General to report the necessary
3.
reimbursement for the transition period, reflecting the effective start date of the
cost-sharing arrangements, in the context of the budget performance reports;
VI
Disarmament, demobilization (including reinsertion) and reintegration
1.

Takes note of the note by the Secretary-General; 4

2.
Notes that reinsertion activities are part of the disarmament and
demobilization process, as outlined in the note by the Secretary-General;
3.
Emphasizes that disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes are a critical part of peace processes and integrated peacekeeping
operations, as mandated by the Security Council, and supports strengthening the
coordination of those programmes in an integrated approach;
Stresses the importance of a clear description of respective roles of
4.
peacekeeping missions and all other relevant actors;
5.
Also stresses the need for strengthened cooperation and coordination
between the various actors within and outside the United Nations system to ensure
effective use of resources and coherence on the ground in implementing
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes;
Requests the Secretary-General, when submitting future budget proposals
6.
containing mandated resource requirements for disarmament, demobilization and
reinsertion, to provide clear information on these components and associated post
and non-post costs;
Notes that the components used by the Secretary-General for budgeting
7.
for disarmament, demobilization and reinsertion activities are set out in the note by
the Secretary-General, recognizing ongoing discussions on these concepts;
Notes also the intention of the Secretary-General to submit integrated
8.
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration standards to the General Assembly at
its sixtieth session;

_______________
4

A/C.5/59/31.

5

A/RES/59/296

VII
Quick-impact projects
Requests the Secretary-General to streamline the process of implementation of
quick-impact projects and to ensure that they are fully implemented within the
planned time frames;
VIII
Training, recruitment and staff in the field
Recalling its resolutions 56/293 of 27 June 2002 and 57/318 of 18 June 2003,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the training policy
and evaluation system of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, 5 and the
relevant paragraphs of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions, 6
Having also considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the criteria
used for recruitment to support account posts, 7 on greater use of national staff in
field missions, 8 on measures to expedite recruitment for field missions, taking into
account the delegation of recruitment authority to field missions, including the use
of fair and transparent recruitment procedures and monitoring mechanisms, 9 on
measures that would better streamline the policy guidelines related to the temporary
duty assignment of staff in peacekeeping missions, 10 on the status of the civilian
rapid deployment roster, 11 on the staffing of field missions, including the use of
300- and 100-series appointments 12 and the relevant section of the report of the
Advisory Committee, 13
Having further considered the notes by the Secretary-General transmitting the
reports of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the audit of the policies and
procedures for recruiting Department of Peacekeeping Operations staff 14 and on the
follow-up audit of the policies and procedures of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations for recruiting international civilian staff for field missions, 15
1.
Emphasizes the importance of finalizing the comprehensive training
strategy, and decides to restrict training away from mission headquarters of civilian
staff to training specific to the implementation of the mandate of the mission, the
effective functioning of the mission, the function of a post or, where it is
cost-effective, until the finalization of the strategy;
Requests the Secretary-General to report on the finalization and
2.
implementation of the comprehensive training strategy along with the framework of
_______________
5

A/58/753.
A/59/736, paras. 73–79 and 117.
7
A/58/767.
8
A/58/765.
9
A/58/764.
10
A/57/787.
11
A/59/763.
12
A/59/762.
13
A/59/736, paras. 123–144.
14
A/58/704.
15
A/59/152.
6

6

A/RES/59/296

the evaluation of training to the General Assembly at its sixtieth session in the
context of his overview report;
3.
Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the comprehensive
training strategy includes the training needs of national staff for the purpose of
capacity-building in the mission area;
Further requests the Secretary-General to ensure that staff in all United
4.
Nations peacekeeping operations have access to relevant training opportunities;
5.

Requests the Secretary-General to make greater use of national staff;

6.
Recalls section X, paragraph 7, of its resolution 59/266 of 23 December
2004, decides to establish an overall target of no more than 5 per cent of authorized
General Service/Field Service posts across missions, with the exception of those
missions in a start-up phase, and other exceptional circumstances, to be filled by
staff on assignment from Headquarters, and requests the Secretary-General to report
on the progress towards reaching this target;
Affirms that locally recruited mission staff may be recruited as
7.
international staff only through the normal recruitment process in which they
compete for international posts in another mission along with other external
candidates;
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the highest standards of
8.
efficiency, competence and integrity serve as the paramount consideration in the
employment of staff, with due regard for the principle of equitable geographical
distribution, in accordance with Article 101, paragraph 3, of the Charter of the
United Nations;
Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to make every effort to fill
9.
vacant posts in peacekeeping operations expeditiously;
10. Decides that generic vacancy announcements posted in Galaxy shall be
accompanied by information on the location of current specific vacancies and that
this would apply to all international vacancies in peacekeeping missions;
11. Notes with concern the observations of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, in paragraphs 55 and 56 of its report,1
regarding the practice of hiring individual contractors or individuals on procurement
contracts to perform functions of a continuing nature, and requests the
Secretary-General to revert to the General Assembly for its consideration of the
creation of a post if the function is ongoing and is so warranted;
12. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on criteria used for
recruitment to support account posts,7 and requests the Secretary-General to update
the information and to submit a report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixtyfirst session for its consideration in the context of human resources management;
13.

Recalls section X of its resolution 59/266;

14. Regrets that the report of the Secretary-General on the staffing of field
missions, including the use of 300- and 100-series appointments,12 did not fully
provide the information requested in section X, paragraphs 2 and 3, of
resolution 59/266, and in this context reiterates its request to the Secretary-General
in section X, paragraph 3, of its resolution 59/266;

7

A/RES/59/296

15. Decides to continue to suspend the application of the four-year maximum
limit for appointments of limited duration under the 300 series of the Staff Rules in
peacekeeping operations until 30 June 2006;
16. Authorizes the Secretary-General, bearing in mind paragraph 15 above,
to reappoint under the 100 series of the Staff Rules those mission staff whose
service under 300-series contracts has reached the four-year limit by 30 June 2006,
provided that their functions have been reviewed and found necessary and their
performance has been confirmed as fully satisfactory, and requests the
Secretary-General to report thereon to the General Assembly at the second part of its
resumed sixtieth session;
17. Notes the fact that 278 of 346 eligible staff were judged to have
performed “fully satisfactorily”, and requests the Secretary-General to apply
rigorously the criteria set out in its resolution 59/266;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to continue the practice of using
300-series contracts as the primary instrument for the appointment of new mission
staff;
IX
Conditions of service
1.
Recalls section X, paragraphs 5 and 6, of its resolution 59/266, in which
the General Assembly requested the International Civil Service Commission and the
Secretary-General to review conditions of service in the field and to report to the
Assembly at its sixty-first session;
Decides to limit conversion of General Service posts to the Field Service
2.
category pending receipt of that review;
3.
Also decides that the review of the field service is the appropriate
mechanism for possible recognition of hardship, if warranted;
X
Mission subsistence allowance
Recalling its resolution 58/258 of 23 December 2003,
Having considered the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on
the audit of mission subsistence allowance policies and procedures 16 and the note by
the Secretary-General transmitting his comments thereon, 17
1.
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the Office of Internal
Oversight Services continues to audit the mission subsistence allowance rates to
ensure their reasonableness in comparison with the actual subsistence costs in the
various mission areas and with the daily subsistence allowance set by the
International Civil Service Commission in the same areas;
Decides to revert to the question of mission subsistence allowance rates
2.
and the recommendations of the Office of Internal Oversight Services in the context

_______________
16
17

8

A/59/698.
A/59/698/Add.1.

A/RES/59/296

of the review of conditions of service in the field, requested by the General
Assembly in section X, paragraphs 5 and 6, of its resolution 59/266;
3.
Also decides that specific guidelines and criteria for the setting of
miscellaneous or incidental costs as a component of the mission subsistence
allowance should be developed, taking into account that mission subsistence
allowance rates should not, as a general principle, exceed those of the daily
subsistence allowance in the same locality;
XI
Participation of United Nations Volunteers
Recalling its resolution 54/245 A of 23 December 1999,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the participation of
United Nations Volunteers in peacekeeping operations, 18 the report of the Joint
Inspection Unit on the evaluation of the United Nations Volunteers Programme 19
and the note by the Secretary-General transmitting his comments thereon, 20 and the
related reports of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions, 21
1.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the participation of
United Nations Volunteers in peacekeeping operations,18 the report of the Joint
Inspection Unit on the evaluation of the United Nations Volunteers Programme19
and the note by the Secretary-General transmitting his comments thereon,20 and
endorses the observations and recommendations of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, as contained in paragraphs 70 to 72 of its
report;1
2.
Acknowledges the valuable contribution of United Nations Volunteers in
the United Nations system;
3.
Recognizes that Volunteers should not be used as a substitute for staff to
be recruited against authorized posts for the implementation of mandated
programmes and activities and should not be sought for financial reasons;
Takes note of paragraph 25 of the report of the Secretary-General and the
4.
intention of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to continue its efforts to
exploit the potential for increased use of United Nations Volunteers in peacekeeping
operations in those functions or skills which are not normally available in the
Secretariat or which are limited;
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure that Volunteers are
5.
subject to the same obligations and responsibilities, including standards of conduct,
that the United Nations staff are subject to;
Also requests the Secretary-General to take into account greater use of
6.
national staff in peacekeeping operations, when feasible;

_______________
18

A/55/697.
See A/59/68.
20
A/59/68/Add.1.
21
A/55/874, paras. 41–45 and A/59/736, paras. 70–72.
19

9

A/RES/59/296

XII
Military component
1.
Requests the Secretary-General to make every effort to reimburse
Member States that have provided troops and equipment to United Nations
peacekeeping operations in a timely manner;
Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the deployment of
2.
troops and contingent-owned equipment is well coordinated so that troops are not
deployed without their equipment;
XIII
Regional investigators
Having considered the note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of
the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the first year of experience of regional
investigators in two hubs, Vienna and Nairobi, 22
Takes note of the findings and recommendations contained in the report of the
Office of Internal Oversight Services on the first year of experience of regional
investigators in two hubs, Vienna and Nairobi, and emphasizes in particular the
utilization of resident investigators to do investigations in the large peacekeeping
missions and regional investigators to do investigations in the other missions and to
provide support for complex cases in the large missions;
XIV
Sexual exploitation and abuse
Recalling its resolution 59/300 of 22 June 2005,
Reaffirming its resolutions 48/218 B of 29 July 1994, 54/244 of 23 December
1999, 59/272 of 23 December 2004 and 59/287 of 13 April 2005,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on special measures for
protection from sexual exploitation and sexual abuse 23 and the report on the
investigation by the Office of Internal Oversight Services into allegations of sexual
exploitation and abuse in the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, 24
1.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on special measures for
protection from sexual exploitation and sexual abuse23 and the report on the
investigation by the Office of Internal Oversight Services into allegations of sexual
exploitation and abuse in the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo;24
2.
Emphasizes the need for the development of a comprehensive,
well-defined and coherent policy, taking into account also the relevant provisions of
resolution 59/300, addressing, inter alia, the various managerial aspects of
preventing and addressing allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse in all United
Nations activities;

_______________
22

A/59/546.
A/59/782.
24
A/59/661.
23

10

A/RES/59/296

3.
Affirms that the implementation of a zero-tolerance policy and
procedures towards acts of sexual exploitation and abuse should be clearly defined
as a core management function, in particular also addressing clear lines of
responsibility and accountability relating to the non-implementation and
non-enforcement of codes of conduct, policies and preventive measures, and should
ensure that adequate mechanisms are in place in this regard;
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
4.
sixtieth session a comprehensive report based on a thorough analysis of the aspects
referred to paragraphs 2 and 3 of the present section, as well as addressing the
following:
(a) Systematic consideration of the full continuum of personnel conduct
issues, including policy development, training, community relations, compliance
supervision, accountability, discipline and investigation;
(b) Clear demonstration that existing expertise and resources in the
Organization, both at Headquarters and in the field, including on child protection,
gender, public information and other components within their specific roles and
mandates, as well as human resources management and training, are fully utilized,
and that relevant resource requests avoid duplication of resources and functions and
enhance coordination among relevant departments and offices, while ensuring the
effective implementation of the mandates of the missions;
(c) Clear reporting lines and proposals for the placement of the proposed
capacity dealing with personnel conduct issues, bearing in mind that the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General is ultimately accountable;
(d) Full justification of resource requirements, both at Headquarters and in the
field, taking into account the specificities of each mission and based on empirical data
on the actual number of allegations and cases of sexual exploitation and abuse;
XV
Global audit of field security management
Having considered the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on
the global audit of field security management, 25
Decides to defer until its sixtieth session consideration of the report of the
Office of Internal Oversight Services in the context of its consideration of a
strengthened and unified security management system for the United Nations;
XVI
Procurement
Recalling its resolutions 57/290 B of 18 June 2003, 58/297 of 18 June 2004
and section A of its resolution 59/288 of 13 April 2005,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on procurement and
contract management for peacekeeping operations 26 and the related report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 27
_______________
25

A/59/702.
A/58/761 and A/59/688.
27
A/59/722.
26

11

A/RES/59/296

Having also considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the analysis of
establishing a global procurement hub for all peacekeeping missions at Brindisi,
Italy, 28 and on the implementation of the strategic deployment stocks, including the
functioning of the existing mechanisms and the award of contracts for
procurement, 29 and the related reports of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions, 30
Having further considered the note by the Secretary-General transmitting the
report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the procurement of goods and
services through letters of assist, 31
1.
Requests the Secretary-General, in order to improve the transparency and
efficiency of procurement in peacekeeping operations, to ensure implementation of
and compliance with the mechanisms aimed at facilitating the compilation by all
missions of an assessment of progress and final performance of vendors and its
immediate transmission to the United Nations Procurement Service at Headquarters;
Notes progress towards the harmonization of Headquarters and mission
2.
procurement databases, and in this regard welcomes the continued efforts towards
improved transparency and accountability of a comprehensive procurement system,
including the availability of peacekeeping procurement data for Member States, as
currently displayed on the United Nations Procurement Service web site;
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to improve reporting
3.
procurement data to Member States and to consider procurement system processes
utilized in the government and private sectors;
Notes the efforts made by the Secretary-General to increase procurement
4.
opportunities for developing countries and countries with economies in transition,
and requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue to simplify the vendor registration process, taking into
account access to the Internet;
(b) To take further steps to sensitize the business community to procurement
opportunities within the United Nations system, including:
(i)

The holding of additional business seminars;

(ii) Inviting the Inter-Agency Procurement Working Group to hold more
meetings in developing countries;
(iii) Including the issue of diversity of sources of procurement as an agenda
item at the annual meetings of the Inter-Agency Procurement Working Group;
5.
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that all peacekeeping missions
operate with reference to their procurement plans in order to realize the benefits
offered by proper procurement planning;
Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to monitor and address
6.
causes of excessive procurement lead times at peacekeeping missions;

_______________
28

A/59/703.
A/59/701.
30
A/59/736/Add.2 and A/59/736, paras. 114–116.
31
A/57/718.
29

12

A/RES/59/296

7.
Also encourages the Secretary-General to continue to ensure that all
peacekeeping missions formally identify the training needs of all procurement
officers and communicate these needs to Headquarters in order to ensure that
training follows proper planning and evaluation of its effectiveness;
XVII
Asset management
1.
Reiterates that the Department of Peacekeeping Operations should ensure
that all missions implement an assets replacement programme in a cost-effective
manner and in strict compliance with the guidelines on the life expectancy of assets;
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the heads of the
2.
peacekeeping operations take effective measures to ensure inventory control,
replenishment of stocks and reasonable write-off procedures for the disposal of
assets no longer required or useful;
Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that formal written
3.
agreements are in place, which include elements such as financial reimbursement
and liability, with other United Nations bodies before loaning out to them resources
belonging to a peacekeeping operation;
Commends the ongoing efforts to increase cooperation between missions,
4.
particularly those in the same region, and stresses that any agreement on the loan or
sharing of mission assets should be clearly understood and documented by the
missions involved, bearing in mind that individual operations should remain
responsible for preparing and overseeing their own budgets as well as for
controlling their own assets and logistical operations;
XVIII
Information technology
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the functional
requirements of field missions for communication and information technology 32 and
on the information and communications technology strategy: arrangements for the
Galaxy system 33 and the relevant section of the report of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 34
1.
Requests the Secretary-General to take fully into account the return on
investment for information and communication technology and to report on its
impact on the resource requirements for the support account for peacekeeping
operations;
Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of
2.
the information and communications technology strategy adopted by the General
Assembly in order to avoid unnecessary redundancies;
Further requests the Secretary-General to implement the Galileo system
3.
in all peacekeeping operations in order to unify peacekeeping operations inventory;

_______________
32

A/58/740.
A/59/265/Add.1.
34
See A/59/736, sect. III.E.
33

13

A/RES/59/296

XIX
Air operations
Recalling section B of its resolution 59/288,
1.
Requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary actions to ensure
that staff members involved in air operations are adequately trained, as specified in
the Air Operations Manual;
Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to conduct aviation
2.
quality inspections and aviation assessments at missions to confirm that established
standards are being fully complied with;
Further requests the Secretary-General to improve the formulation of
3.
resource requirements for air operations in budget submissions to make them more
reflective of actual operations, bearing in mind the overbudgeting of air
transportation requirements in some peacekeeping operations;
Requests the Secretary-General to undertake an analysis of the impact of
4.
the new costing structure relating to air operations, bearing in mind the relevant
observations and recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions and the Board of Auditors, and to report thereon in the
context of his next overview report;
XX
Ground transportation
1.
Requests the Secretary-General to provide the General Assembly with a
cost-benefit analysis on the issue of the transfer of vehicles with high mileage to the
United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, to other missions and to upcoming
missions, taking into account the cost of freight, and to report thereon to the
Assembly at its sixtieth session;
Also requests the Secretary-General, in the context of his overview
2.
report, to provide detailed information on the implementation of the vehicle policy,
as requested in paragraph 86 of the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions;1
3.
Further requests the Secretary-General to develop a standard policy with
regard to the purchase and assignment of standard civilian and specially equipped
armoured vehicles, as well as representational vehicles;
XXI
Ratios of vehicles and information technology equipment to staff
1.
Notes with concern the lack of information on the implementation of
ratios of vehicles to staff and discrepancies in the implementation of standard ratios;
2.
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that peacekeeping operations
adhere to the standard ratios, bearing in mind the mandate, complexities and size of
individual peacekeeping operations;
Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that in all missions the
3.
actual ratio of heavy/medium vehicles is no greater than the established standard
ratio of 1:1 and to justify any departure from this standard ratio;

14

A/RES/59/296

4.
Further requests the Secretary-General to review the policies on standard
ratios of vehicles to staff and to provide the General Assembly, in the context of the
overview report, with information on the outcome of the review and efforts to
ensure that individual peacekeeping operations adhere to the standard ratios, while
bearing in mind the mandate, complexity and size of individual operations;
Requests the Secretary-General to apply greater economies in the
5.
provision of 4x4 vehicles for civilian staff in missions, in particular but not limited
to senior staff at the D-1 level and above, bearing in mind that the existing ratio for
4x4 vehicles must not be exceeded, and to report on the implementation thereof to
the General Assembly at its sixtieth session in the context of the overview report;
Encourages the Secretary-General progressively to reduce the allocation
6.
of one printer per work station and to implement, with immediate effect, where it is
cost-effective and feasible, the ratio of printers to desktop computers of 1:4 for all
work stations in peacekeeping missions, at Headquarters and in the field;
Decides to defer consideration of new provisions for desktop computers,
7.
printers and laptops at Headquarters and in the field with the exception of new
missions and those missions undergoing expansion according to Security Council
mandates as well as for replacement purposes in strict compliance with the General
Assembly resolution, pending the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services
on the comprehensive management audit to review the practices of the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, mentioned in section IV, paragraph 4, of the present
resolution;
XXII
Rations contracts
1.
Requests the Secretary-General to undertake a cost-benefit analysis of the
delivery of food rations by air assets, without prejudice to the delivery of food to the
troops, and to implement the most viable and cost-effective option in each
peacekeeping operation;
Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that all missions monitor
2.
and evaluate the quality management systems of rations contractors to ensure that
food quality and hygienic conditions are in accordance with established standards;
Further requests the Secretary-General to undertake a cost-benefit
3.
analysis of the use of an independent inspection mechanism to verify the fulfilment
by contractors and vendors of all contract specifications regarding quality, hygiene
and delivery plans.
104th plenary meeting
22 June 2005

15
