General Á88embly-Thirty-third Session

152

Recognizing that the migratory labour system is one of the
major instruments of apartheid,
Mindful of the gross indignities it inflicts on workers, who
are denied many of their basic human rights,
Noting that it undermines family life and disrupts agrarian
economies,
Hereby pledge ourselves to strive for the abolition of the
migratory ,labour system practised in South Africa and, pending its elimination, agree to the present Charter of Rights for
Migrant Workers in Southern Africa.

Article 11
AM workers shall have a right to:
(a)

Free medica! services for themselves and their families;

Sick leave and, where applicable, maternity lea ve with
ful! pay;
( b)

(e)

Annual paid holidays.
Article I 2

Ali workers shall be entitled to retire on ful! pension or
with a gratuity proportionate to their period of service.

CHAPTER I

Article 13

RIGHTS OF ASSOCJATION, MOVEMENT AND RESIDENCE

A.ll workers shall have a right to determine their terms and
conditions of employment through collective bargaining.

Article 14

Article l
AH workers shall have the right to:
(a)

Ali workers shall have a right to unemployment bcnefits.

Article 15

Form and join trade unions of their own choice;

Participate in coHective bargaining on equal terms
with all other workers regardless of race, sex, political affiliation or religion;
(e) Withhold their labour by strike action in support of
their demands.
(b)

Article 2
All workers shall have the right to freedom of movement
and shaill not be required to carry a pass or similar document.
Article 3
All workers shall have the right to be accommodated near
their place of work with their families in suitable houses under
home ownership schemes or to reside elsewhere if they choose
so to do.
Article 4
All workers shall have the right of occupation free from
colour bar, job reservation and all other forros of discrimination.
Article 5
Every worker, regardless of race or sex, shall have the
right to work, choose his occupation and change from one
employer to another without foss of accrued benefits and claims
to promotion.
Article 6
AU workers, without exception, shall have the right to
equal pay for equal work.
Article 7
Ali workers shall have equal rights to vocational training
and adult education for the purpose of acquiring skills and
increasing their awareness.
CHAPTER II
RIGHT TO A DECENT STANDARD OF LJVING

Article 8
Every worker is entitled to a mínimum basic wage sufficient
for the maintenance of the health and weM-being of his family.
Article 9
All workers shall have the right to adequate protection
against occupational accidents and diseases by means of approved safeguards and close supervision by an independent
industrial and farming inspectorate operating in conjunction
with workers' representatives.
Artide JO
Ali workers and their families shall have an equal and
absolute right to adequate, immediate and effective compensation for death or disability arising out of ocoupational diseases
and accidents.

All women workers shall have the right to participate in
ali sectors of the economy without discrimination in respect
of wages, training, job allocation or pension benefits.

33/163.

Measures to improve the situation and
ensure the human rights and dignity of
all migrant workers

The General Assembly,
Recalling the provisions of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 68 and the Intemational Convention on the Elimination of All Forros of Racial
Discrimination, 60
Considering the Migrant Workers (Supplementary
Provisions) Convention, 1975,70 and the Recommendation concerning Migrant Workers, 1975,71 adopted by
the General Conference of the lnternational Labour
Organisation,
A ware of the fact that the problem of migrant
workers is becoming more serious in certain regions
for transient political and economic reasons and for
social and cultural reasons,
Recalling that the family is the natural and fundame~tal group 1:1nit of society and is entitled to protect10n by society and the State and that, in that
context, the families of migrant workers are entitled
to the same protection as the migrant workers
themselves,
Bearing in mind the need for the Governments of
h<?st coun_tries and of_ countt?es of origin to co-operate
w1th a v1ew to findmg satisfactory solutions to the
situation of migrant workers,
Considering the provisions relating to the question
of migrant workers contained in the Declaration and
the Programme of Action adopted by the World Conference to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination, 72
Recalling its resolution 32/ 120 of 16 December
1977,
Bearing in mind Economic and Social Council resolution 1978/22 of 5 May 1978,
11 8 Resolution
6 9 Resolution

217 A (III).
2106 A (XX), annex.
Labour Office, Ofjicial B111/etin, vol. LVIII,
1975, series A, No. 1, Convention No. 143.
71 /bid., No. 1, Recommendation No. 151.
72 Report of the World Conference to Combat Racism and
Racial Discrimination, Geneva, 14-25 Au¡?ust 1978 (United
Nations publication. Sales No. E.79.XIV.2), chap. 11.
70 International

VI.

153

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committe"

Noting with appreciation the efforts of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization in the field of the education of migrant workers
and their families,
Having taken note of the report of the Economic
and Social Council, 73
I. Calls upon all States, taking into account the
provisions of the relevant instruments adopted by the
International Labour Organisation and of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Racial Discrimination, to take measures to prevent
and put an end to all discrimination against migrant
workers and to ensure the implementation of such
measures;
2. Invites all States, particularly host countries,
to give the widest possible dissemination, ínter alia
through the mass media, to information aimed at
promoting better public understanding of the contribution of migrant workers to the economic growth and
social and cultural development of those countries and
at fostering a climate of mutual understanding;
3. Also invites the Governments of host countries
to adopt the necessary measures to prevent any activity
that might be prejudicial to the interests of migrant
workers;
4. Again invites the Governments of host countries to give consideration to adopting definitive measures to promote in their territories a normal family
life for migrant workers by reuniting families;
5. Expresses the hope that the Commission on
Human Rights will submit to the Economic and Social
Council at its first regular session of 1979 the study
recommended in General Assembly resolution 32/120,
on the basis of the concrete proposals formulated by
the Working Group established pursuant to Council
resolution 1978/22;
6. Calls upon all States to give consideration to
ratifying the Migrant Workers (Supplementary Provisions) Convention, 1975, adopted by the General
Conference of the International Labour Organisation;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to explore with
Member States and in co-operation with the United
Nations agencies, particularly the International Labour
Organisation, the possibility of drawing up an international convention on the rights of migrant workers;
8. Invites the Governments of host countries to
adopt measures to ensure that the children of migrant
workers receive genuinely equal treatment in the field
of education and training;
9. Also invites those Govemments to co-operate
with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization with a view to enabling migrant
workers and their families to benefit from all necessary
opportunities in the field of education in order to
enable them to participate fully in the life of the society
of the host country while preserving their national and
cultural identity.
90th plenary meeting
20 December 1978
73 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/33/3 ), paras. 319-321.

33/164.

Assistance to South
refugees

African

student

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 31/126 of 16 December
1976 and 32/119 of 16 December 1977 conceming
assistance to South African student refugees,
Recalling also Security Council rcsolution 417 ( 1977)
of 31 October 1977 and Economic and Social Council
resolution 1978/55 of 2 August 1978, in which, ínter
afia, an appeal was made to all Governments, organizations and United Nations agencies to make generous
contributions to the United Nations emergency programmes of assistance to South African student
refugees,
Deeply concerned by the discriminatory education
policies and repressive measures being applied by the
Government of South Africa against black students
in that country,
Noting that the Governments concerned expect
the flow of student refugees from South Africa into
their countries to continue while these discriminatory
policies and repressive measures are maintained,
A ware that the continued influx of South African
student refugees fleeing from these repressive policies
continues to cause pressure on the available educational and other facilities in neighbouring countries
offering asylum to those students,
Recognizing the need to provide assistance to those
countries to help them to provide adequate facilities
to the student refugees,
Having considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral74 containing the findings of the review missions
sent by him to Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland and
Zambia in May and J une 1978 to examine the status
of the programmes of assistance to South African
student refugees,
Recognizing that the international assistance provided so far has made possible the implementation of
major components of the emergency assistance programmes for South African student refugees in the
region, but that further international assistance is still
required for their care, subsistence and education,
1. Endorses the assessment and recommendations
contained in the report of the Secretary-General and
commends him and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on their efforts to mobilize resources and organize the programmes of assistance to
South African student refugees in the host countries;
2. Notes with appreciation that the Governments
of Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland and Zambia continue
to grant asylum and make educational and other
facilities available to the student refugees in spite of
the pressure which the continuing influx of these
refugees exerts on facilities in their countries;
3. Notes with satisfaction the contributions made
by various States, United Nations agencies and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations
towards meeting the needs of South African student
refugees;
4. Expresses concern that, in spite of the contributions made so far, the needs of South African student
refugees continue to increase;
5. Requests all agencies and prograrnmes of the
United Nations system, including the United Nations
74 A/33/163

and Corr.l.
