58

General Anembly-Tw-ty-ninth SeuJon

2. Strongly endorses Trade and Development Board
resolution 124 (XIV) of 13 September 197442 on new
approaches to international commodity problems and
policies;
3. Requests, in this connexion, the Secretary-Gen·
eral of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development to keep current developments in the
world economy under continuous review and to report,
as necessary, to the Trade and Development Board on
the measures that, in the light of a decline in the levels
of economic activity and the emergency that might consequently arise, Member States should consider, individually or co11ectively, in order to promote sustained
growth in world economic activity, and especially to
expand the exports of developing countries and to protect and expand the real value of their export eamings
from all sources, in · particular from primary commodities;
4. A/so requests the Secretary-General of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development to keep
the Economic and Social Council and the General
Assembly informed of the action taken by the Trade
and Development Board;
5. Further requests the Secretary-General of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, in pursuance of Trade and Development Board
resolution 124 C (XIV), to convene a group of experts
to examine the issue of indexation in a11 its aspects,
with a view to identifying practica! and feasible schemes
for implementation, taking into account the discussion
on the subject by the Committee on Commodities at its
eighth session and by the Second Committee of the
General Assembly at its tweoty-ninth session, and to
report to the Trade and Development Board at its
fifteenth session for such action as the Board may
deem necessary.
2319th plenary meeting
14 December 1974
3309 (XXIX). Multilateral trade negotiations

The General Assembly,
Recalling resolution 82 (111) of 20 May 1972 of
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development43 and General Assembly resolutions 3041
(XXVII) of 19 December 1972 and 3085 (XXVIII)
of 6 December 1973,
Recalling a/so the Declaration of 14 September
1973, which was approved by the Ministerial Meeting
of the Contracting Parties to the General Agreemen~
on Tariffs and Trade held in Tokyo,' as well as the
concluding statement of the Chairman of the Meeting,
Noting Trade and Development Board resolution
116 (XIV) of 13 September 1974,44
Recalling its resolution 3202 (S-VI) of 1 May 1974,
in which it suggested guidelines for bringing about
just and equitable term,; of trade of the developing
countries and proposed concrete measures to eliminate
persistent trade deficits of the developing countries,
4 2 See Offecial Records o/ the General Assembly, Twentyninth Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/9615/Rev.l), annex l.
43 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Deve/opment, Third Session, vol. I, Report and
A.nnexes (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.73.11.D.4),
annex I.A.
44 See Offecial Records o/ the General A.ssembly, Twentyninth Ses.fion, Supplement No. 15 (A/961S/Rev t l. annex l.

Recalling a/so that the first biennial over-all review
and appraisal of the lnternational Development Strategy
for the Second United Nations Development Decade
has acknowledged that the provisions of the Strategy
to maintain a standstill, particularly on tariff and nontariff barriers on manufactured and semi-manufactured
products, have not been fu11y observed by sorne dcveloped countries, 411
Recalling further that the Tokyo Declaration statcd
that the Ministers intended that the trade negotiations
be concluded in 1975, and considering that effectivc
negotiations have not as yet started,
A ware that the delay in the multilateral trade ncgotiations has had a negative impact on different initiatives in the trade field, with unfavourable conscqucnces
to the promotion of trade in general and to the tradc
and development of developing countries in particular,
Convinced that the present intemational economic
situation calls far sustained efforts to expand the exports of developing countries and protect and increase
the real value of their export eamings, and to expand
the growth of world trade as a whole,
1. Calls upon ali members of the Tradc Negotiations Committee of the General Agrecment on Tariffs
and Trade to take a11 necessary measures to entcr immediately into substantive negotiations so as to cnsure
that the schedule laid down in the Tokyo Declaration
is adhered to;
2. Considers that the aims of the multilateral tritde
negotiations should be to achieve the cxpansion and
liberalization of trade among ali countries, to improvc
the standard of living and welfare of the peoples of tite
world and, in particular, to secure additional bencfits
for the international trade of developing countries;
3. Stresses the need for the ful) and effective application, whenever feasible and appropriate, of differential treatment in favour of developing countrics in thc
different fields of the negotiations, so as to cnsure
additional benefits to those countries;
4. Stresses the importance of avoiding cscalation
of restrictions on trade and, to this end, urges dcvelopcd
countries to refrain from introducing, or increasing thc
incidence of, customs duties or non-tariff barricrs on
products currently or potentia11y of particular export
interest to developing countries, or from having recourse in any other manner to unilateral measures, of
either general or specific nature, to restrict the export
earnings of developing countries;
5. Urges the developed countries which have rccently introduced or irr.posed import restrictions that
adversely affect the products of interest to devcloping
countries, in particular restrictions specifically dircctcd
against such countries, to eliminate them as soon as
possible;
6. Invites the Director-General of the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade to prepare an intcrim
report on the negotiations, bearing in mind the purposes of the special session of the General Assembly
that will be held in September 1975, to submit it to
the Preparatory Committee for that session and to update it as necessary;
7. Requests the Secretary-General of the Unitcd
Nations Conference on Trade and Development, in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 1995
4 ~See resolutíon 3176 (XXVIII).

59

Resolutions adopted on the reportll of the Seeond Committee

(XIX) of 30 December 1964 and with particular reference, inter alía, to the lnternational Development
Strategy for the Second United Nations J?evelopll!ent
Decade, 46 resolution 82 (III) of the Umted Nations
Conference on Trade and Development and the Declaration47 and the Prooramme of Action 48 on the Establishment of a New "'1nternational Economic Order,
also to prepare an interim report on the multilateral
trade negotiations and to submit it to the Preparatory
Committee, updating it as necessary.

2319th plenary meeting
14 December 1974
3310 (XXIX).

Participalion of the Secretary•
General of the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development in the multilat•
eral trade negotiations

The General Assembly,
Recalling resolution 82 ( III) of 20 May 1972 of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development49 and General Assembly resolution 3085
(XXVIII) of 6 December 1973,
Noting Trade and Development Board resolution
116 (XIV) of 13 September 1974,50
Recalling General Assembly resolution 3202 (S-VI)
of 1 May 1974 containing the Programme of Action
on the Establishment of a New lnternational Economic
Order,
Decides that the Secretary-General of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development should
be enabled to attend regularly the meetings of the
Trade Negotiations Committee of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and those of its subsidiary
bodies, and that ali documentation should be made
available to him.
2319th plenary meeting
14 December 1974
3311 (XXIX).

Special measures related to the
particular needs of .the land-locked developing countries

Tite General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3 I 69 (XXVIII) of 17 December 1973 on special measures related to the particular needs of the land-locked developing countries,
Recalling also resolution 63 (III) of 19 May 1972
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development40 and General Assembly resolution 2971
(XXVII) of 14 December 1972,
Recognizing that, as a result of the geographical situation of the land-locked developing countries, the
additional cost of transportation and the poor develop46 Resolution 2626

(XXV).

47 Resolution 3201 (S-VI).

ment of their infrastructures, the expansion of their
trade and economic development is adversely affected,
Recognizing the need for the urgent extension of
financia! and technical assistance to the land-locked
developing countries by the international community
and international organizations on the basis of the relevant recommendations of the organizations of the
United Nations system, particularly in the field of infrastructure of ali kinds,
·
Recalling the decision taken in this respect by the
Fourth Conference of Heads of State or Govemment
of Non-Aligned Countries, 51 held at Algiers from 5 to
9 September 1973,
Conscious of the urgent needs of the land-locked
dcveloping countries and the special measures that
must be considered and implemented in their favour,
taking into account that many land-locked developing
countries fall within the category of the least developed
among the developing countries,
Bearing in mind that the note by the Secretary-General entitled "Special measures related to the particular
needs of the land-locked developing countries" 112 is not
a complete study as requested by the General ~ssembly
in resolution 3169 (XXVIII) and does not mclude a
report of the Secretary-GeJ?eral on his findin_gs from
consultations on the establishment of a special fund
in favour of the land-locked developing countries, as
requested by the Economic and Social Council in its
resolution 1755 (LIV) of 16 May 1973,
I. Requests the Secretary-G~neral, in. the im~lementation of Economic and Social Counc1l resolut1on
1755 (LIV) and in consultation with the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development, to
submit to the General Assembly at its special sessi~n
devoted to development and intemational e~onom1c
co-operation, through the Preparat~ry Comm1ttee for
the special session, a comprehens1ve studr on the
transit problems of the land-locked deve~opmg countries and a complete study on the establ_ishment o_f a
fund in favour of the land-locked developmg countnes;
2. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the Secretary-General of the United Nations Cohference on Trade and Development, the land-locked
countries and the United Nations agencies, to find
ways and means of improving the economic situation
of the Iand-locked developing countries through the
urgcnt implementation of resolution 63 (111) o( the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development;
3. Invites the appropriate organs of the United ·
Nations system and the members of the international
community, including regional development banks, to
pay special attention to the p~rtic~lar ~roble!11s of thc
Iand-locked developing countncs m their ass1stance to
national, regional and subregional infrastructural projects related to transport;
4. Invites ali Member States and the competent international organizations to assist the land-locked developing countries in facilitating the exercis~ of t~eir
rioht of free access to and from the sea, as w11l bt- 1m"'
plemented
in relevant agreements.

48 Resolution 3202 (S-VI).

49 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Third Session, YO!. I, Report and
Annexes ( United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.73.11.D.4 ),
annex I.A.
r;o See O[Jicial Records of the General Assemb/y, Twentynintl, Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/9615/Rev.l), annex l.

2319th plenary meeting
14 December 1974
r.1 A/9330 an<l Corr.l, p. 77.
G2 E/5501.
