S/PV.8613

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8613

th meeting
Tuesday, 10 September 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Nebenzia/Mr. Safronkov. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Adom
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Radomski
Mr. Matjila
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security (S/2019/703)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-27407 (E)
*1927407*

S/PV.8613

The situation in Afghanistan

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security (S/2019/703)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Afghanistan,
Australia, Canada, Egypt, India, the Islamic Republic
of Iran, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Pakistan, Turkey and
Uzbekistan to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Tadamichi
Yamamoto, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan; and Mr. Yury Fedotov,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime.
Mr. Fedotov is joining today’s meeting via videoteleconference from Vienna.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr.Silvio Gonzato, chargé d’affaires of the Delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2019/703, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security.
At this meeting, the Security Council will
hear briefings by Mr. Yamamoto, Mr. Fedotov
and Ambassador Triansyah Djani, Permanent
Representative of Indonesia, in his capacity as Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1988 (2011).
I now give the floor to Mr. Yamamoto.
Mr. Yamamoto: The events of recent days and
weeks have shown more than ever the urgency of
2/35

10/09/2019

finding a political settlement to the long Afghan
conflict. Efforts over the past year produced
opportunities for peace, which created not only hope
but also fear for many. But one point remains clear: the
conflict can be resolved only by direct talks between
the Afghan people. Those talks must be inclusive and
must represent the whole spectrum of Afghan society.
It is imperative, therefore, that direct talks between
the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan and the Taliban
commence as soon as possible. Many efforts have been
made for that purpose, working with Afghan parties,
and have created an opportunity where the beginning
of direct talks between the two Afghan parties seems
to have come within reach. Yet often the period just
before coming to an agreement is the most difficult
phase. All those concerned with peace efforts, above all
the parties to the conflict, need to continue to work to
bring about direct talks. I call on the parties to continue
to seize the opportunity of direct talks so as to build a
peaceful future.
I have listened to many Afghan people from across
the country who express their hopes and fears about the
future. They hope for an end to the conflict, but they also
fear that peace might come at the sacrifice of freedom
and rights, which the country has striven to protect and
advance for the past 18 years. Many young people of
Afghanistan, especially young women, are worried
about future restrictions on their participation in the
social, economic and political life of their country. Any
political settlement must include a promise to continue
to protect and advance human rights and fundamental
freedoms for all who live in Afghanistan, including
those of women, youth and minorities, as well as the
freedom of expression the media.
Another important achievement over the past
18 years, which needs to be maintained and further
promoted, is the institutional capabilities of the State,
including in the areas of security and service delivery.
The recent informal talks between representatives from
Afghan society and the Taliban in Moscow and Doha
gave opportunities for dialogue to address some key
issues needed for peace. I hope that that experience
will be carried forward and help deepen dialogue for
constructive outcomes.
The United Nations stands ready to support an
intra-Afghan process drawing on impartiality and
expertise. I also wish to point out that peace efforts
need to address and bring about a reduction in violence
and an eventual ceasefire.
19-27407

10/09/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV. 8613

Finally, the support of the countries in the region
and beyond remains critical. Their active engagement
in, and support for, peace efforts will be essential going
forward, particularly from neighbouring countries
that have the most to gain from peace and stability
in Afghanistan.

Attacks directed against polling centres and civilians
participating in the electoral process are unacceptable.
They are clear violations of international law. I urge the
Taliban to retract their threat, and I urge the Government
to provide adequate security arrangements to safeguard
the electoral process.

On 20 September, the people of Afghanistan are
scheduled to head to the polls in the fourth presidential
election since 2001, whereby the country will take
another step in strengthening the foundation of a
representative democratic political system. The United
Nations fully supports the efforts of the Independent
Election Commission (IEC), the Electoral Complaints
Commission (ECC), security institutions, civil society
and, above all, candidates, their supporters and voters
to conduct credible and inclusive elections on schedule.
Credible elections would provide an important political
foundation for the future of the country as well as
legitimacy and authority to the elected President, which
will be particularly important in view of the anticipated
peace process.

Voter turnout is important for elections, and
9.6 million people have registered. Voter turnout could
be negatively affected by security, but also by the
general interest of voters. Through our field offices, we
have a sense that interest in elections is not as high as it
could be. That might be partly because there has been
stronger interest in the peace process, but also because
campaigns, which started on 28 July, have not picked up
full momentum. I appeal to Afghan citizens to exercise
their right to vote. Electoral bodies and the candidates
also need to call on people to come out and vote.

As for the technical and operational preparations
for the elections, which are led by Afghan institutions,
things are so far on track. The ballot papers and other
voter materials are being delivered to provinces and
districts. The recruitment and training of polling staff
is ongoing. The timely roll-out of electronic technology
is being managed by the IEC. The voters’ list has been
updated, and over 9 million records have gone through
the public display and corrections process. Those are
some examples of reforms that reflect lessons learned
from last year’s parliamentary elections. They and
other measures will go a long way towards improving
key aspects of fraud-mitigation measures designed to
increase the transparency and credibility of the vote.
Our United Nations advisers are working hand in hand
with the electoral management bodies during these
last weeks and days of intense preparation. However,
concerns still remain ahead of the elections. One
is security, another is voter turnout, and another is
possible fraud and irregularities.
There are serious efforts under way by Afghan
security institutions, in collaboration with international
partners, to ensure adequate security arrangements
during the preparations and for the polling day.
However, we still hear much anxiety expressed by
Afghan citizens, particularly in view of the Taliban’s
stated threat to disrupt the electoral process, especially
by targeting civilians participating in elections.

Another challenge that could affect credibility is
the issue of fraud and irregularities, which includes the
need to provide a level playing field for all candidates.
In that regard, I should like to point out that the best
technical preparations cannot substitute for the political
commitment to play by the rules and accept the results
of the elections. Candidates, political parties, civil
society and the media all have the ability to field
monitors for the process on election day. I therefore
call on all stakeholders to obtain accreditation with the
IEC in order to be present in every polling station. I
also urge all actors to refrain from taking actions that
could give any candidate undue advantage or call into
question the legitimacy and credibility of the process.
I encourage all stakeholders to bring cases of alleged
violations to the relevant bodies, including the ECC.
The most difficult choice for candidates and
politicians after elections is to accept defeat, but it is the
supreme act of statesmanship in a democratic process.
All technical and operational efforts are put in place
to make the presidential election credible. I appeal to
and urge all candidates and supporters to respect the
democratic process to reach an outcome acceptable for
the people and the country.
Efforts for peace should be accompanied by a
reduction in violence. Yet violence has intensified in
recent days. Recent attacks by insurgents in Kunduz,
Baghlan and Farah, and, above all, the multiple attacks
in Kabul, are of serious concern. Trying to obtain the
position of strength in negotiation cannot be an excuse
for the escalation. The parties to the conflict must

19-274073/35

S/PV.8613

The situation in Afghanistan

reduce the levels of violence and civilian casualties to
demonstrate their seriousness for peace.
I am much troubled by the continuing high number
of civilian casualties from such attacks. In particular I
must point out that the deliberate targeting of civilians
is a matter of grave concern and that it is a war crime.
The increasing number of civilians killed during search
operations and air strikes is also of concern. I urge all
parties to review the way in which they conduct their
operations in order to protect civilians and to minimize
the harm caused.
In that connection, I am very concerned about the
continued harm to civilians caused by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan Province, which is
showing signs of its unabated and persistent intention
to expand its influence.
While the search for peace goes on, let us not forget
the millions of people across Afghanistan who suffer
the consequences of conflict. United Nations agencies
and non-governmental organizations currently work
in 331 of the country’s 400 districts, in particular in
the areas of agriculture, education and health. Their
access and reach provide short-term relief as well as
the building blocks for a better future.
At the same time, it is never too early to start
thinking about how to assist people following peace
as well as while peace is being negotiated. The
international community has already embarked on a
study of post-peace assistance, led by the World Bank
in collaboration with the United Nations and countries
such as the United Kingdom. International assistance
and mutual commitment to Afghanistan, starting from
the ministerial meeting in Tokyo in 2012 to those in
London, Brussels and Geneva, will need to be reviewed
so as to meet the new requirements and situations
brought about by peace. The United Nations, as the
co-chair of the 2018 Geneva Ministerial Conference, is
conscious of the need to work vigorously in that area,
and we stand ready to work with the co-chair of the
2020 Ministerial Conference, yet to be chosen.
I cannot stress enough the importance of advancing
efforts for delivering peace, specifically the start of
intra-Afghan negotiations. Examples from past peace
negotiations from around the globe show that as
the prospect for substantive talks becomes real, the
challenges will become greater. The final stages leading
to the start of intra-Afghan talks become more difficult
and require delicate handling. They require cooperation
4/35

10/09/2019

from all of us. The United Nations commends the
efforts of all those concerned to bring about direct talks
between the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan and the
Taliban and we in the United Nations will continue to
assist such efforts.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Yamamoto for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Fedotov.
Mr. Fedotov: I thank you, Sir, for this opportunity
to brief the Security Council on what the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) is doing
to support Afghanistan to promote peace, security, the
rule of law and sustainable development.
The situation in the country as related to drug
production and drug trafficking, as well as transnational
organized crime, remains complex. Insurgents and
other non-State actors control areas under opium poppy
cultivation and are raising hundreds of millions of
dollars. The persisting challenges posed by illicit drugs,
economic and financial crime, corruption, money
laundering and the financing of terrorism continue to
undermine the stability of the country. Such crimes
have a profoundly negative impact on the Government’s
macroeconomic objectives of financial inclusion, job
creation, robust private sector-led growth and stable
domestic revenues.
Nevertheless, we can also report some good
news. UNODC is currently working with the Afghan
Government to finalize the Afghanistan Opium Survey
2019, which will be released in October. We do not
yet have the results but we expect that the area under
opium poppy cultivation will decrease from the record
high levels in 2017 and 2018. That may be due to a
combination of factors, including saturation of the
market, weather conditions, shifting consumption
trends and so forth. However, we must also acknowledge
the efforts of the Government of Afghanistan and other
countries in the region, supported by the international
community. UNODC, including through our Office
in Kabul, provides enhanced technical assistance and
capacity-building to enable Afghanistan to pursue
balanced health- and rights-centred responses to
the drug supply and demand, in line with the 2019
ministerial declaration adopted by Member States at
the Commission on Narcotic Drugs in March.
Mobile detection teams and precursor control units,
which were established with the support of UNODC,
19-27407

10/09/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

last year seized approximately 800 kilos of heroin, more
than 1.2 tons of opium and nearly 9 tons of hashish.
They also seized more than 7,500 litres of precursor
acetic anhydride. That is a huge amount, sufficient to
produce more than 3 tons of heroin.
Alongside building national capacities, UNODC
is committed to strengthening regional cooperation,
including by linking initiatives and platforms for
regional and subregional cooperation to address the
trafficking in illicit drugs and precursor chemicals.
Important operational mechanisms include the
Triangular Initiative and its joint planning cell, the
Afghanistan-Kyrgyzstan-Tajikistan initiative and the
Central Asia Regional Information and Coordination
Centre, which is considering expanding its membership
to include Afghanistan.
In view of those regional responses, it is worth
noting that this year’s World Drug Report showed a
decline in opiate trafficking from Afghanistan along
the northern route through Central Asia towards
Russia. UNODC is also promoting coordination with
other regional initiatives and mechanisms, including
the Heart of Asia Process, the Paris Pact Initiative,
the Afghan Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board
and others.
Furthermore, alternative development to enable
farmers to free themselves from illicit opium cultivation,
as well as evidence-based drug use prevention and
treatment, remain crucial to other components of
UNODC’s support. Particularly through our alternative
development work, more than 8,500 jobs were created
and more than $4 million of income was generated last
year. I am pleased to note that nearly 4,200 women and
girls are among those employed. More than 4,800 social
contracts were signed with individual beneficiaries and
26 such contract with communities, all of which agreed
to refrain from opium poppy cultivation, production,
processing and trafficking.
Alongside those efforts, UNODC is also scaling
up its support to the Government in order to address
vulnerabilities to human trafficking resulting from
conflict, in line with resolutions 2331 (2016) and 2388
(2017). Only last week, we launched in Afghanistan the
Global Action to Prevent and Address Trafficking in
Persons and the Smuggling of Migrants, which will be
funded by the European Union and implemented with
the International Organization for Migration.

S/PV. 8613

Disrupting terrorist financing and linkages to drug
trafficking and other forms of organized crime remains
a priority element of UNODC’s work with Afghanistan.
The Government’s efforts demonstrate the continued
high-level political commitment to countering money
laundering and the financing of terrorism.
UNODC is supporting those efforts and, at the
Government’s request, is concentrating on the areas of
greatest risk. Our assistance focuses on investigating
and disrupting the financing networks of terrorist and
organized-crime groups, as well as money laundering,
corruption and other economic crimes. It also includes
combating the illegal flow of cash out of and into the
country, and improving the supervision of banks and
money or value transfer services.
The international community recently marked
Afghanistan’s 100 years of independence. That
occasion for joyful celebration was tragically marred
by terrorist attacks on innocent people. I welcome
Afghanistan’s determination to stop such despicable
attacks and commend the Government for establishing
and co-chairing, with Spain, the Group of Friends of
Victims of Terrorism.
UNODC is working closely with Afghanistan
and other partners to better understand the challenges
faced by victims and provide assistance through
victim-centred criminal justice approaches. The Office
remains strongly committed to supporting Afghanistan
in addressing the interlinked challenges of drugs, crime,
corruption and terrorism, and we rely on the assistance
of the international community to help us carry out this
essential work.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Fedotov for his briefing.
I now call on Ambassador Djani.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for this opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
work of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), which I am pleased
to do in accordance with paragraph 56 of resolution
2255 (2015).
I am also grateful to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, and
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) for their support of the work of the 1988
Sanctions Committee and continued assistance to its
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team.

19-274075/35

S/PV.8613

The situation in Afghanistan

I would also like to thank the previous Committee
Chair, Ambassador Kairat Umarov from Kazakhstan,
for the work and efforts of his team over the past
two years.
As the Council is aware, the main goal of the 1988
Committee is to deter the Taliban from continuing to
support Al-Qaida and its affiliates and to deter Taliban
attacks against the Government of Afghanistan through
the use of tools such as global asset freezes, global travel
bans and global arms embargoes. At the same time, the
1988 Committee, through the sanctions regime, helps
facilitate conditions to promote Taliban dialogue with
the Afghan Government, resulting in a peaceful and
stable Afghanistan.
We have witnessed positive steps and many efforts
in that direction in the form of a series of discussions
between the relevant parties, with the launching of
an intra-Afghan dialogue in Moscow in February
and its second round, held in Doha. In an effort to
support that process, on 6 April the 1988 Committee
adopted a nine-month travel ban exemption, ending on
31 December, for 11 listed Taliban members to attend
talks in the interest of promoting reconciliation and
the prospects for peace in Afghanistan. The exemption
to the ban was accompanied by a decision to grant a
limited asset freeze exemption for the financing of
exempted travel. The Committee fully supports the
nine-month travel ban exemption for listed Taliban to
attend talks that are in the interest of promoting the
prospects for peace and reconciliation in Afghanistan.
As Committee Chair, I would remind Member States
likely to host the peace process of their obligations,
pursuant to resolution 2255 (2015), to provide followup reporting to the Committee on completion of travel
and the costs incurred therefrom. I would also like
to express some caution and concern regarding the
continued strong links between the Taliban and the
Haqqani Network and Al-Qaida.
The concern about the Taliban’s broad alignment
with terrorist groups is compounded by the issue of its
continued participation in terrorist acts and its deepseated involvement in the cultivation, production and
trafficking of narcotics, which has strong negative
effects both in Afghanistan and globally.
It is also worth noting that, as underlined by
resolution 2255 (2015), in order to maintain continued
and close cooperation with the Government of
Afghanistan, which would contribute to further
6/35

10/09/2019

enhancing the efficiency and effectiveness of the
sanctions regime, on 12 March Ambassador Raz,
Permanent Representative of Afghanistan to the
United Nations, and Ambassador Hamdullah Mohib,
National Security Adviser of Afghanistan, briefed the
Committee on progress in the peace process.
While there are structures and frameworks in place
for the implementation of the 1988 sanctions regime, the
effectiveness of the implementation depends not only
on internal but also regional and international actors.
The Committee therefore encourages Member States
to play a more active role in providing information
that would help keep the sanctions list as up to date as
possible and to assist the Committee in enhancing the
effectiveness of sanctions measures.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
remind members that the Security Council, in
presidential statement S/PRST/2017/15, decided that the
implementation of the measures outlined in resolution
2255 (2015) required no adjustment at that time.
Moreover, I would like to remind the Council that
the mandate of the Monitoring Team was last extended
in 2015 through resolution 2255 (2015) and is set to
expire in December. Meanwhile, within the sanctions
regime imposed by the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities, resolution 2368
(2017) extended the work of the Monitoring Team
to December 2021. It is therefore imperative for the
Security Council to start to consider extending the work
of the Monitoring Team, in pursuance of its mandate
relating to Taliban sanctions, to align with that of the
1267 Committee, until the end of 2021.
Finally, the Committee looks forward to continuing
its close engagement with UNAMA, with the
Government of Afghanistan, and with the States of the
region during my chairmanship of the 1988 Committee
in 2019 and 2020.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Ambassador Djani for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative
of Afghanistan.
Mrs. Raz (Afghanistan): Allow me to begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, and your delegation
on assuming the presidency of the Council for the
19-27407

10/09/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

month of September. We thank you for holding today’s
meeting on the situation in Afghanistan. This meeting
comes at a crucially important time as we prepare for
our presidential election and continue to make efforts
to achieve sustainable peace.
I would also like to welcome Ambassador Yamamoto,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, here
today and thank him for his comprehensive briefing on
the overall current situation in Afghanistan.
As we meet, my country is taking another historic
step towards strengthening and further institutionalizing
democracy. Later this month, Afghans from all walks of
life will exercise their constitutional rights by casting
their vote to elect their president through a democratic
process. They have eagerly anticipated this important
national event as a measure to once again defy terror
and extremism, determine their political destiny and
secure the future of the country.
The Afghan Government is approaching the
election with a full and unprecedented commitment
to ensure a transparent, free, credible and inclusive
process, in accordance with the strong demand of our
people. Preparations for the upcoming polls are moving
ahead steadily, following the electoral timetable for the
Independent Election Commission. The Government
will spare no effort to ensure the safety and security of
the voters, and will put all the necessary measures in
place in order to ensure the most efficient process.
To that end, voting centres have been allocated
countrywide and, for the first time, voter lists are
available online, and biometric verification will be
used alongside printed lists. Approximately 72,000
security force personnel have been assigned to
ensure the safety of voters. Of those 72,000, almost
9,900 female security officers will be tasked with
the security of women’s voting centres. The elections
further underscore Afghanistan’s commitment to
taking ownership of strengthening the rule of law and
democracy since, for the first time, the Government has
committed to covering a major part of the financial costs
associated with the elections by allocating $90 million
to the process.
Despite all the security threats and challenges,
the people of Afghanistan are determined to hold and
participate in the elections. The casting of each ballot
by a cross-section of our society will yet again signify
our people’s firm determination to work towards
stability, democracy and prosperity. Afghanistan wants

S/PV. 8613

to move forward, not backward. We must respect the
desire of the Afghan people and should not prejudge the
credibility of the election or question or underestimate
the turn out. Afghans, again and again, have proven
that despite security threats and being attacked by the
Taliban, they will come out to vote and participate in
the future of their country. Peace and elections have
been equally important to the people of Afghanistan.
My request to the Council and all our international
partners and allies is to support the people of
Afghanistan in their quest for democracy, as they
have always done. This Chamber should also call on
countries that could influence the Taliban to respect the
aspirations of all Afghans and prevent them from being
attacked on election day.
Peace is another top priority for the Government of
Afghanistan. President Ghani has laid the foundation of
a clear path for a carefully calculated and responsible
peace process with the Taliban through various
initiatives over the past two years. That includes
the announcement of unconditional peace talks, the
enforcement of a ceasefire and the release of prisoners
during the Eid festivals last year. Those measures were
reinforced by the holding of a grand consultative loya
jirga for peace in April, at which 3,000 representatives
from across the nation adopted a declaration laying out
the road map for peace.
The Government of Afghanistan has welcomed all
international initiatives in support of our peace efforts
that will lead to a dignified and lasting peace and
preserve the shared gains that we have made together,
including but not limited to strengthening the Republic
and women’s constitutional rights. The people of
Afghanistan have also stressed that a real and genuine
pledge to peace by the Taliban should be manifested
in ending violence, as well as engaging in direct peace
talks with the Afghan Government.
The Government of Afghanistan, as always,
remains committed to peace talks conducted on a set
of common principles, in accordance with the demands
and expectations of all Afghans from across the country.
Any potential agreement should be endorsed by the
people of Afghanistan and ensure their mandate of an
immediate ceasefire, a long-lasting peace and stability,
and the preservation of the gains and achievements of
the past 18 years, which include democratic values, the
Republic and, in particular, the rights of women, as
stipulated in our Constitution.

19-274077/35

S/PV.8613

The situation in Afghanistan

We cannot ignore the meaningful role and
participation of women in Afghanistan. Our women, as
agents of change and a symbol of resilience, play a key
role in the political, social and economic development
of the new Afghanistan. They have the legitimate right
to be an active part of all negotiations and decisions.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
once again thank Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed and her accompanying United Nations
high-level delegation for their visit to Afghanistan in
July, in the context of women and peace and security.
Her recognition of the achievements made by Afghan
women and her echoing of their strong call in the
Security Council for a peace that safeguards their
hard-won rights once again reaffirmed the United
Nations firm pledge to stand by our women and the
progress they have made in our society. I thank her for
her strong support and commitment on behalf of all
Afghan women.
One of the greatest challenges to achieving a
stable and self-reliant Afghanistan is the protracted
war against international terrorism, for which we
continue to pay a very high price. The Taliban and
international terrorist groups continue their attacks on
civilian targets, creating horror and fear. They further
put civilians and civilian infrastructure at risk by using
them as shields while conducting their operations.
Furthermore, the Taliban have also remained hostile
to humanitarian workers and have issued threats to
members of the press. We call on the Taliban to end
the senseless violence, show a true commitment to
peace and respect the pledge they made at the Doha
Intra-Afghan peace conference, when they said that
they would reduce civilian casualties to zero.

10/09/2019

making sacrifices on a daily basis. Their bravery should
be recognized and supported by all of us.
In line with efforts to defeat terrorist groups
militarily, we have also been working on limiting
their operational capabilities, including in tackling
financing that may come from the proceeds of narcotics
operations. To that end, we have conducted counternarcotics operations throughout the country, seizing
tons of illicit drugs and destroying hundreds of drugprocessing facilities.
Other efforts have included improved security
at airports and border crossings to detect and deter
any instances of trafficking. Those measures have
concluded with the apprehension of individuals involved
in the drug trade, and our justice system is committed
to holding them accountable for their actions. However,
we must look at the issue of counter-narcotics in broader
terms, including the demand in the supply chain, and
consider it a regional issue. We must also look into a
regional counter-narcotics strategy as an option.
The Government is committed to the realization
of a self-reliant Afghanistan as a hub of regional
connectivity and a platform for global, economic and
regional cooperation. That has been reflected in the
implementation of several regional mega-projects,
which are already paying economic dividends in our
country and beyond. The increased trade, investments,
infrastructure and development brought by those
projects, coupled with other initiatives that have also
enhanced regional efforts on security, especially
the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process, have shown the
direction of that new Afghanistan as a regional platform
of cordiality and cooperation.

Contrary to that pledge, a heinous and cowardly
attack was launched at a wedding hall in Kabul on
17 August and caused the death of more than 70
civilians, wounding 180 others. That was followed by
the attacks of 19 August in Jalalabad, which happened
during our Independence Day celebration, in Kabul by
the Green Village and the 5 September attack, which
caused a high number of civilian casualties.

The gains of the past 18 years have left us with
a committed young generation that continues to take
charge of the future of their own country. That includes
men and women who are engaged within the private
sector as innovative and successful leaders in industry
and entrepreneurs and within the public sector as loyal
and dedicated civil servants. Among those, women
have reached new heights, taking leadership positions
in various ministries.

Additional attacks also took place last week in
Kunduz and Puli-Khumri, but were repelled by the
efforts of our Afghan National Defence and Security
Forces. In that regard, allow me to highlight that our
forces, as true allies in the war on terrorism, are fighting
fearlessly at the forefront of international terrorism and

In standing by the re-emergence of our country and
the spirit of that new generation, we thank the United
Nations and our international partners for their support
since 2001. The role of the United Nations and the
international community in helping us get to this point
has been evident through the work of the United Nations

8/35

19-27407

10/09/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), the
Security Council and other bodies of the Organization.
As we move forward onto a new chapter in our modern
history, new challenges require that we recommit and
develop our relationship together.
On that point, we hope for a thorough renewal of
the UNAMA mandate that will highlight core priority
issues for Afghanistan’s future in achieving a sustainable
and lasting peace agreement but also beyond that, into
a post-conflict development setting. A new mandate
should incorporate updates to the country’s situation.
We hope for the mandate to be extended for a year, at
the minimum.
In closing, allow me to reiterate Afghanistan’s
gratitude for the Council’s tireless work in helping us
make progress towards stability and peace. We remain
focused on facing the challenges ahead of us. We trust
in the support of the Council and our international
partners in meeting them together. As such, the Council
can count on Afghanistan’s firm commitment, as a
partner, to the defence of the rule of law, respect for
international rules and obligations and the promotion of
the values of peace and international solidarity.
The President: Before I give the floor to Council
members, I should like to inform them that I will have
to leave in a little while to present the report of the
Security Council to the General Assembly (A/73/2). It is
the report we have agreed and approved. Mr. Safronkov
will steer the meeting in my absence.
(spoke in Russian)
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I thank you,
Mr. President, for scheduling today’s debate. It is very
timely. We all followed the events of recent days and
the cancellation or interruption of the United Statesled peace talks. Mr. Cohen will certainly enlighten us
on where we stand on that. Despite that cancellation
or interruption, we have to determine where we now
stand in comparison to last year. Last year, there was
no genuine political process. Today, there are prospects
for a genuine political process, thanks to the efforts
of the Afghan Government, Afghan civil society, the
opposition, the United States, Qatar and others.
I would like to repeat what Mr. Yamamoto said at the
outset — there is no alternative to a political solution.
We have to do everything to return to a political track.

S/PV. 8613

It has to be an intra-Afghan negotiations track, in which
the Afghan Government, the political opposition, civil
society and key Afghan shareholders take part. We
must work very hard and with determination to get
there. We must also be patient. The right conditions
must be created and, in that respect, I would like to
echo what the Afghan Ambassador just said with regard
to what the Taliban has been doing in recent days and
weeks and the despicable attacks it has launched in
Afghanistan, which have killed so many civilians. That
needs to stop if we are to create the right conditions.
Germany remains committed to Afghanistan. We
are the second-largest donor and the second-largest
troop-contributor. In July, on the margins of the Doha
talks, Germany, together with Qatar, launched an
intra-Afghan dialogue. We are ready to pursue that
dialogue. A specific element of that dialogue was
the inclusion of women. We believe that the full and
effective participation and leadership of women in the
peace process and, overall, in the decision-making
in Afghanistan at all levels — local, national and
regional — are key. I would also echo what the Afghan
Ambassador said with regard to the Deputy SecretaryGeneral. Her trip to Afghanistan in July was a very
strong and positive signal.
I would also like to highlight one of the many points
I retained from Mr. Fedotov’s intervention. With the
means he has at his disposal, creating jobs for women
is very important. As the Ambassador said, women are
the agents of change and resilience in Afghanistan.
A sustainable peace process must take place. Here
again, I would like to echo Mr. Yamamoto’s remarks. To
ensure the continuity and stability of State institutions
and the Constitution of Afghanistan, any future solution
has to respect human rights, in general, and the rights
of women and their freedoms, in particular. We, as the
Council, have a very important role in communicating
that and our expectations.
To avoid a constitutional vacuum, it is very
important that the presidential elections of 23 September
be held in a fair, transparent and democratic manner.
What we heard today from Ambassador Yamamoto
and Ambassador Raz with regard to the elections is
encouraging. There are certain risks but regarding
preparations, much has been achieved.
I would like to raise one specific point that is very
dear to our hearts — the effects of climate change on
Afghanistan. The effects of climate change are tangible.

19-274079/35

S/PV.8613

The situation in Afghanistan

There are unprecedented droughts and flash flooding.
The impact on the country has been devastating. That is
an additional factor that destabilizes the country and has
implications for the security situation. All stakeholders
must consider that factor and take appropriate action.
It perhaps has one positive effect. This question is
for Mr. Fedotov. What impact does drought have on
poppy cultivation?
We — I and my friend the Ambassador of
Indonesia — are the co-penholders for the draft
resolution on the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA). We believe that we need
a strong substantive mandate that corresponds to the
expectations of the Afghan people, as just expressed
by the Ambassador of Afghanistan. In particular, in
the present situation with the interruption of peace
talks, we need to comfort the Afghan people. We need
to send the message that the international community
is determined to remain present and engaged with
the Afghan people. I would urge all Security Council
members to put Afghanistan and UNAMA first and be
ready for compromise.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): We, too, thank Ambassador
Yamamoto, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), and Mr. Yury
Fedotov for their briefings. We also applaud the whole
UNAMA team, along with humanitarian aid workers,
for their valiant and tireless work.
Indonesia would like to highlight three points.
First, security incidents are worrisome and the
high number of civilian casualties is unacceptable. For
Afghanistan, one is already too many. Indonesia echoes
Afghans’ calls for zero civilian casualties. That entails
full protection for humanitarian personnel too. Whatever
their political differences, all Afghan stakeholders
must ensure that no harm comes to the people, who
have already endured so much in demanding a peaceful
and prosperous homeland. Violence and attacks need
to stop. The attainment of peace should not be at the
expense of civilians.
We call for a ceasefire throughout Afghanistan. The
exploitation of the volatile situation by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and increasing attacks
are also of concern. The wedding hall attack in Kabul
in August was a gruesome reminder of danger posed
by ISIL and the imperative for everyone to be united
against the vile designs of ISIL and other terrorist
10/35

10/09/2019

groups. Indonesia strongly condemns that attack. As
the co-penholder on Afghanistan, together with my
colleagues from Germany, Indonesia will play its role,
including by proactively proposing Security Council
press statements on such vile happenings, which the
international community must stand against resolutely.
Secondly, every effort must be made to advance a
credible peace process. We concur with the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2019/703), which places emphasis
on pursuing a negotiated settlement. In that connection,
we welcome the various ongoing efforts. Indonesia
hopes that all efforts will result in the immediate
start of Afghan-led and Afghan-owned inclusive
peace negotiations with the participation of women.
We also welcome Ambassador Raz’s statement on the
role of women in Afghanistan. Indonesia continues
to feel strongly about the involvement of women in
peace negotiations, and we have explored initiatives
in that regard. The hard-earned gains in women rights
should not be reversed. The relevant entities, including
UNAMA, must remain cognizant of this. We also take
note of the formation of a 15-member team to represent
the Government in the negotiating processes, which
includes individuals from all walks of life.
Thirdly, free and fair presidential elections,
along with development, are critical. We welcome
the preparations for the upcoming presidential
election supported by UNAMA. The preliminary
registration figure of 9.6 million Afghans shows their
determination in a democratic process through which
they can shape their destiny. We call for a transparent,
credible, free and fair election, and we hope that such
an election can be held in a timely manner. We support
Special Representative Yamamoto’s appeal and call for
peace during the elections and restraint in relation to
threatening civilians.
We also recognize the many challenges being
faced by the Afghan authorities in their nation-building
process. We support the Government’s efforts to remain
vigilant in the fight against corruption, so as to ensure
that economic gains can be properly distributed in the
interests of the Afghan people.
Indonesia, on its part, is working tirelessly to
ensure the well-being of its Afghan brothers and
sisters. We are assisting in the Afghan peace process, in
capacity-building for Afghan public officials through
various programmes and, as the co-penholder, we are
supporting UNAMA’s work. I would like to echo what
19-27407

10/09/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

the Ambassador of Germany mentioned by saying that
we hope that we receive full support for the upcoming
mandate renewal draft resolution. The draft resolution
should focus on the most immediate political process
and security concerns in Afghanistan, with UNAMA’s
mandate at its core. It could become a trajectory for the
Security Council to support the people of Afghanistan
at this critical time. We must not forget that the interests
of the Afghan people should come first.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): Belgium aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
At the outset, I would like to thank Special
Representative Yamamoto for his briefing, as well as
Mr. Fedotov and Ambassador Djani.
We remain convinced of the need for peace talks.
Unfortunately, we cannot ignore the fact that those
talks were held in the context of a proliferation of
extremely deadly terrorist attacks. Using the lives of
children, women and men as a means of pressure in
negotiations is unacceptable. One cannot hold the pen
to sign a peace agreement in one hand and a bomb in
the other.
After so many years of conflict, the Afghan people
deserve lasting peace and a peace agreement that is
acceptable to the Afghan people and their Government.
We fully support the Afghan Government’s central role
in the peace process and call on the Taliban to engage
in talks with the Government and to control their
combatants in order to put a stop to any future attacks.
A lasting peace agreement must preserve the
gains made in women’s rights at all costs, as it would
be extremely unjust to sacrifice progress in that area.
We also stress the importance of the meaningful and
equal participation of women in the peace process and,
in that regard, we attach particular significance to the
implementation of the new phase of Afghanistan’s
national action plan on human rights in line with
resolution 1325 (2000). Belgium, for its part, is
supporting the implementation of the action plan
through a contribution to UN-Women.
Belgium fully supports the holding of credible, free
and fair presidential elections., which would strengthen
the legitimacy of State institutions and pave the way
for intra-Afghan dialogue. A high voter turnout will
be crucial in order to reflect the democratic will of the
Afghan people. In that context, we strongly condemn

S/PV. 8613

the attacks announced by the Taliban and others on
the electoral process. Attacks targeting schools and
hospitals are particularly heinous. We encourage the
Government to honour its commitments under the
Safe Schools Declaration and to take every measure to
protect those serving at polling stations during elections.
We also recall the importance of maintaining a level
playing field for all candidates and all stakeholders.
Belgium remains gravely concerned by the high
number of civilian casualties and the growing number
of displaced persons, due to both the conflict and
the drought. We recall the obligation of all parties to
uphold international humanitarian law and to take
immediate measures to prevent civilian casualties. The
proliferation of attacks against humanitarian workers
is unacceptable, as they deprive the most vulnerable
communities of access to vital aid. We also condemn
the indiscriminate use of improvised explosive devices.
We strongly condemn all violations and abuses
perpetrated against children in Afghanistan and
deplore the record number of minor victims in the
past year. We are eagerly awaiting the next report of
the Secretary-General on the situation of children in
armed conflict in Afghanistan and look forward to
the Council taking decisive action in that regard. The
treatment of detainees, including minors, requires
particular attention.
Before concluding, I would like to reaffirm
Belgium’s determination to implement the sanctions
regime of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1988 (2011) in order to dissuade the Taliban
from supporting Al-Qaida and its affiliates and
discourage attacks against the Afghan Government. We
echo the Committee Chair’s appeal to Member States
to provide information to keep the sanctions list as
up-to-date as possible and to assist the Committee in
enhancing the effectiveness of sanctions measures.
Finally, I wish to acknowledge the crucial role
played by the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan and all United Nations agencies in
supporting peace, prosperity and the promotion of
human rights in Afghanistan. Belgium, for its part,
remains committed to supporting Afghanistan by
providing military training through the Resolute
Support Mission and contributing financially to the
Afghan National Army Trust Fund.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Yamamoto, Executive Director

19-2740711/35

S/PV.8613

The situation in Afghanistan

Fedotov and Ambassador Djani for their briefings, as
well as Ambassador Raz for her presentation today.
The United States commends the continued hard
work of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) in supporting the people
of Afghanistan.
We reiterate our deep sympathies and condolences
to the loved ones of those killed in the terrorist attack
on a wedding hall in Kabul, committed by Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan Province on
17 August. We also convey our sympathies to the
victims of recent Taliban attacks in Kabul, Kunduz
and across Afghanistan, including attacks that claimed
the lives of two United States service members, a
Romanian service member and a Romanian diplomat.
Their sacrifices remind us of the importance of
achieving peace and stability in Afghanistan, for too
many Afghans, members of international security
forces, foreign diplomats and others have lost their lives
to indiscriminate violence.
Regarding the peace process, the remarks made by
President Trump and Secretary of State Pompeo over
the weekend and yesterday speak for themselves; I have
nothing to add to them at this time
The United States continues to support Afghan
political and electoral institutions. We welcome the
findings of the report of the Secretary-General on
UNAMA (S/2019/703) that 9.6 million people have
been registered to vote. We have pledged $29 million
out of the total $59 million in donor funding offered
towards financing the presidential election and
have supported the work of the United Nations
Development Programme building the capacities of the
Independent Election Commission and the Electoral
Complaints Commission.
We continue to strongly support the role played by
Afghan women in Afghanistan’s economic, political
and social advancement. The United States remains
concerned about the high level of illicit narcotics
cultivation and production in Afghanistan, including
opiates and the growing ephedra problem. We
appreciate the work of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, including the Research And Trend
Analysis Branch, in continuing to draw the attention
of Member States to this issue. We hope that the
international community can expand efforts to address
the drug problem.
12/35

10/09/2019

Finally, as Council members are aware, we are in
the midst of a negotiation on a new UNAMA mandate.
We must ensure that the renewal draft resolution
provides UNAMA with clear, specific guidance to do
its critical work, particularly during this pivotal period
in Afghanistan’s history. We strongly believe that this
mandate is too important at this moment to have one
Security Council member deny consensus for reasons
having nothing to do with UNAMA. All of us must
display discipline and political will to focus the mandate
on the core issues that will empower UNAMA to
support the Government and the people of Afghanistan.
In conclusion, let me once again express
my appreciation to the United Nations and other
international partners for their support in strengthening
the legitimacy of Afghanistan’s electoral process and
for supporting Afghanistan’s peace process.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful for the holding of this important meeting
and to Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, Ambassador Djani
and the Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, Mr. Yuri Fedotov, for their
valuable briefings.
At the outset, we condemn the senseless attacks
carried out last week by the Taliban in various parts
of the country. We offer our condolences to the
victims’ families and wish a speedy recovery to those
affected. Such a threat to civil society is all the more
troubling in the current electoral context, with reported
attacks on candidates, workers and electoral and voter
spaces. Those unacceptable crimes must be met with
a commensurate response, and those responsible must
pay for their actions by facing justice.
In keeping with Special Representative Yamamoto’s
statement, we believe that Afghanistan is at a decisive
crossroads. The presidential elections scheduled to be
held in a few weeks will not only mark the democratic
destiny of the country, but will also provide a new
historical context and an opportunity to contribute
decisively to stability, reconciliation, sustainable peace
and the fight against corruption, pursuant to the vision
developed under the Geneva Mutual Accountability
Framework, with the support of the United Nations.
In that regard, we stress the importance that the
elections be held in accordance with the code of conduct,
which promotes and encourages behaviour based on
dialogue, tolerance and mutual respect, underpinned
by the lessons learned from previous elections. As the
19-27407

10/09/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

Secretary-General indicates, that requires the process
to be perceived as fair, transparent and fair for all
candidates, including refraining from the use of State
resources for campaigning purposes.
With regard to the peace process under way,
we deem it to be of key importance that the solution
to the current crisis be framed primarily within the
intra-Afghan dialogue, under the inclusive leadership
of the process advanced by the Special Representative,
and with the firm support of countries with influence.
We reiterate the importance of maintaining direct
negotiations between the Taliban and Government
representatives, as President Ashraf Ghani has stated,
with a view to ending the violence.
The multisectoral visit led in July by Deputy
Secretary-General Amina Mohammed — in the course
of which it was emphasized that the peace process
will be successful only if it is inclusive and fully
respects the rights of all Afghans — was very useful.
We must not forget that the majority of the victims
of violence are women and children. We therefore
welcome the Government’s efforts to better promote
and protect women and their participation in the
main electoral institutions, the Independent Human
Rights Commission and initiatives to strengthen their
participation in the peace process, as recognized by the
National Action Plan on Women, Peace and Security,
and in the economic empowerment programme.
The precarious security situation that has
been described is compounded by the presence of
terrorists from the Islamic State and their ties with
drug trafficking. As acknowledged at the recent
Istanbul Process meeting, it is imperative to establish
a regional strategy to adequately address the nexus
linking terrorism and organized crime in that area, in
accordance with resolution 2482 (2019). We highlight
the efforts of the Government, in partnership with the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, which
Mr. Fedotov pointed out earlier.
In conclusion, we underscore the vital work of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
in meeting all of those goals, particularly its work in
addressing the difficult humanitarian situation of the
country, including calls for a more significant response
by the international community to respond to urgent
food and health needs. We reaffirm our support for the
invaluable work of Special Representative Yamamoto

S/PV. 8613

and his team, the renewal of whose mandate we
strongly support.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): As this is the first
time that I am taking the floor under the Russian
presidency, let me congratulate you, Sir. You have our
full support. I thank our Polish colleagues for their
stewardship during the month of August. I would also
like to thank our briefers: the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Fedotov and our colleague
from Afghanistan.
Like other speakers, I would like to particularly
highlight four issues: peace, the presidential elections,
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) itself and the issue of women, peace
and security.
Together with other speakers this morning, I want to
express the United Kingdom’s strong condemnation of
the Taliban for its recent attacks. Taliban representatives
at the intra-Afghan peace conference held in Doha in
July committed to reducing civilian casualties to zero,
but the Taliban’s actions are not matching the group’s
words. Indeed, on the eve of a historic meeting with
United States representatives, the Taliban chose to
carry out yet further attacks in Kabul. The Afghan
Ambassador enumerated those, but the list before me
identifies at least five attacks since the month of August.
Those are not the actions of a group that is searching for
peace. At a minimum, the leaders of the Taliban need to
condemn violence when it occurs and undertake to do
everything in their power to stop the rest of its groups
from carrying out violence. It also needs to get a united
view that peace is in its interests as much as it is in the
interest of the people of Afghanistan.
As I am talking about the Taliban, I will take
the opportunity now to reiterate what the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General said about
inviting the Taliban to retract the threats against
the election. We note that President Ghani remains
committed to direct peace talks, and we share other
speakers’ wish that the intra-Afghan negotiations
can proceed apace. President Ghani has appointed a
15-strong member negotiating team, and he said only
this Monday, “We are ready for peace talks, but if the
Taliban think they can scare us, look at these warriors”.
But peace without ceasefire is impossible. If there
is to be lasting peace in Afghanistan, the Taliban must
enter into meaningful negotiations with an inclusive
and representative Afghan negotiating team.

19-2740713/35

S/PV.8613

The situation in Afghanistan

My second point concerns the elections. We are
encouraged by what the Special Representative said
that the elections remain scheduled for 28 September. I
know from experience in Kabul that there are often many
stories around elections and many fears that they will
be cancelled. Therefore, what Special Representative
Yamamoto was able to say about the elections and the
arrangements has been very important. The elections
represent an important opportunity for the Afghan
people to make decisions about their future at a critical
time. Our Ambassador in Kabul met in recent weeks with
Ms. Hawa Alam Nuristani, Chair of the Independent
Election Commission, and with Zohra Bayan Shinwari,
Chair of the Electoral Complaints Commission. I think
it is important that the Council offer its full support to
the Afghan authorities to help ensure that the elections
are credible, transparent, participatory and as free as
possible from violence, and that we encourage all the
leaders to engage faithfully in the democratic process
and to take a stand against electoral fraud.
Turning to my third point, about UNAMA, we very
much welcome the work UNAMA has done, especially
in coordinating international support for the elections.
We hope that it will be able to continue that work at
the same pace until election day and beyond. Other
speakers have referred to UNAMA’s mandate, which is
due for renewal by 17 September. We hope all Security
Council members will be able to support a text that
gives UNAMA the clear and strong mandate it needs to
support Afghanistan at this critical time.
Turning to the issue of women, which the
Ambassador of Afghanistan set out so eloquently, in
all cases, the United Kingdom remains committed to
a peaceful and democratic future for Afghanistan. We
will continue to work with partners and the Afghan
authorities to ensure that Afghanistan has the support
it needs. It is particularly important that Afghanistan
maintain the gains it has made on human rights over
recent years. Women play an essential role in Afghan
society, a fact that was underscored by the Deputy
Secretary-General’s visit in July. The United Kingdom
will continue to support the full implementation of
Afghanistan’s national action plan on women and peace
and security.
I want to end by stressing the vital importance of
women’s participation in the elections, but also in an
inclusive peace process.
14/35

10/09/2019

Mr. Radomski (Poland): I would like to begin
by expressing our gratitude to Special Representative
Yamamoto for his comprehensive and informative
briefing. Poland highly values and welcomes the efforts
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) to support peace and development in
Afghanistan. We are also grateful to Ambassador Djani
and Mr. Fedotov, as well as Ambassador Raz, for their
insightful interventions.
Let me say that Poland aligns itself with the
statement to be delivered later by the observer of the
European Union.
I would like to touch upon three issues in my
intervention that we find of great significance,
namely, the presidential elections, the importance
of international humanitarian law and safeguarding
social achievements.
The forthcoming days will be essential for
eliminating the shortcomings and addressing the
lessons learned from the 2018 electoral process. It
is crucial to ensure credibility and transparency
and preserve the inclusivity of the political process
during the preparations and conduct of the upcoming
presidential elections. Strong, effective measures to
safeguard the safety, transparency, accountability and
credibility of this ballot need to be taken. We urge
anti-Government elements to restrain from attacking
polling stations, in order to allow the brave men and
women of Afghanistan to participate in the democratic
process. Poland reiterates its support for the Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces, which provide
security protection during the electoral process in close
cooperation with NATO Resolute Support Mission
personnel. As the previous election has already proven,
capacity-building efforts supported by international
forces produce very positive and encouraging results.
The presidential statement adopted by the
Council on 20 August (S/PRST/2019/8) reaffirmed the
Security Council’s strong condemnation of violations
of international humanitarian law committed by all
parties to armed conflict, wherever conflict occurs.
The condemnation relates also to the situation we
see now in Afghanistan, especially with regard to
civilian casualties. Poland condemns in the strongest
terms the brutal attacks by the Taliban deliberately
aimed at civilians. We urge all sides involved in the
current conflict to comply with international law so
as to end violations, abuses and impunity. We also
19-27407

10/09/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

strongly condemn the unlawful denial of access to
humanitarian assistance and humanitarian personnel
and the deliberate attacks on medical and humanitarian
personnel, hospitals and other medical facilities subject
to protection under international humanitarian law.
In the context of recent developments, Poland
strongly believes that any peace process should include
mechanisms to safeguard the interests of all Afghans,
in particular women, youth and minorities. We wish
to underline that peace should not come at the cost of
rolling back the progress made in recent years. The
full participation of all Afghans, especially women and
youth, in all aspects of social, political and economic
life has to be preserved. A peaceful resolution of the
conflict cannot be achieved at the cost of women’s and
minority rights.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm Poland’s
appreciation for the crucial role played by UNAMA
and all the United Nations agencies in supporting the
Afghan people. The current negotiation process on
UNAMA’s mandate should lead us all to the adoption
of a consistent and meaningful resolution that provides
a strong foundation for the United Nations active role
in Afghanistan. We remain committed to supporting
UNAMA and international partners to achieve a
democratic and self-sustainable Afghanistan.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Special Representative Tadamichi Yamamoto,
Executive Director Yury Fedotov and Ambassador
Djani for their briefings. I appreciate the work done
by them all, the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA), the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime and the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), pertaining to
Afghanistan and the Taliban. I would also like to
thank the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan,
Ambassador Raz, for her statement.
At present, the Afghan situation is in a critical
phase, with the countdown to the elections, the parallel
advancement of the peace and reconciliation process
and the electoral preparations, the worrisome security
situation and grave humanitarian conditions. The
international community should effectively implement
its commitments and continue to provide resolute
support to Afghanistan.
First, there is a need to assist Afghanistan in holding
safe and smooth presidential elections. The presidential
elections are to be held this month, and preparations are

S/PV. 8613

in their final phase. China appreciates Afghanistan’s
work and efforts to prepare for the elections. In order to
maintain political and social stability in Afghanistan,
China hopes that the national electoral bodies will
draw on the experiences and lessons of last year’s
parliamentary elections so as to ensure that all elections
unfold in an orderly manner. We hope that UNAMA
will provide technical support in this regard.
We hope that the Afghan National Defence and
Security Forces will predeploy for security situations
that may arise during the elections. We also call on all
political factions in Afghanistan to strengthen unity
and address any differences relating to the elections
through dialogue.
The second point is to assist in advancing the
Afghan-led and -owned reconciliation process. China
notes that the international community and countries
in the region have recently been actively pushing for
the Afghan Government to engage in direct dialogue
with the Taliban, and we urge the United States and
the Taliban to continue to advance their negotiations
and to implement agreements. We call on all parties
in Afghanistan, including the Taliban, to prioritize
the national interests and the interests of the people,
seize this historic opportunity, launch inter-Afghan
negotiations and speedily elaborate a political
framework that is acceptable to all parties.
We hope that UNAMA will continue to assist
the Afghan Government in advancing the domestic
political dialogue and push the Taliban to return to the
negotiating table promptly.
The third point is to assist Afghanistan in
strengthening its security capacity-building. The
Afghan security situation remains weak. Air strikes
and search operations have resulted in a large increase
in civilian casualties, terrorist organizations remain
active and drugs are still a major source of income for
terrorist organizations.
China calls for foreign troops to withdraw from
Afghanistan in an orderly and responsible manner
and for the United States and the Taliban to honour
their commitments on troop withdrawal and counterterrorism. China hopes that UNAMA will continue to
help Afghanistan strengthen security capacity-building.
The international community should provide training,
funding and technical support in that respect and assist
Afghanistan in effectively countering the threat of
terrorism, cross-border crime and drug smuggling.

19-2740715/35

S/PV.8613

The situation in Afghanistan

The fourth point is to assist Afghanistan in
achieving socioeconomic development and improving
livelihoods. Recently, Afghan economic development
has been at a standstill. The Afghan people have an
urgent desire to improve their livelihoods. As peace
and stability require good socioeconomic conditions,
China calls on the international community to assist
Afghanistan in leveraging its own advantages and in
participating in regional economic cooperation and
interconnectivity so as to enable it to achieve stability
and prosperity as soon as possible.
UNAMA should plan out United Nations agencies’
overall capacities in Afghanistan to assist the Afghan
Government and people in eradicating poverty,
improving livelihoods and overcoming the challenges
resulting from natural disasters. The international
community should effectively honour its commitments
of assistance to Afghanistan, help displaced Afghans
and improve the humanitarian situation of Afghan
refugees in neighbouring countries.
China has consistently supported the Afghan
political process and the swift realization of broad and
inclusive political reconciliation. Regarding future
political arrangements in Afghanistan, China believes
that three principles should be followed: first, there
should be broad representation and inclusiveness to
ensure that all parties and ethnic groups in Afghanistan
can participate in the political life of the country on
an equal footing and promote power-sharing; secondly,
terrorism must be fought tirelessly to ensure that
Afghanistan never again becomes a safe haven for
terrorist organizations; and, thirdly, a foreign policy
of peace and friendly relations should be pursued to
ensure that Afghanistan can live in peace with the
countries of the world, especially its neighbours, and
play a constructive role in regional peace and stability.
The third session of the China-AfghanistanPakistan Foreign Ministers’ Dialogue, held in Pakistan
on 7 September, issued a joint statement and adopted a
list of initial projects under the trilateral memorandum
of understanding on counter-terrorism cooperation
among Afghanistan, China and Pakistan. The Foreign
Ministers of the three countries expressed their hope
that the intra-Afghanistan negotiations would begin as
soon as possible and lead to a full cessation of violence;
underlined the need to reach a comprehensive agreement
through an inclusive, Afghan-led and -owned peace
process; and reaffirmed their commitment to promoting
the building of interconnectivity in the framework of
16/35

10/09/2019

the Belt and Road Initiative, the Regional Economic
Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan and other
regional economic initiatives. The Ministers stated
that they would not allow any terrorist organization,
element or individual to use their respective territories
to engage in activities against other countries. That
declaration is reflective of the current situation and
highly significant for the peace and reconciliation
process in Afghanistan.
China, through such multilateral mechanisms as
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization Afghanistan
Liaison Group and the China-Afghanistan-Pakistan
Foreign Ministers’ Dialogue, will continue to provide
support to Afghanistan in its political process and other
relevant areas and to work with it to actively implement
the memorandum of understanding between China and
Afghanistan on jointly advancing in the Belt and Road
Initiative, thus actively supporting the reconstruction
of the country and its reintegration into the regional
economy.
China will continue to support UNAMA and other
relevant actors in playing a greater role on Afghanistan.
We will continue to make our contribution by working
together with the international community for the
security, stability, development and prosperity
of Afghanistan.
Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): I
would like to welcome the convening of this debate and
thank Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto and Mr. Yury Fedotov
for their very enlightening briefings. I would also like
to thank Ambassador Triansyah Djani, Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1988 (2011), for his report, and our colleague
the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan,
Mrs. Raz, for the particularly enlightening information
that she has just shared.
Just 18 days from the presidential elections in
Afghanistan, Côte d’Ivoire would like to commend the
outstanding work done by the Independent Election
Commission in registering 9.6 million people on the
electoral roll, including in areas where the security
situation remains precarious. We encourage the
Commission to continue its efforts by stepping up
awareness-raising among the electorate regarding the
use of and safeguards provided by the voting machines.
As we look ahead to the elections scheduled for
28 September, my country calls once again on Afghan
political actors to help establish an environment
19-27407

10/09/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

conducive to the holding of free, transparent and credible
elections despite the latest developments regarding
the Doha talks. The security context continues to be
characterized by persistent attacks against the security
forces and civilians, particularly since the launch of the
electoral campaign on 28 July, which is indeed a source
of profound concern.
The electoral milestones represent without doubt
an essential link in the chain of requirements for
establishing lasting peace and stability in Afghanistan.
They must nonetheless be accompanied by a set of
initiatives aimed at achieving an inclusive approach for
ending the crisis. Côte d’Ivoire would therefore like to
welcome the establishment by President Ashraf Ghani
of a Ministry of Peace — an institutional tool that
will further enhance the coordination of Government
actions in implementing programmes aimed at
strengthening peace and stability as well as ensuring
national reconciliation and social cohesion.
In this regard, my country is of the view that the
Government’s peace and security initiatives, far from
being mutually exclusive, could have been strengthened
by the conclusion of an agreement between the United
States and the Taliban; such an agreement could have
opened the way to possible peace talks between the
Taliban and the Afghan authorities. Alas, it seems the
macabre accounting is not yet over given the ongoing
killings perpetrated by the armed opposition. It is the
civilian population, particularly women and children,
that pays the highest price for such barbaric acts. That
is why Côte d’Ivoire condemns in the strongest terms
the recent attacks, especially those that took place on
2 September in Kabul, for which the Taliban claimed
responsibility even as it had for weeks been engaged in
talks with the United States in Doha. Everything must
therefore be done for the resumption of the political
process in order not to destroy the international
community’s tremendous efforts for the benefit of the
Afghan people, who have suffered so much.
As with any country emerging from crisis, peace,
security and development in Afghanistan require the
multifaceted and ongoing support of the international
community, particularly the United Nations. To be
effective, that support must be in line with the strategic
priorities of the Afghan Government and help to create
sociopolitical and security environments that are
conducive to foreign investment. Peacebuilding efforts
must also be supported by economic recovery measures
so as to overcome the most pressing challenges,

S/PV. 8613

particularly combating poverty and ensuring access to
health care and education for all, including girls.
Côte d’Ivoire shares the concerns expressed by
the Secretary-General with regard to the southern,
eastern and south-eastern regions of Afghanistan,
where attacks by armed groups undermine peaceful
coexistence among communities and exacerbate the
humanitarian situation. The support of the United
Nations and international partners for the restoration of
State institutions is therefore essential. That is the main
purpose of Côte d’Ivoire’s call for the Resolute Support
Mission’s ongoing support to the capacity-building
of the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces
and to the improved capacity of judicial institutions,
particularly those specializing in the fight against drug
production and drug trafficking.
My country also stresses the importance of an
enabling environment for constructive cooperation
among States and with subregional organizations.
In that regard, we welcome the improved bilateral
relations between Afghanistan and Pakistan, as well as
the counter-terrorism and counter-narcotics efforts of
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization.
In conclusion, my delegation welcomes the logistics
and operational support of the Resolute Support Mission
to the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces.
We commend the unity of the Council, which remains
unwavering in its support for UNAMA and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. Côte d’Ivoire
hopes that such momentum within the Council will be
reflected in the renewal of the UNAMA mandate so that
the United Nations mission can continue to contribute
towards restoring peace and stability in Afghanistan.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, I would like to thank all the
briefers — Mr. Yamamoto, our colleague Ambassador
Djani, Permanent Representative of Indonesia, and
Mr. Yury Fedotov — for their comprehensive briefings.
I would also like to thank our colleague Ms. Adela
Raz, Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, for her
statement. We reiterate the support of the State of Kuwait
to Mr. Yamamoto and the staff of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for all
their tireless efforts given the difficult circumstances in
which they work. I also thank the Secretary-General for
his quarterly report (S/2019/703), which sheds light on
the situation in Afghanistan over the past three months.

19-2740717/35

S/PV.8613

The situation in Afghanistan

Today we meet days ahead of the presidential
elections in Afghanistan. We note with satisfaction
that the recent period witnessed significant progress
in preparing for the elections while creating new
opportunities for political participation towards
achieving peace despite the ongoing serious challenges
that must be addressed
The current stage in Afghanistan is a historic one
that is witnessing intensified consultations between
the various political Afghan parties in order to elect an
Afghan President who can shoulder the responsibility
for the country’s transition to an inclusive and
sustained peace. We are also seeing preparations for
the presidential elections by the Independent Election
Commission (IEC). Those elections are supposed to be
held on 28 September. In that regard, I would like to
commend the vital role of UNAMA as well as the IEC
in registering voters and candidates and the preparation
of the polling centres for the elections.
The total number of voters stands at 9.6 million,
and that figure demonstrates the desire of the Afghan
people to choose the path of democracy despite the
security threats. We pay tribute to the valiant Afghan
people in stressing once again that the political solution
must be Afghan-owned and Afghan-led.
In the context of the political developments,
we must emphasize the importance of national
reconciliation and the Afghan peace process. The State
of Kuwait is closely following the steps taken by the
Government of Afghanistan, the most recent of which
was the formation of the Ministry of Peace as part of
the Government’s efforts to support reconciliation and
intra-Afghan talks. We also follow all regional and
international efforts to bring about a comprehensive
and inclusive peace process in Afghanistan. We hope
that such efforts ultimately lead to a de-escalation and
promote the interests of the Afghan people above any
other interests.
With regard to security, Afghanistan unfortunately
still suffers from a lack of stability in the country. The
report of the Secretary-General includes several figures
with regard to security incidents and the protection
of civilians, which demonstrate the critical security
situation in Afghanistan and the ever-increasing
responsibility to reach a peace agreement with regional
and international support. That agreement would lead
to putting an end to violence once and for all.
18/35

10/09/2019

A discussion of the situation in Afghanistan must
include the fight against terrorism, crime and drugs.
In that regard, we would like to reiterate the support of
the State of Kuwait to Afghanistan in its war against
terrorism and its tireless efforts to extend its control
and sovereignty over all its territories. We reiterate the
importance of addressing the threat of terrorism, which
is a main factor for stability in Afghanistan. That is part
of the international community’s joint efforts against
the scourge and of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy. We also commend the efforts of
the Afghan authorities to combat crime and drugs, as
clearly noted in the Secretary-General’s report.
In conclusion, we would like to reiterate that
lasting peace and stability in Afghanistan and the
region can be achieved only through a negotiated
political settlement. Consequently, we urge all parties
to participate constructively in the diplomatic efforts to
achieve peace and promote the interests and prosperity
of the Afghan people.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me first to extend France’s condolences to the Afghan
people and the families of the victims of the attacks
perpetrated on 2 and 5 September in Kabul. France
stands in solidarity with the Afghan Government in the
fight against terrorism. That is a joint commitment of
which we are all particularly aware on the eve of the
eighteenth anniversary of the attacks of 11 September
2001. I, too, thank Special Representative Tadamichi
Yamamoto for his insightful briefing, in particular
with regard to the need to protect civilians and to
work for a political settlement to the conflict through
an intra-Afghan negotiation process. I also thank
Ambassador Djani and Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, for their interventions. I especially welcome
the statement made by Ambassador Adela Raz, in
particular her support for the rights of Afghan women.
I associate myself with the statement to be delivered
shortly by the observer of the European Union. I would
like to focus on three main points.
First, France shares the deep concern over the
continuing high level of violence in Afghanistan.
Civilians continue to be targeted in deadly attacks in
violation of international humanitarian law. Women
and children continue to pay the highest price. That
is unacceptable. Violations of international law,
particularly regarding children’s rights, must stop.
19-27407

10/09/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

France welcomes all steps by the Afghan Government
to work to that end and to strengthen measures to ensure
the rights of Afghan women in all areas.
I also wish to express France’s support for the
Secretary-General’s call for secure and unhindered
humanitarian access to all Afghan territory.
Humanitarian and health-care personnel, as well as
civilian and humanitarian infrastructure, must be
protected in order to ensure that the needs of the Afghan
population are met.
I would also like to take advantage of Mr. Fedotov’s
presence today to highlight the importance of the fight
against drug trafficking, which continues to fuel the
illicit economy, finance terrorist groups and threaten
the health of many Afghans. Efforts to combat drug
trafficking must continue, and France remains fully
committed to working with the Afghan authorities in
that regard.
My second point concerns the need to make every
effort to ensure that the presidential elections slated
for 28 September are held without incident in a free,
credible, transparent and inclusive manner. As the
Special Representative stressed clearly, it is critical to
avoid a new surge of violence as elections approach.
The registration of more than 500,000 new voters,
36 per cent of whom are women, is an encouraging
sign. However, all necessary measures must be taken
to ensure their effective and safe participation in
political life.
Further efforts must be made by the Afghan
authorities to restore public confidence in the security
and transparency of the elections. In that regard, France
welcomes the important work of the Afghan Government
to secure polling stations with the assistance of the
NATO mission, which must be completed. The future
president of Afghanistan will be responsible for
meeting the Afghan people’s aspirations for peace. It is
particularly important that the upcoming elections be
held successfully in order to strengthen their legitimacy
with a view to future intra-Afghan negotiations.
Finally, I would like to stress the need to work
towards a negotiated and lasting peace in Afghanistan.
The concept of an Afghan-led peace process is more
relevant than ever. Such a process must be inclusive and
not exclude any segment of the population. The gains
made in the field of justice, the rule of law and respect
for fundamental freedoms must also be consolidated

S/PV. 8613

in order to guarantee lasting peace. That will require
condemning and abandoning violence.
To that end, the resolute commitment of
Afghanistan’s partners is essential. France, with
long-standing ties to Afghanistan, will do its part
and urges all countries of the region to actively and
unambiguously support the stabilization of Afghanistan
and to contribute to the establishment of lasting peace
in that country.
In conclusion, let me reiterate my country’s
full support for the Afghan Government and for the
Organization’s efforts to achieve lasting peace for
all Afghans. As we are now discussing the renewal
of UNAMA’s mandate, I would like to acknowledge
the remarkable work that the Mission does on a daily
basis. In order to continue playing a vital role and to
support Afghanistan on the path to peace, UNAMA
must be able to rely on a robust and clear mandate and
the support of the Security Council. In that regard,
France welcomes the efforts made by Germany and
Indonesia and expresses to them its full support in the
achievement of a balanced text.
Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): On behalf of the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea, I would like first of all to express our
condolences to the families of the victims and wish a
speedy recovery to those injured in the latest attacks
in Afghanistan, which we strongly condemn. We once
again call on the parties to abide by international law
and international humanitarian law with regard to the
protection of civilians.
I would like to thank Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto
for his informative briefing and for his admirable
commitment to lasting peace in Afghanistan. We
have listened to his remarks, which, for the most part,
we endorse. We also thank Ambassador Djani for
the excellent work he has done in the exercise of his
functions as Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), as well
as Mr. Yury Fedotov for the relevant information he
has provided.
The successful holding of Afghanistan’s
presidential elections, scheduled for 28 September, will
be an important milestone for the Afghan people and a
great opportunity for all Afghans to decide the future of
their country. We therefore encourage the Government
of Afghanistan to fortify security measures through
the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces so

19-2740719/35

S/PV.8613

The situation in Afghanistan

10/09/2019

that the Afghan people can exercise their right to vote
in a secure environment and to ensure the holding of
transparent, inclusive and credible elections through
the Independent Election Commission. Along those
lines, we echo Mr. Yamamoto’s call for national leaders
and candidates to participate responsibly, and urge
the Taliban and other armed groups to desist from
threatening or attacking election personnel, candidates
or voters.

of United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA).

My delegation believes that, in parallel with the
electoral process, it is particularly important that talks
on an Afghan peace process continue. In that spirit, we
support all of the efforts under way and future efforts to
promote the intra-Afghan dialogue for peace in Qatar
and the strengthening of regional cooperation efforts
through the convening of multilateral forums to build
regional consensus on peace.

In conclusion, we reiterate our support and welldeserved praise for UNAMA’s key role in promoting
peace and stability in Afghanistan.

Equatorial Guinea believes that such a peace process
must be inclusive and Afghan-led and -implemented,
with a view to achieving a peaceful resolution of the
conflict and a comprehensive political solution; this
means that it must incorporate all social and political
forces in the country, including the opposition as
well as women in particular, in a meaningful way.
While we acknowledge that there has been significant
progress in that regard, we encourage the Government
of Afghanistan to continue including women in the
electoral and peace processes, with women playing a
leading role during the negotiations.
With regard to the humanitarian and security
situation in Afghanistan, we share the grave concern
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2019/703) once again
reflects a high and devastating number of victims, the
result of deliberate attacks through the indiscriminate
use of improvised suicide and non-suicide explosive
devices, as well as ongoing attacks on humanitarian
workers. All of that, compounded by drought, sudden
natural disasters, food insecurity and poverty, is
displacing massive numbers of people, exacerbating the
major challenges facing Afghanistan.
Those challenges require the continuing attention
of the international community and the provision
of significant support to the Afghan Government to
improve the country’s security environment. In that
context, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea will support
any language aimed at addressing those challenges
during the negotiations for the renewal of the mandate
20/35

Last but not least, our country remains concerned
about the growing presence of the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant in Afghanistan, which poses a serious
threat to the security of Afghanistan and the countries
of the region. In that connection, we encourage Member
States to support the work of the 1988 Committee and
thus comply fully with their sanctions obligations.

Mr. Matjila (South Africa): Please allow me to
begin by thanking the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto; the Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Mr. Yury
Fedotov; and Ambassador Djani, Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1988 (2011), for their insightful briefings.
In that regard, I would also like to commend
UNAMA’s personnel and Mr. Yamamoto for their
vital contribution in supporting Afghanistan’s efforts
towards restoring peace and stability in the country,
especially given the challenging circumstances in
which they operate.
We would like to highlight the following three
points in our statement: first, the peace process;
secondly, the role of women; and, thirdly, the security
situation in Afghanistan.
First, regarding the peace process, South Africa
believes that the only way for Afghanistan to achieve
durable peace and stability is through a comprehensive
and inclusive Afghan-led and Afghan-owned political
process leading to a negotiated settlement. My
delegation is of the opinion that any engagement or
peace initiative towards lasting peace and security in
Afghanistan should be considered, including that of
the United States of America or other parties of the
region. However, it is also important that all sectors
of the Afghan Government and society be included in
those discussions to ensure that a comprehensive and
inclusive peace is established and sustained.
Secondly, on the role of women, South Africa
strongly believes that an integral aspect of those
engagements is the inclusion and participation of
19-27407

10/09/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV. 8613

Afghan women. That would safeguard the significant
progress and gains achieved regarding women’s and
girls’ rights and provide the necessary views and voices
of all segments of Afghan society. We welcome the
Government of Afghanistan’s efforts to advance the
promotion and protection of women’s rights and urge that
this commitment continue during future discussions.

election process to work together to ensure that the
elections go ahead as planned as mandated by the
Afghan Constitution. We hope that with the necessary
cooperation and support among the parties, the
presidential elections will be credible, free, fair and
transparent, and that the 9.6 million registered Afghans
can go to the polls as scheduled.

In that regard, we welcome President Ghani’s
appointment of Ambassador Raz as the Permanent
Representative to the United Nations. We hope and
have no doubt that she will continue to fly her country’s
flag high and that she will be a shining example of what
the women of Afghanistan can achieve. Equally, we
join Ambassador Raz in thanking Deputy SecretaryGeneral Amina Mohammed and the Executive Director
of UN-Women for their visit to the country in July and
their engagement with the women and the Government
of Afghanistan in the area of women and peace
and security.

Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank
Mr. Yamamoto, Mr. Fedotov and Ambassador Djani
for their briefings. We also thank and welcome the
Ambassador of Afghanistan.

Peace in Afghanistan can be achieved only by
the Afghan people themselves. My delegation urges
all stakeholders to work towards that noble and
achievable goal.

The electoral events and those related to the peace
process continue to weigh on the political environment
in Afghanistan. In that regard, we take note of the
preparations for the presidential elections, to which we
hope that the lessons learned from the parliamentary
elections will be applied, but above all that they will be
credible and legitimate. We applaud the collaboration of
international and regional actors with the intra-Afghan
dialogue, and we urge the continuation of the talks
that have been taking place in Doha in support of an
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned process.

Thirdly and finally, on the security situation in
Afghanistan, South Africa is deeply concerned at
the levels of violence and insecurity in Afghanistan,
especially attacks targeting innocent civilians through
the use of improvised explosive devices and suicide
attacks. The ongoing violence only erodes the positive
progress made in recent years. As the SecretaryGeneral stated, those deplorable acts cannot be justified
and must come to an end. We pay tribute to those who
have sacrificed their lives in assisting Afghanistan on
the road to peace and stability.

At the same time, we welcome the various initiatives
in support of that dialogue, including the third trilateral
consultation held in Beijing, the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization summit held in Bishkek and the Heart
of Asia-Istanbul Process senior officials meeting held
in Ankara. Meetings such as those are simple steps
to create and build trust between the parties. In that
regard, we would like to commend the cooperation of
the Governments of the United States, Pakistan, Qatar,
Germany and Russia, as well as the improvement of
bilateral relations between Pakistan and Afghanistan.

The effect of that violence is particularly felt by the
most vulnerable in society, notably women, children
and those living with disabilities. We call on all parties
to ensure the protection of civilians and to adhere to
their obligations under international humanitarian
and international human rights law. My delegation
continues to condemn the unlawful recruitment and
use of children in armed forces and groups and calls
for their immediate release and reintegration into
Afghan society.

Regarding the security situation, we are concerned
about the high number of victims and the consistent level
of clashes and attacks perpetrated by anti-Government
elements. We urge both the Government and the
Taliban to comply with the initiatives emanating from
the outcomes of the peace dialogue aimed at bringing
about a ceasefire and reducing the number of clashes.
The Dominican Republic strongly condemns the recent
attacks perpetrated by the Taliban, and we offer our
condolences to the families of the victims.

In conclusion, the Afghan people are expected
to go to the polls on 28 September and exercise their
hard-won right to choose their own President. In that
regard, South Africa calls on all participants in the

We would like to acknowledge the progress made
in protecting women’s rights, the allocation of funds
to the national budget for women victims of violence
and the establishment by presidential decree of the

19-2740721/35

S/PV.8613

The situation in Afghanistan

special secretariat to investigate cases of harassment of
women in Government institutions. Similarly, we wish
to reiterate our call for the meaningful participation
of women in the peace process and all areas of
decision-making on the future of Afghanistan.
An area of concern for us is the economic situation
caused by conflict and natural disasters. Impoverished
farmers are seeing their crops decimated by drought
and their living standards diminished, so that illegal
cultivation becomes an attractive option. Moreover,
we are concerned that the high levels of opium
production and trafficking are channelling funds to
non-State groups, fuelling instability and hampering
development efforts.
On the other hand, vulnerable groups continue to
be in urgent need of assistance to survive and mitigate
the shortage of food, including 132,000 displaced
families in the first five months of the year. That is
compounded by restrictions on humanitarian access to
vulnerable areas controlled by anti-Government armed
groups. The threats posed to humanitarian personnel in
those areas are unacceptable. We urge all parties to the
conflict to ensure access to those areas and to respect
the rights of their inhabitants.
Despite promising advances, many challenges must
be addressed before lasting peace can be achieved.
Ending the war in Afghanistan will require all parties
to make difficult compromises, but ultimately it is up to
the Afghans themselves.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.
We thank Mr. Yamamoto, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA);
Mr. Fedotov, Under-Secretary-General and Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, as well as Ambassador Djani, Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988
(2011), for their in-depth analyses of the current
situation in Afghanistan.
UNAMA plays an important role in coordinating
international assistance to Afghanistan. The security
situation in the country remains a source of concern.
Despite the efforts of the Afghan National Defence
and Security Forces, the country remains plagued by
brutal terrorist attacks. The countless victims of those
22/35

10/09/2019

heinous attacks include civilians, above all women
and children, as well as military and police personnel.
We pay tribute to their courage and to their memory.
The situation is further complicated by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) in Afghanistan. Its
fighters retain influence in the country. They fill their
ranks by adding foreign terrorist fighters with combat
experience in Syria and Iraq and by creating so-called
sleeper cells. As Mr. Fedotov rightly noted earlier,
the drug problem is inextricably linked to terrorism.
Narcodollars provide considerable financial support for
terrorism. We believe that it is extremely important to
continue and strengthen international efforts to counter
that scourge.
The Collective Security Treaty Organization
(CSTO) always stands ready to provide its assistance in
that regard, as it has extensive experience in combating
the drug threat, including through Operation Channel.
We intend to continue working with our Afghan friends
to eliminate the security threats, primarily those posed
by ISIL and Al-Qaida, and to build the capacities of
civilian, security and counter-narcotics agencies.
The Russian Federation consistently supports the
aspirations of the Afghan people for lasting peace in
the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan. We are genuinely
eager to promote an Afghan-owned and Afghan-led
reconciliation process and subsequent stabilization in
the country. We have said time and again that a peaceful,
stable and prosperous Afghanistan is our common goal.
The Russian Federation has already done and
continues to do a great deal to establish peace on Afghan
soil. Examples of our efforts include inter-Afghan
contacts on the Russian platform during the Moscow
format of consultations, held on 9 November 2018,
and during celebrations of the 100th anniversary of
Russian-Afghan diplomatic relations on 28 and 29 May
this year. Such steps are based on the understanding
that national reconciliation hinges on inclusive
dialogue, leaving no social and political forces behind.
The intra-Afghan dialogue was launched in Moscow on
5 and 6 February. For the first time, it brought together
eminent politicians, women and the Taliban at the same
table and confirmed the fact that a broad discussion
remains key to achieving peace in Afghanistan. We
stand ready to continue to provide our full cooperation
in that regard.
Another channel for successful engagement on
Afghanistan is the trilateral consultations format on
19-27407

10/09/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

the Afghan peace process at the level of the special
representatives of Russia, the United States and China,
with the participation of Pakistan at the meeting of the
troika in Beijing on 11 July.
We note the growing awareness of the importance
of the regional context of an Afghan settlement
and the need to harness the potential of established
structures in that regard, in particular the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization (SCO) and the renewed SCO
Contact Group with Afghanistan, as well as the CSTO.
National reconciliation should be the result of an allencompassing inter-Afghan dialogue and a concerted
approach to uniting the entire country and all Afghans,
without exception. However, after years of conflict,
the path to peace in Afghanistan will be arduous and
require the consolidation of the efforts of all actors.
In addition, there will be a need for strategic patience
to ensure that the blueprint for a final settlement is
fully operational.
We deplore the suspension of talks between the
United States and the Taliban, a positive outcome to
which would have paved the way for further progress in
achieving a peaceful settlement, national reconciliation
and a comprehensive solution in Afghanistan. We
trust that the situation that has arisen will not lead to
excessive delays in United States-Taliban dialogue. We
call on the parties to return to the negotiating table as
soon as possible. The Russian Federation reaffirms
its commitment to facilitating the peace process in
Afghanistan and its willingness to act as a guarantor
of an agreement between the United States and the
Taliban, alongside other key States of the region.

S/PV. 8613

Today’s meeting is being held at yet another critical
juncture for Afghanistan. Only 18 days are left before
the presidential elections are held. Those elections are
supposed to help consolidate our efforts to achieve
security and stability in the country. However, we
are once again faced with an increasing number of
terror attacks perpetrated by the Taliban. Civilians,
especially women and children, are the victims of that
alarming, vicious campaign. The weakening of the
security situation is likely to derail the election process
and put the country into yet another cycle of violence.
That approach cannot bring peace or stability to
Afghanistan. The future of Afghanistan should be based
on democracy and the rule of law, not on violence. The
international community must back the Afghan people
to ensure that elections are peaceful and successful.
Turkey strongly condemns terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations. As a framework nation through
NATO’s Resolute Support Mission, we continue to
support Afghanistan on defence, security and law
enforcement matters, including training and assistance
to the Afghan national security forces.
While we are only three weeks from the scheduled
elections, it is unclear how far we are from achieving
truly lasting peace in the country. At this critical
moment, we expect all parties to act responsibly and
seize the opportunity to bring the 40-year war to an end.
We are closely following the information coming from
Doha talks and recent announcements by President
Trump with regard to calling off the negotiations
between the United States and the Taliban.

I give the floor to the representative of Turkey.

Turkey welcomes all efforts aimed at reducing
violence and supporting peace and security in
Afghanistan. As we have repeated many times in the
Chamber, the Afghan people have made achievements
at important costs and those cannot be easily sacrificed.
Our efforts to empower vulnerable groups, in particular
women and girls, should not be wasted. Peace in
Afghanistan can be sustainable only through genuine
reconciliation among all segments of Afghan society.

Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Yamamoto,
Under-Secretary-General Fedotov and the Permanent
Representative of Indonesia, Ambassador Djani, for
their briefings, and the Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, Ambassador Raz, for her statement. I also
thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2019/703).

Our efforts and cohesion in our messages will have
an immense impact on the way in which the next decade
will unfold. Therefore, it is important that we refrain
from drawing down the international community’s
commitment to Afghanistan at an immature stage,
which would be incompatible with the situation
and requirements on the ground. We cannot afford

Afghanistan is about to hold presidential elections,
scheduled for September this year. We trust that the
elections will take place in an atmosphere of calm
and be a powerful consolidating factor for the people
of Afghanistan.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

19-2740723/35

S/PV.8613

The situation in Afghanistan

to leave Afghanistan until our joint achievements
are irreversible.
At a time of transformation, the importance of
regional cooperation and commitment becomes all the
more relevant. The momentum that has been achieved
through the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process is worthy
of attention. At both the meeting of senior officials in
June and the Joint Regional Conference on CounterTerrorism and Counter-Narcotics in July, the need for
a cohesive regional approach to tackling transboundary
challenges was underlined. Increasing cooperation in
the heart of Asia will benefit Afghanistan. It will also
constitute a useful instrument for the region as a whole
to realize its full potential in economic development,
investments and trade. The Istanbul Process remains
the most comprehensive regional platform for dialogue.
In close consultation with the Afghan Government, we
are planning to hold a ministerial conference of the
Istanbul Process by the end of the year. We sincerely
hope that this mechanism can be used to contribute to
the existing peace efforts.
Negotiations for a resolution renewing the
mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) have come at a timely moment,
when change and transformation are dominating the
country’s agenda. We believe that the comprehensive
role assumed by UNAMA in assisting the Afghan
people to achieve a bright future is of the utmost
importance. We once again acknowledge its role
in the organization of upcoming elections and the
strengthening of electoral reform efforts by providing
technical assistance and capacity-building. Turkey will
continue to support UNAMA’s activities and efforts in
this regard. We hope that its mandate will be renewed
so as to enable the Mission to conduct its activities
without any hindrance.
The
international
community’s
continuing
support remains vital for a peaceful, secure and stable
Afghanistan that can effectively serve the needs of
its people. We will maintain our solidarity with the
Afghan people, as well as our support through regional
and international forums.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Serra (Italy): At the outset, I wish to congratulate
the Russian Federation on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of September. We are
deeply grateful to Special Representative Yamamoto,
24/35

10/09/2019

Executive Director Fedotov and Ambassador Djani
for their comprehensive presentations. I also wish to
thank the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan
for her update on the situation in the country and the
electoral process.
Italy aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
by the observer of the European Union.
While the situation in Afghanistan remains
extremely volatile at present, these uncertainties should
not lead us to overlook the significant progress made in
recent months in the negotiations to achieve peace. In
this challenging context, the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan remains an essential point of
reference for prospects for stability and development in
Afghanistan, and we look forward to the renewal of its
mandate in the coming days.
I cannot continue my remarks today, however,
without first expressing our firm condemnation of
the heinous terrorist attacks that have again struck
Afghanistan and its capital in recent weeks. We are
horrified by the Taliban’s latest attack in Kabul and
convey our deepest condolences to the families of
the victims.
Italy’s sincere hope is that this current phase
constitutes an inevitable but necessary moment for the
parties to reflect — an opportunity to develop a shared
awareness of the deeper significance that lies behind
a peace negotiation. Such talks require a great sense
of responsibility on the part of all stakeholders, whose
behaviour should be in keeping with the spirit of dialogue.
Above all, laying the foundations for a successful peace
process requires the patient rebuilding of trust, which is
impossible in an environment of escalating violence. It
is therefore cynical and unacceptable for the Taliban to
resort to indiscriminate violence against civilians as a
tool to gain leverage.
What the negotiations need to do instead is to
reassure all stakeholders — and first and foremost
the Afghan people — that the cycle of violence that
has prevailed in recent years can indeed be reversed.
Efforts made thus far in order to advance peace talks
should not be dispersed. On the contrary, they should
constitute the basis for reviving debate and dialogue
between the parties. We therefore hope that the window
of opportunity for peace — pursued so resolutely and
tenaciously in recent months — will remain open.
Peace is the only guarantee of a stable and prosperous
future for Afghanistan.
19-27407

10/09/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

Italy therefore reiterates its full support for those
diplomatic initiatives that can facilitate the start of a
reconciliation process in Afghanistan under Afghan
leadership and ownership, including a primary role
for Afghan women in order to ensure that their
constitutional rights and hard-won civil and social
gains are adequately safeguarded. In this regard,
we also reaffirm the importance of the contribution
that the main regional stakeholders can make to the
peace process.
Addressing the constant threats to security entails
high costs, draining precious resources and energies
that are urgently needed for institution-building and for
the economic and social development of Afghanistan.
Italy continues to stand shoulder to shoulder with our
Afghan partners and, within the framework of the
Resolute Support Mission, with the Afghan National
Defence and Security Forces, which bravely fight every
day against terrorism and violent extremism in order to
restore stability and security.
In closing, I wish to refer to the imminent presidential
elections scheduled for 28 September, which must be
credible, transparent and inclusive. The upcoming
election must provide the Afghan people with a tangible
demonstration of the progress made towards democratic
maturity and a framework for further strengthening
Afghanistan’s political institutions. Above all, the
election will constitute an opportunity for the people to
reaffirm their strong desire for peace, which is shared
by all Afghans. Building a broad-based consensus for
peace through elections can also be a crucial means to
improve prospects for intra-Afghan dialogue.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I congratulate the
Russian Federation on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of September and
wish them every success with their timely and relevant
agenda of critical issues. My delegation conveys its
thanks to Poland for its outstanding work as President
of the Council last month.
We thank the Russian presidency for convening this
important debate on the situation in Afghanistan, as well
as the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto; the Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Mr. Yury
Fedotov; and Ambassador Djani, in his capacity as Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution

S/PV. 8613

1988 (2011), for their comprehensive updates. We also
appreciate the statement delivered by Ambassador
Adela Raz, Permanent Representative of Afghanistan,
for its insights on the prevailing critical situation.
The recent report of the Secretary-General
(S/2019/703) provides a realistic assessment and
important update on the work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). This
debate is also taking place on the eve of important
events that will determine the fate of Afghanistan in
the immediate and long-term future of the country. The
results of the 28 September presidential elections will
be crucial and have a profound impact on the dynamics
of and prospects for Afghanistan’s development. We
hope that they will be conducted in a peaceful and
transparent way to consolidate Afghan society. We
agree with Special Representative Yamamoto that
any threat or actual terrorist attack to undermine the
process is unacceptable.
We welcome the efforts of the various stakeholders
to advance the peace process and conduct relevant
negotiations with the Taliban. At the same time, we
strongly believe that only successful direct dialogue
between the Government of Afghanistan and the
Taliban could ensure a long-term viable settlement of
the devastating conflict. Terrorist attacks should cease
and must not be used as a political tool.
Despite the effective measures taken by the
international community and the Government, the
security situation continues to be complex. We are
particularly concerned that Da’esh in Afghanistan
remains combat-capable and continues to step up
its presence in various provinces of the country.
Increased terrorist activity in the north of Afghanistan,
near its borders with the Central Asian States, is of
special concern to us. In that regard, the effective
implementation of the third phase of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in Central Asia
is vital.
We also see the need to prevent violence against
women and children in Afghanistan, as well as the
growing number of deaths caused by terrorist attacks
and massive air strikes conducted by the army. As
indicated in the report of the Secretary-General, women
and children accounted for approximately 42 per cent
of the overall number of victims.
Kazakhstan attaches particular importance to the
role of women in conflict resolution. In that regard, we

19-2740725/35

S/PV.8613

The situation in Afghanistan

organized a regional conference, entitled “Empowering
women in Afghanistan” in September 2018 in our
capital. The conference focused on sustainable
economic growth by empowering Afghan women,
including in the business sector, reinforced by regional
cooperation, with an increased focus on education.
The role of regional and international
organizations — such as INTERPOL, the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and its Central
Asian Regional Information and Coordination Centre
for Combating Illicit Trafficking of Narcotic Drugs,
Psychotropic Substances and their Precursors — are
even more relevant in the light of the fact that drug
production in Afghanistan is one of the main sources
for financing terrorism.
In his report, the Secretary-General underlines
that securing Afghanistan’s economic future will
require the incremental development of its private
sector, accompanied by improved investor confidence
and enhanced trade and infrastructure connectivity
with regional partners. We therefore call on donors to
increase their contribution to peace and development in
and around Afghanistan.

10/09/2019

we welcome his comments and are grateful for his
leadership role in the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
Canada believes that a lasting solution to the
conflict in Afghanistan cannot be achieved through
military means alone. At this critical juncture, the
international community must continue to show its
support, including through the Security Council, which
will renew UNAMA’s mandate later this month.
My statement today will focus on two
important issues: the peace talks and the upcoming
presidential elections.
The Afghan people and the international community
look forward to a political settlement as the necessary
first step towards achieving lasting peace. The recent
devastating attacks in Afghanistan have prevented
building the necessary trust for realizing those efforts
to bring about peace and have intensified the urgent
need to achieve an inclusive and lasting political
settlement that protects civilians and strengthens
economic security in Afghanistan.
(spoke in English)

To that end, Kazakhstan is continuing to work on
establishing, in Almaty, an interregional hub for the
Sustainable Development Goals under the auspices
of the United Nations. We hope that that structure
will contribute to better connectivity and coordinated
support for Afghanistan and other countries in the region
and beyond, with a view to accelerating the achievement
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.

We have listened to the voices of Afghan women,
who are not willing to settle for a political agreement
with the Taliban that sacrifices the hard-earned gains
made with regard to their rights; nor are we. Canada
welcomes the fact that Afghan women were able to
attend the Doha talks. We strongly encourage Afghan
leaders to formally include women in any future
negotiating team and intra-Afghan peace talks.

Finally, my country is pleased that the Government
of Afghanistan, UNAMA and the international
community have continued to maintain a close
partnership, which is vital to ensuring sustainable
peace and stability in the country. Kazakhstan will
continue to support the brotherly people of Afghanistan
in fulfilling their aspirations for peace, prosperity
and security.

Canada and the international community
have supported Afghanistan through military and
police deployments, development and humanitarian
assistance, and reconstruction and stabilization efforts.
In partnership with Afghanistan, our collective efforts
have contributed to the foundations of a stable and
inclusive society in Afghanistan, and those gains
must be protected. An agreement that does not bring
peace to all members of society — men and women, all
ethnicities and all religions — is not a durable peace.
Men need to stand in solidarity with women to reach a
settlement that benefits all Afghans.

The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Blanchard (Canada) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Mr. President and your team, and all of
today’s briefers.
Canada was pleased to welcome Special
Representative Yamamoto at the meeting of the Group
of Friends of Afghanistan yesterday. As always,
26/35

Canada is working together with partners to build
the capacity of women’s organizations to take their seat
at the table and engage meaningfully in peacebuilding
and peace talks. For example, through its Women’s
Voice and Leadership project in Afghanistan, Canada
19-27407

10/09/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

is providing $8.4 million to help women’s organizations
provide services and strengthening networks among
women’s rights organizations.
With regard to my second point, concerning the
upcoming presidential elections, Canada welcomes
the efforts of the Independent Election Commission
to ensure that the elections are held fairly and
transparently. Providing sufficient security so that
women are able to safely participate is a critical step in
ensuring that women’s voices are a permanent part of
Afghan political life.
Finally, with those political processes under way, it
is now more important than ever to redouble our efforts
to build Afghanistan’s economic security and empower
UNAMA to support that work. I really believe that it is
also important that the UNAMA mandate also focus on
leveraging the economic integration already happening
in the region. When the poverty level rises from year
to year, when more than half of the Afghan population
lives below the national poverty line and when more
than 40 per cent of young adults have no occupation,
the narcotics trade and terrorism will remain attractive.
There will be no peace in Afghanistan without
minimal economic security, and I believe that one of
the most promising pillars for Afghanistan’s peace and
development that I have heard about since I have been
here at the United Nations and that I have seen in recent
years is through the enhanced regional integration that
is already under way.
UNAMA therefore needs to be better equipped to
leverage the economic integration that is happening
in the region, to ensure the coordination of the United
Nations-Afghan country team and to ensure the latter’s
coordination with the neighbouring country team.
UNAMA is the best place for acting as that coordinator,
and Canada submits that Council members should think
about that as they discuss the renewal of the UNAMA
mandate this month.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I thank you, Sir, for convening
this debate on Afghanistan. I also wish to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, for his informative briefing
and his tireless efforts, as well as those of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
Let me further express my appreciation to all the

S/PV. 8613

briefers for their remarks, as well as to Ambassador
Adela Raz of Afghanistan for her valuable input.
Achieving sustainable peace in Afghanistan is a
long-cherished desire not only of the Afghan people but
of the whole international community. An Afghan-led
and Afghan-owned peace process is crucial, and Japan
supports the determination and efforts of the Afghan
Government towards its realization.
We also commend the dedication of Afghanistan’s
international partners to that end, including Germany
and Qatar, for their efforts in bringing to fruition the
intra-Afghan peace dialogue in July; United States
Special Representative for Afghanistan Reconciliation
Zalmay Khalilzad for his negotiations with the Taliban;
and the United States, Russia, China and Pakistan for
convening the four-party meeting on the Afghan peace
process, held in Beijing on 10 and 11 July. Japan hopes
that those endeavours will eventually lead to an Afghanled and Afghan-owned peace process, and we would like
to continue our cooperation with international partners
to help achieve peace and prosperity in Afghanistan.
With the presidential elections coming up at
the end of this month, Japan welcomes the news that
relevant preparations are on track, including the full
voter-registration process that took place in Ghazni
province, where the 2018 parliamentary elections were
not held owing to political tensions and insecurity. It
is important that the people of Afghanistan be able to
cast their vote and decide their own future. UNAMA
plays a critical role in the electoral process, and
Japan commends and supports the efforts made by
Mr. Yamamoto and his team.
The participation of Afghan women is fundamental
in both the peace and electoral processes. Japan
welcomes the recent visit to Afghanistan by Deputy
Secretary-General Amina Mohammed and lauds her
clear focus on women,peace and security.
Meanwhile, Japan expresses its deep concern
about, and strong condemnation of, the continuing
terrorist attacks in Afghanistan, which are and aimed at
disrupting the peace efforts and electoral preparations.
We stress that the only way to end the conflict in
Afghanistan is by a peaceful settlement achieved
through dialogue.
Japan remains committed to supporting a self-reliant
and stable Afghanistan. We are steadily implementing
the $96 million in assistance that we committed to in

19-2740727/35

S/PV.8613

The situation in Afghanistan

March, and, later this year, we intend to provide further
support to Afghanistan in its efforts in education, in
particular its efforts to increase the adult literacy rate.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): Let me begin by conveying
our appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2019/703)and to our good friend, Special
Representative Tadamichi Yamamoto, for his very
insightful briefing.
The situation in Afghanistan remains a source of
concern for the international community, especially
for my country as a neighbour. Persisting conflict,
instability and turmoil and a fragile economy continue
to exacerbate the suffering of the Afghan people. We
share the Secretary-General’s concern at the continued
fighting and its heavy toll on the civilian population. We
are also concerned about the deteriorating humanitarian
situation in Afghanistan. We agree with his assessment
that the war in Afghanistan has been long and brutal
and that the path to peace will be challenging, but we
share his optimism about the progress achieved in the
peace talks.
That, of course, was before last weekend. After
decades of conflict, the framework for an eventual
peace agreement seemed within grasp. There were
sufficient grounds to be hopeful that the parties
appeared closer to that goal than at any other time in
the past 18 years. Nine rounds of direct talks between
the United States and the Taliban over nearly a year
had brightened prospects for putting in place, at least in
principle, an agreement for a settlement that could lead
to intra-Afghan negotiations and a negotiated end to the
long drawn-out conflict.
As history is our witness, the path to peace,
especially in protracted conflicts, is never linear or
easy. Challenges have to be overcome and hurdles
crossed before a comprehensive agreement is reached.
Therefore, the recent setback should not set back our
hopes or the resolve to persist. We hope the suspension
of the peace talks is only a pause and that they will
resume sooner rather than later, as the alternative is
far worse, namely, a surge in violence that could push
Afghanistan into an even more turbulent and uncertain
phase than has been witnessed in the past.
Pakistan has always condemned violence and called
on all sides to exercise restraint and a commitment to
28/35

10/09/2019

pursue the process. Let me reiterate that message today.
We have been facilitating the peace and reconciliation
process in good faith, as a shared responsibility, and
have encouraged all sides to remain engaged with
sincerity and patience. Pakistan will continue to
monitor the developments. We reiterate our principled
policy position that there is no military solution to the
conflict in Afghanistan. We urge all sides to re-engage,
and look forward to an early resumption of the talks.
Apart from Afghanistan itself, there is no country
that has suffered more than Pakistan from the four
decades of war and foreign interventions in Afghanistan.
There is no other country that will gain more from
peace in Afghanistan. In his recent visit to Washington,
D.C., Prime Minister Imran Khan assured President
Trump of Pakistan’s full support in bringing the
conflict in Afghanistan to a negotiated conclusion. But
Pakistan, at best, can be only a facilitator. It is up to the
parties to the conflict to resolve their differences with
patience, trust and continued, sustained engagement.
Tough decisions will eventually have to be taken by
the Afghans themselves. It is equally critical for the
international community to recommit to supporting a
negotiated peace in Afghanistan.
On the bilateral front, during the visit of President
Ashraf Ghani to Pakistan in June, the leadership of the
two countries committed to adopt the framework for
a forward-looking approach and to move away from
the mistrust of the past. The need for enhanced trade
and economic relations and cooperation for regional
connectivity was re-emphasized. Pakistan has provided
significant development aid to Afghanistan in the
education, health, reconstruction and infrastructure
development sectors.
In addition, my country has hosted millions of
Afghan refugees for four decades, opening our homes
and hearts to our brothers and sisters in their time of
travail and tragedy. Even as I speak, we are host to the
largest protracted presence of refugees anywhere in the
world. We remain committed to their safe, dignified
and voluntary repatriation. My Government recently
extended the tripartite agreement and the validity of
their stay in Pakistan to 30 June 2020.
At the regional level, China, Afghanistan and
Pakistan concluded the third round of the trilateral
Foreign Ministers dialogue in Islamabad only this
past weekend. The Ministers reiterated their support
for a politically negotiated settlement of the conflict
19-27407

10/09/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

and underlined the need for an inclusive, Afghanled and Afghan-owned peace process leading to a
comprehensive agreement for durable peace and
stability. We are working with Afghanistan and our
regional partners on many regional economic and energy
corridors, including the Belt and Road Initiative, the
Turkmenistan–Afghanistan–Pakistan–India Pipeline,
the CASA-1000 power project and others.
In conclusion, let me say that peace and stability
in Afghanistan and Pakistan are intertwined and
interdependent. Pakistan has a vital interest in a
peaceful, stable, united and prosperous Afghanistan.
My country stands ready to support the Government
of Afghanistan in addressing the multiple challenges it
faces today and will assist in whatever way it is asked
when it transitions from war to a peaceful future.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uzbekistan.
Mr. Ibragimov (Uzbekistan): First of all, I would
like to commend you, Mr. President, for convening
this quarterly debate on the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan, as well as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Tadamichi
Yamamoto, United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
Executive Director Yury Fedotov, Ambassador Djani
of Indonesia and Ambassador Raz of Afghanistan, for
their informative briefings.
Today it is obvious that the prospects for stable
and sustainable development in Central Asia are
inextricably linked with the achievement of durable
peace in neighbouring Afghanistan. Therefore,
Uzbekistan has significantly expanded its bilateral
relations with Afghanistan over the past years and is
actively participating in the international community’s
efforts to seek a peaceful solution to the Afghan
problem. In Uzbekistan, we consider Afghanistan to
be a close and fraternal nation, with which we have
been connected for centuries by the bonds of friendship
and common history, religion, customs and traditions.
Uzbekistan pursues with regard to Afghanistan a policy
based on the principles of mutual respect and equality
that takes into account shared interests, and supports a
Government elected by the people of Afghanistan.
It should be underlined that a holistic, deeply
thought-out and strategically substantiated vision of the
President of Uzbekistan, His Excellency Mr. Shavkat
Mirziyoyev, regarding the situation in Afghanistan
served as a solid foundation for the development

S/PV. 8613

by Tashkent of a completely new, practical and farsighted policy with regard to Afghanistan. In that
regard, Uzbekistan is firmly committed to continuing
to support all efforts conducive to making a practical
contribution to stabilizing the situation in Afghanistan
and returning that country to peaceful development.
The Tashkent Conference on Afghanistan, convened
in March 2018 at the initiative of the Presidents of
Afghanistan and Uzbekistan, became the political basis
to that end. The Tashkent declaration adopted at the end
of the Conference demonstrated a consolidated position
at the regional and global levels on the need for the early
start of direct negotiations between the Government of
Afghanistan and the Taliban movement.
In order to further advance the peace process and
ensure its inclusiveness, Uzbekistan has held a number
of important negotiations with the Government in
Kabul and representatives of the leading political forces
in Afghanistan, including the Taliban movement. In
particular, the Uzbek side over the past year met with
representatives of the Qatar-based Taliban Political
Commission. The most recent meeting took place a
month ago in Tashkent, when the Taliban movement
welcomed Uzbekistan’s efforts on Afghanistan. I
would like to emphasize that Uzbekistan closely
coordinates all of its contacts with the Taliban with the
Government of Afghanistan. In particular, we conduct
prior consultations with the Afghan authorities on our
upcoming meetings with the Taliban and brief them on
the outcomes.
Uzbekistan does not claim the right to be the main
negotiating platform on Afghanistan. Our ultimate
goal is to help launch peace talks and facilitate the
achievement of a general stabilization of the situation
in Afghanistan. From our perspective, the durability
of any peace agreement in Afghanistan will depend
upon, first and foremost, the involvement of all
domestic political forces. Therefore, the Government
of Afghanistan should be a party to any negotiation
process. This is the most important aspect without
which it will be impossible to achieve tangible progress
in launching peace talks.
We cannot postpone an intra-afghan political
process any longer: delaying it any longer will cost the
lives of many more innocent people. We also consider
it crucial to maintain the role of State institutions
in the negotiating process in such important areas
as law enforcement, fully functioning civil society
institutions and respect for the rights of women in

19-2740729/35

S/PV.8613

The situation in Afghanistan

Afghanistan — in short, all the achievements made
over the past 18 years. In addition, we must also invest
in the future social stability of Afghanistan through
its younger generations. In that regard, Uzbekistan
is today providing comprehensive assistance to the
economic recovery of Afghanistan and its participation
in regional initiatives. We support such projects as the
Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India
pipeline
and the Central Asia-South Asia power project, as well
as the practical implementation of initiatives vital to
Afghanistan in the areas of transportation, energy,
trade and education. Among those are the construction
by Uzbekistan of the Surkhan-Puli-Humri power line,
the opening of an educational centre in Termez city to
train Afghan citizens and the Termez-Cargo logistics
centre with a customs terminal, the development of
projects for the construction of railway lines from
Mazari-e-Sharif to Herat and Mazari-e-Sharif to Kabul
and Peshawar.
In addition, a ministerial meeting of the eighth
Regional Economic Cooperation Conference on
Afghanistan will be convened this year in Tashkent.
We expect the main result of that forum to be the
development of a strategy for further forging partnership
between the neighbouring countries of Afghanistan in
the name of the common goals of peace and prosperity.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that today
the future of peaceful development in Afghanistan
depends on consolidating the efforts of the international
community as a whole towards the soonest possible start
to direct negotiations among all parties to the conflict.
In that connection, I underscore once again that only
an Afghan-led and -owned political process can lead to
a durable peaceful settlement to the ongoing conflict.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I wish to
begin by thanking you, Mr. President, and the Russian
Federation for having convened this meeting. I also
wish to convey my sincere gratitude and appreciation
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA), Mr. Yamamoto, to the
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, Mr. Fedotov, and to my dear colleagues
Mrs. Adela Raz, Ambassador of Afghanistan, and
Ambassador Djani of Indonesia, in his capacity as
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
30/35

10/09/2019

pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011). I thank them for
their detailed and informative briefings following the
periodic report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/703),
in particular since this meeting is being held in advance
of the extension of the UNAMA mandate, to be
considered later next week.
I extend my heartfelt condolences to the Afghan
people and Government in the wake of the recent
terrorist attack in Kabul.
Egypt always stresses the importance of bolstering
the role of the Security Council and recalls the
commitment of the international community to
Afghanistan by providing it with political, security and
developmental support for a better present and future
for the Afghan people and the whole of Central Asia.
We must all be partners in order to link security to
development and peace in Afghanistan and its region.
We all believe in one desired international objective
that leads to strengthening Afghanistan’s capabilities
after the country has suffered a great deal for decades
while striving to address difficult challenges since the
last quarter of the twentieth century. The future goal
is to achieve peace, stability, security and sustainable
development by strengthening the United Nations role
concerning this vital issue and shedding light on the
future of Afghanistan and Central Asia, along with
reminding various international parties of the need to
shoulder their responsibility towards Afghanistan,
As there is a correlation between the interests and
reasons for stability in Central Asia and the Middle
East, Egypt always supports the Afghan Government
in its war against terrorism and its tireless efforts at
control and sovereignty over all of its territories. At
the same time, we look forward to the resumption of
peace talks between the United States of America
and the Taliban. We also welcome the support from
neighbouring countries to this vital negotiating path.
We also support Afghan authorities in their political
and social endeavours to establish security and
development for all the people of Afghanistan. Based
on that, when we, as the international community, seek
practical solutions in that regard, we need to shed light
on the following aspects.
First, the security aspect has at its core the
collective commitment to fight terrorism everywhere
under the international strategic framework and to
address the extremist ideologies, especially fighting
Da’esh in Afghanistan, in particular the Khorasan
19-27407

10/09/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

Province branch), amid an escalation in security
incidents recently and terrorist attacks in a manner that
is unprecedented in Afghanistan. In that regard, we
stress the importance of close cooperation regionally
and internationally with the relevant Afghan authorities
involved in fighting drugs, while also stressing the
importance of countering opium trafficking, as
reported by United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
in its recent reports. It is impossible to disassociate this
from counter-terrorism efforts given the fact that drug
trafficking is among the main sources of financing
terrorists organizations and armed groups.
Secondly, the development aspect should be
considered in the light of economic and investment
initiatives of neighbouring countries as well as regional
projects that have a strategic dimension. At the forefront
of those endeavours are the decisions taken by the Heart
of Asia ministerial conferences, along with the efforts
undertaken by the Regional Economic Cooperation
Conference on Afghanistan. In that regard, Egypt
pledges to continue its contribution through specialized
training offered by programmes of the Egyptian Agency
for Partnership for Development that target Afghan
army and police elements. In addition, Egypt continues
to provide support in the areas of the judiciary, culture,
health care, nursing, agriculture, irrigation and the
banking sector, as part of contributing to building an
integrated architecture for Afghan national institutions.
Egypt believes in the desired international unity of
purpose with a view to strengthening the capabilities
of the Afghan Government to achieve peace, stability,
security and sustainable development. In that context,
Egypt calls on the international partners to continue
meeting their commitments to Afghanistan.
Thirdly, the political aspect requires that we
support the Afghan Government in order to promote
the possibilities of succeeding in the internal peace
process, national dialogue and reconciliation, especially
in the context of the quartet mechanism. We welcome
the efforts of the Afghan Government to prepare for the
upcoming elections.
Fourth is the international aspect, which is
represented by UNAMA and the means to strengthen
the activities and effectiveness of that important United
Nations mission in the light of its role and significance
in Afghanistan. In that regard, we also value the vital
tasks undertaken by the United Nations Regional Centre
for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia.

S/PV. 8613

Fifthly and lastly is the regional aspect, where we
emphasize the important role of regional organizations,
as well as subregional bodies in Central Asia, such
as the Shanghai Cooperation Organization. It is also
important to build upon the positive outcomes of the
Brussels Ministerial Conference and to ensure that
pledges made there be met. It is necessary to strengthen
cooperation and coordination to counter threats,
overcome challenges and bolster communication in this
strategically important part of the world.
In conclusion, I reiterate the importance of making
progress towards an integrated United Nations vision
that includes the above-mentioned elements. That
should be accompanied by a clear Afghan-owned and
Afghan-led road map in order to establish peace and
security and, ultimately, to achieve development and
prosperity in Afghanistan and Central Asia given that
this is a model example for implementing the concept of
global peacebuilding called for by the United Nations.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Australia.
Mr. Yardley (Australia): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this debate. I also thank
all today’s briefers.
Afghanistan continues to experience unacceptable
levels of violence. With 3,804 reported civilian deaths
in 2018, that is more than any other year on record. Since
then scores more lives have been lost to the conflict,
including civilians and Afghan security forces trying
to protect their country against terror and insurgency.
Australia remains firm in its support of all efforts
to achieve peace in Afghanistan. We appreciate the
efforts made by United States Special Representative
Khalilzad to engage in meaningful negotiations
with the Taliban. The past year has seen significant
diplomatic investment to end the long-running conflict
in Afghanistan. In recent days, many hoped such
efforts would result in a historic deal to de-escalate the
conflict and lay the foundations for direct intra-Afghan
peace talks.
We call on the Taliban to immediately halt
the violence against civilians and to agree to a
comprehensive ceasefire as the basis for intra-Afghan
negotiations. We must continue to prioritize diplomacy
and other peaceful means to end the conflict.
Afghan and international human rights advocates
have called for the full protection of the rights of

19-2740731/35

S/PV.8613

The situation in Afghanistan

Afghan women. That must include access to health
care, education, employment and freedom of movement
and addressing gender-based violence. Many Afghan
women are calling for transitional justice, basic services
and room to continue the long journey to equality.
We applaud all those who stand up for these rights.
Australia will continue to advocate strongly for the full
protection of Afghan women and girls.
We know that the most durable peace agreements
are inclusive and are able to address the root causes of
conflict by engaging all citizens in a process of change.
That is a long-term endeavour and will require the
support of the international community.
The inclusion of women in the intra-Afghan
peace dialogue is an important moment, including for
resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security.
Women must have the right to speak for themselves at
home and in international forums, including in peace
discussions. Ensuring the representation of Afghan
women in negotiations would be the beginning of a
truly inclusive peace process.
Despite the ongoing challenges, Australia welcomes
the significant gains that Afghanistan has made over
the past 18 years, such as the tenfold increase in school
enrolment, the 20-year increase in life expectancy
and the fivefold increase in gross domestic product
per capita.
We must work together to protect those gains. It
is not for the sake of a diplomatic agreement but for
the gains made by ordinary Afghans that we must
collectively pursue peace in Afghanistan.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Akbaruddin (India): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this debate. We also thank Ambassador
Yamamoto, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral; Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime; Ambassador
Djani, Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1988 (2011); and Ambassador Adela Raz,
Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, for their
insights into recent developments in Afghanistan.
We meet at a time when the Afghan people mark
a century of their independence this year and their
country stands at yet another transformational juncture.
Preparations are under way for the presidential elections,
32/35

10/09/2019

scheduled to be held in a few weeks. Afghanistan is
poised to renew its commitment to an order ensuring
that a democratically elected Government is at the heart
of any process to determine a peaceful settlement of its
issues. We should all join in support of the solution that
will best suit the country and can be implemented in a
sustainable and dignified manner.
Notwithstanding the unforeseen shifts and
challenges to which we are accustomed, we note the
cautious optimism in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2019/703). Even though the journey ahead may not
be easy or predictable, we welcome the opportunities
for peace and reconciliation emerging from the
various efforts.
It is the Afghan people who will implement and bear
the consequences of any agreements reached. Hence,
outcomes that have constitutional legitimacy and a
political mandate and are arrived at in an inclusive and
democratic way alone can ensure stability. We therefore
support the Secretary-General’s call for direct talks.
Peace and reconciliation cannot go forward in an
atmosphere of terror. There has been a surge in violence
in Afghanistan in recent days, including threats to the
election process itself. That has deepened apprehensions
that acts of terror are being used to compete for a place
of advantage in the negotiating process.
The international community needs to continue
its support by fulfilling the commitments made to
the Afghan security forces in their fight against the
scourge of terrorism. The support and safe havens
enjoyed from beyond Afghanistan’s borders by groups
such as the Taliban, the Haqqani Network and Da’esh,
as well as Al-Qaida and its proscribed affiliates,
including Lashkar-e-Taiba and Jaysh al-Mujahidin,
must be addressed. Having been victims of terrorism,
we understand and empathize with our Afghan friends
over the suffering and pain that they are undergoing.
Amid the clouds of uncertainty of the present, we
should not forget the precious gains that the Afghan
people have made in the past 18 years. They have
strengthened and embraced democracy; established
a constitutional order; promoted the welfare and
rights of minorities and young people; built a strong
and increasingly capable security force; and forged
deeper regional links. They have done all that while
confronting the most brutal threats posed by terrorism.
19-27407

10/09/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

Even in the most difficult times, the famed Afghan
resilience and strength of character shine through in
their homes, schools, colleges, theatres, markets and
factories and, indeed, on their sports grounds. Lest
anyone doubt that, less than 48 hours ago, Afghan
cricketers secured their second victory in three cricket
test matches played thus far. The last time such a feat
was accomplished by any country was way back in the
19th century. That is only one instance and is symbolic
of the many gains that the Afghan people are making,
unknown to many. Another accomplishment is the
remarkable reclamation by Afghanistan’s women of
their rightful place in all parts of society. Those hardwon achievements need to be nurtured, not nullified.
India’s support for the Afghan people is well
known, and I reiterate it here. We believe that there
is hope on the horizon. We remain willing to work
with all countries in the region and beyond, keeping
Afghanistan’s sovereignty and its ownership of the
peace process at the forefront.
We hope that the international community, through
the Council and its various instruments, can finally
do right by the people of Afghanistan and support an
inclusive peace that will ensure that the destiny of the
country will be steered by the Afghan people.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the observer of the European Union.
Mr. Gonzato: I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union (EU) and its 28 member
States. The candidate countries the Republic of North
Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as
well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia,
align themselves with this statement.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive report (S/2019/703). I would also
like to thank Special Representative Yamamoto and
Executive Director Fedotov for their briefings, as well
as Ambassador Raz for her statement. They all brought
important elements to our attention.
The EU strongly acknowledges the crucial role
played by the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and all the United Nations
agencies in supporting the Afghan people, encouraging
peace and reconciliation, monitoring and promoting
human rights and implementing the commitments

S/PV. 8613

from the November 2018 Ministerial Conference on
Afghanistan. The EU wishes to have the closest possible
relationship with UNAMA, in a spirit of transparent
and open cooperation on the ground and in international
formats, for the ultimate benefit of Afghanistan.
The European Union remains a steadfast supporter
of the current efforts to achieve lasting peace in
Afghanistan. In the light of the current momentum
in the peace process, for the EU it is more important
than ever to preserve the political, economic and social
achievements of the past 18 years, for which Afghans
and the international community have made enormous
sacrifices — particularly the rights of women, children
and minorities. It is crucial to continue to enhance and
build on those achievements.
That approach has been clearly expressed by the
EU and its member States, notably through EU Council
conclusions in November 2018 and April 2019 and the
EU five-point offer to support the peace process, as
announced by Federica Mogherini, Vice-President of
the European Commission and High Representative of
the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, at
the Geneva Ministerial Conference in November 2018.
The five points are helping the Government making the
peace process more inclusive; supporting post-conflict
reforms, including security sector reform; reintegrating
ex-combatants; contemplating a possible EU role
as guarantor of the peace process; and supporting
cross-border trade and infrastructure, as well as
regional connectivity.
While political will and strong leadership are
needed, a peace deal can be lasting only if it is owned
by all parts of Afghan society and not perceived as
being imposed on the population. All Afghans need
to feel included in the peace process. Nothing could
demonstrate Afghan ownership more than achieving
a nationwide ceasefire that puts an end to violence by
the time inter-Afghan reconciliation talks are launched.
The EU is ready to play an active role in supporting the
peace efforts and to facilitate consultation processes
and dialogues that will contribute to inclusivity by
involving all segments of Afghan civil society. Particular
attention should be given to the full involvement of
women, in line with resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security, as well as to the protection of
their constitutional rights.
The EU strongly believes that peace must not be
pursued at the expense of Afghanistan’s democratic

19-2740733/35

S/PV.8613

The situation in Afghanistan

development. We therefore fully support the holding of
fair and transparent presidential elections to strengthen
the legitimacy of State institutions, and promote the
democratization and political stability of Afghanistan.
To that end, the EU will continue providing financial
support — over €18 million — to address some of the
technical difficulties of the previous parliamentary
elections in October 2018.
The cessation of violence and achieving lasting
peace are key. The EU stands ready to renew its
long-term commitment to Afghanistan after a peace
agreement has been signed. As we have said before, if
there are expectations for the EU to provide substantial
financial, political, diplomatic and development
support after a successful conclusion of a peace
agreement, the EU needs to be involved at all stages of
the peace process.
This year has been important for EU-Afghanistan
bilateral relations, with High Representative
Mogherini’s visit to Kabul and several bilateral
meetings in the framework of the EU-Afghanistan
cooperation agreement on partnership and development.
The EU Special Envoy for Afghanistan, Roland Kobia,
continues to visit Kabul and the region to support the
peace process.
As progress towards a political settlement
continues, the coordination among development,
security and political actors is crucial. The EU
maintains close cooperation with key international
partners. In that regard, we reiterate our support to the
NATO-led Resolute Support Mission efforts to provide
further training, advice and assistance to the Afghan
security forces and institutions.
The EU is a strong development partner for
Afghanistan, and our development cooperation
responds to the officially defined and presented Afghan
Government’s priorities. The EU will continue its strong
commitment to on-budget support, based on Afghan
progress in the implementation of its policies and their
impact. The EU is currently starting to work on the
next programming cycle for Afghanistan, which will
cover the period from 2021 to 2027, and the potential
priorities in the context of a peace agreement.
The EU continues its structured dialogue with
Afghanistan under the cooperation agreement on
partnership and development. We are also following
up on the outcome of the EU-Afghanistan Special
Working Group on Human Rights, Good Governance
34/35

10/09/2019

and Migration, held on 5 May in Kabul. In particular,
we encourage the Afghan authorities to continue to
implement the relevant legislation, with particular
focus on areas such as the elimination of violence
against women, the use of the national action plan
for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), the
protection of children and the prevention of torture
and ill treatment. Promoting the rule of law and ending
impunity for corruption will also be core elements of a
future sustainable peace.
The EU remains deeply concerned about the
high level of civilian casualties and the increasing
number of displaced people, and reiterates the need to
protect the civilian population, especially women and
children. We need to continue to protect the vital role
of humanitarian agencies and respect their impartiality
and humanitarian space in addressing the most urgent
needs of the most vulnerable.
In conclusion, this is a very important moment
for Afghanistan. However, all peace negotiations
and agreements will be viable and accepted by the
population only if they support and maintain the
values and achievements of the past two decades. The
democratization of Afghanistan should continue, along
with better protection of the rights of all Afghans and
safeguarding the country’s democratic institutions. For
peace to be enduring, the full support of all States of
the region is needed.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Iran.
Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran):
I thank the Russian presidency of the Council for
organizing this meeting. We also thank the briefers for
their valuable input.
Afghanistan is passing through a critical juncture,
and there are alarming trends in its political and
security domains. Numerous efforts are being made to
hold a successful presidential election on 28 September.
However, there are attempts to undermine that
important event.
Holding free and fair presidential elections can
further enhance the democratic institutions of the
country. We call upon the United Nations and the
international community to support holding the
elections as scheduled. Iran also urges all Afghan
parties and political groups, as well as all Afghans
eligible to vote, to actively participate in the elections,
19-27407

10/09/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

as that is essential for the improvement of the security
and socioeconomic conditions of Afghanistan.
In the security domain, the high number of
incidents, as referred to in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2019/703), serves to indicate that the security
situation remains volatile. The increase attacks by
Da’esh is a source of grave concern and underlines
the need to combat it seriously and resolutely. It is
evident that its elements, aided by certain countries,
including in transferring them from Syria and Iraq to
Afghanistan, have significantly increased the offensive
capability of Da’esh. Those countries are therefore also
responsible for the crimes committed by Da’esh.
After almost two decades of United States invasion
of Afghanistan, it is quite clear that the United States
has no choice but to leave that country, and the sooner,
the better. As we have stated time and again, the
time-bound and responsible withdrawal of all foreign
forces is a strong national demand of the people of
Afghanistan. We urge the Government of Afghanistan
and all Afghan parties to be vigilant and cooperate
closely in successfully passing through the current
critical security situation. Any conflict and fratricide
will help those who do not wish to see a secure and
stable Afghanistan.
We urge all parties, pending national reconciliation
and a permanent ceasefire agreement, to exercise
maximum restraint and avoid deteriorating the security
conditions and targeting civilians. Neither Afghanistan
nor our region can afford a new round of conflict. Peace
is the strongest demand of the people of Afghanistan,
and it must be heard by all Afghan groups, who, instead
of confrontation, should cooperate for peace.
Any peace process must be facilitated by the United
Nations and Afghan-led, -owned and -controlled.

S/PV. 8613

We call on regional and international players to
support such a peace process and allow the future of
Afghanistan to be determined exclusively by Afghans
themselves. The Government of the Islamic Republic
of Afghanistan must have the central role in all peace
efforts, and any peace agreement must be concluded
with its participation.
Furthermore, any peace process shall preserve
the achievements of the International Conference
on Afghanistan held in Bonn in 2001, including the
Constitution and the institutions derived from it.
At the same time, in case of an agreement to amend
the Constitution, it shall be conducted according to
the procedure foreseen in the Constitution itself and
under the supervision of the legitimate Government
of Afghanistan. No country has the right to decide the
future of Afghanistan, and any peace negotiation in the
absence of Afghanistan’s Government and the political
factions of the country, or in a unilateral, exclusive and
non-transparent manner, is doomed to fail.
While respecting the sovereignty of Afghanistan and
underlining the need for the ownership and leadership
of any peace process by the people of the country, Iran
stands ready, within a regional initiative, along with
its neighbouring countries, as well as Afghanistan’s
Government and all groups, to enter into consultations
and negotiations with all parties in the conflict in order
to prevent more bloodshed and facilitate the conclusion
of a durable agreement.
As a neighbouring country that has always
wholeheartedly supported the Afghan-led and -owned
initiatives for a stable and prosperous Afghanistan, Iran
will spare no genuine or impartial effort to that end
The meeting rose at 1.25 p.m.

19-2740735/35
