V.

- -

35/18.

Proclamation of the lnternational Drinking
Water Supply and Sanitation Decade"

The General Assembly,
Deeply concerned that a large part of the world's population does not have reasonable access to safe and ample water supplies and that an even larger part is without
adequate sanitation facilities,
Concerned a/so that the plight of that population will
not improve significantly unless there is a major commitment and effort on the part of Governments and of
the international community to bring about the necessary changes,
Recalling that Habitat: United Na\
, Conference
on Human Settlements called for Governments to adopt
programmes to provide safe drinking water for ali by
1990, if possible, 1
Recalling Jurther that in the Mar del Plata Action
Plan, the United Nations Water Conference called
for the designation of the decade 1981-1990 as the
International Drinking Water Supply and Sanitation
Decade, 4
Noting with satisfaction the growing efforts by
Governments and by intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations, in response to that Plan, to
increase the flow of technical and financia) co-operation
to developing countries in water supply and sanitation,
Recalling a/so its resolution 34/191 of 18 December
1979, by which it decided to hold a special one-day
meeting to launch formally the lnternational Drinking
Water Supply and Sanitation Decade,
Bearing in mind resolution 25, entitled "lnternational
Drinking Water Supply and Sanitation Decade",
adopted on 30 July 1980 by the World Conference of
the United Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peace,'
l. Proclaims the period 1981- 1990 as the International Drinking Water Supply and Sanitation Decade, during which Member States will assume a
commitment to bring about a substantial improvement
in the standards and levels of services in drinking water
supply and sanitation by the year 1990;
2. Calls upan Governments which have not yet done
so to develop the necessary policies and set the targets to
this end, to take ali appropriate steps for their implementation, to set sufficiently high priorities for the
activities concerned and to mobilize adequate resources
to achieve their targets for the Decade;
3. Urges Governments to strengthen, as appropriate, their institutional frameworks for carrying out
these activities, to mobilize the necessary technical
expertise at ali levels and, in general, to heighten popular awareness and support through education and
public participation programmes;
4. Calls upan Governments, organs, organizations
and bodies of the United Nations system and other intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations
See also sect. I, foot-note 10, and sect. X.B.3, decision 35/405.
See Report of Habita/: Vnited Nations Conference on Human Settlements, Vancouver, 31 May-11 June 1976 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.IV.7 and corrigendum), chap. 11, recommendation C.12.
4
See Report of the United Nations Water Conference, Mar del
Plata, 14-25 March 1977 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.77.11.A.12 and corrigendum), chap. 1, para. 15.
' See Report of the World Conference of the Vnited Nations Decade
for Women: Equality, Development and Peace, Copenhagen, 14-30 Ju/y
1980 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.80.IV.3 and corrigendum), chap. 1, sect. B.
2

3

10)

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee
--

-

--

concerned to continue and, if possible, to increase their
technical and financia) co-operation with developing
countries in order to enable them to attain the targets
they have set, and to continue also their efforts to coordinate their activities so as to maximize the impact of
their assistance to developing countries;
5. Cal/s upan the regional commissions to review
periodically, on the basis of national reports, the
progress being made by the Governments of their
respective regions in establishing national targets and
carrying out programmes to attain those targets;
6. Decides to review at its fortieth session the
progress made towards the attainment of the Decade's
national and international goals, as outlined in the
report of the Secretary-General concerning the present
situation and prospects relative to the Decade," and requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with the
Administrative Committee on Co-ordination, to prepare a comprehensive analysis of the situation on the
basis of progress reports by Governments and by the international organizations concerned and to submit it to
the General Assembly at that session through the
Economic and Social Council.
55th plenary meeting
JO N ovember I 980

35/53.

United Nations lnstitute for Training and
Research
A
REPORT OF THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI)
of I May 1974, containing the Declaration and the
Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
lnternational Economic Order,
Recalling its resolution 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December
1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights and
Duties of States,
Recalling a/so its resolution 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975, by which it set in motion measures that
form the basis and framework for the work of the competent bodies and organizations of the United Nations
system,
Recalling further its resolution 34 / l 7 of 9 N ovember
1979 on the United Nations Institute for Training and
Research,
Acknowledging the value of the research and "futures
studies" undertaken by the United Nations lnstitute for
Training and Research,
Recognizing the role of the United Nations Institute
for Training and Research in assisting, through training
and other services within its mandate, members of permanent missions to the United Nations and other
national officials concerned with the work of the United
Nations,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Executive Director of the United Nations lnstitute for
Training and Research 7 and of his introductory statement on 2 October 1980; 8
'A/35/367.
1
Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-fifth Session. Supp/ement No. 14 (A/35/14).
" /bid.. Thirty-fifth Session, Second Committee, 6th meeting,
paras. 18-25.

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

l02

2. Welcomes the emphasis on, and urges the continuation of the concentration of the work of the United
Nations Institute for Training and Research in the
sphere of, economic and social training and research
and the inclusion of specific projects on the problems in
the areas identified by the General Assembly at its sixth
and seventh special sessions and in the relevant decisions
adopted by the Assembly at its twenty-ninth and subsequent sessions.

83rd plenary meeting
5 December ! 980
B
FINANCIAL SUPPORT FOR THE UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTE FOR TRAINING AND RESEARCH

The General Assembly,
Recognizing the importance of the role of the United
Nations Institute for Training and Research in providing training and research for the purpose of enhancing the effectiveness of the United Nations in achieving
the major objectives of the Organization, in particular
the maintenance of peace and security and the promotion of social and economic development,
Noting with regret that, despite persistent efforts to
secure greater and wider financia) support for the
United Nations Institute for Training and Research, the
income from voluntary contributions has not been sufficient to meet the mínimum requirements of the lnstitute to carry out its mandate effectively,
Noting a/so the recommendations contained in the
report of the Joint lnspection Unit on the United
Nations Institute for Training and Research,4
l. Decides that a grant-in-aid should be provided,
on an exceptional basis, from the budget of the United
Nations to meet the current deficits as reflected in the
budget estima tes approved by the Board of Trustees of
the United Nations Institute for Training and Research:
2. Requests the Executive Director of the United
Nations Institute for Training and Research, in the light
of the recommendations of the Joint Inspection Unit, to
take further steps with a view to enhancing the effectiveness of the Institute, reducing its costs and increasing
its resources;
3. Urges ali Sta tes which have not yet contributed to
the United Nations Institute for Training and Research
to do so, and calls upon ali donor countries, especially
those that are not contributing at a leve) commensurate
with their capacity, to in crease substantially their voluntary contributions in order to meet the needs of the
Institute;
4. Requests the Executive Director of the United
Nations Institute for Training and Research to report to
the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session on the
implementation of the provisions contained in paragraphs 2 and 3 above and on the financia! prospects of
the Institute for the near future.

83rd plenary meeting
5 December 1980
'A/35/181, annex.

35/54.

lJnited Nations University

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2951 (XXVII) of 11 December 1972, 3081 (XXVIII) of 6 December 1973, 3313
(XXIX) of 14 December 1974, 3439 (XXX) of9 December 1975, 31/117 and 31/118 of 16 December 1976,
32/54 of8 Decembcr 1977. 33/108 of 18 December 1978
and 34/112 of 14 December 1979.
Having considered the report of the Council of the
United Nations Univcrsity on the work of the University. ' 11
Noting decision 5.2.2. of 12 September 1980 adopted
by the Executive Board of the Unitcd Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural O~ganization at its
one hundred and tenth session. in which the Board, inter
afia. noted with satisfaction the progress achieved by the
United Nations University in the development of extensive international networks of research and advanced
training, and the greater collaboration established between the University and the specialized agencies and
programmes of the United N ations system, particularly
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, as well as other national and international
institutions concerned.
Noting the activities of the United Nations University
in studying the role of new theoretical concepts in
human and social development,
Welcoming the new Rector of the United Nations
University, a leading scholar of international affairs and
development. and expressing its appreciation to the first
Rector for the great competence and dedication with
which he discharged his responsibilities in carrying out
the activities of the University in accordance with its
Charter, thereby building a firm foundation for the
future development of the University,
1. Notes with satisfaction that the programmes ofthe
United Nations University have achieved substantial expansion in each area of concern and that tangible results
of the U niversity's research and advanced training activities are being produced;
2. A/so notes with satisfaction that the United
Nations University has intensified its collaborative
relationship with appropriate agencies and programmes
of the United Nations system. in particular the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization. as well as with other international and national institutions concerned. and urges that these efforts should
be continued vigorously:
3. Recommends that the United Nations University,
in accordance with its Charter, should continue to
broaden its concern with pressing ~loba! problems and,
to this end, should further strengthen the intellectual
capahility of the University Centre in Tokyo;
4. Takes note with interest of the opinions expressed
by the Council of the United Nations University in its
report 11 regarding the report on fund-raising efforts for
the University, 12 in particular the specific recommendations and suggestions contained therein:
5. Stresses the nced to create a greater awareness of
the objectives of the United N ations University by
Governments. the international academic community
and other international and national institutions concerned through the programmatic means and the effec1" Ofjicial Record, o/ rhe General Assemhly, Thirry,fifíh Session,
Supplement No. 31 (A _1,,31 and CorLI)
11
Ihid., paras. 47-52.
· Sce A 1 34/654.
