VI.

Resolutions adopted on tbe reports of tbe Tbird Committee

Reaffirming that effective implementation ofthese international standards is of fundamental importance,
Recognizing the value of continuing efforts to identify
specific areas where further intemational action is required to develop the existing intemational legal framework in the field of human rights pursuant to Article 13,
paragraph I a, of the Charter of the United Nations,
Recognizing also that standard setting should proceed
with adequate preparation,
Emphasizing that the standard setting activities of the
United Nations should be as effective and efficient as possible,
l. Calls upon Member States and United Nations bodies to accord priority to the implementation of existing intemational standards in the field of human rights and
urges broad ratification of, or accession to, existing treaties
in this field;
2. Urges Member States and United Nations bodies engaged in developing new international human rights standards to give due consideration in this work to the established intemational legal framework;
3. Reaffirms the important role of the Commission on
Human Rights, among other appropriate United Nations
bodies, in the development of international instruments in
the field of human rights;
4. Invites Member States and U nited Nations bodies to
bear in mind the following guidelines in developing international instruments in the field of human rights; such instruments should, inter alia:
(a) Be consistent with the existing body of international human rights law;
(b) Be of fundamental character and derive from the
inherent dignity and worth of the human person;
(e) Be sufficiently precise to give rise to identifiable and
practicable rights and obligations;
(d) Provide, where appropriate, realistic and effective
implementation machinery, including reporting systems;
(e) Attract broad international support;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to provide appropriate specialized support to United Nations bodies working
on standard setting in the field of human rights.
97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986
41/121.

Reporting obligations under United Nations instruments on human rights

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
containing updated information as at l June 1986 on the
problem of overdue reports by States parties to United Nations instruments on human rights, the comments of
States parties with more than two such reports and information on training activities to assist States in fulfilling
their reporting obligations, 81
Noting with concern the critica! situation with regard to
overdue reports under the International Convention on
the Elimination of Ali Forms of Racial Discrimination 3
and the significant backlog of reports developing in relation to other United Nations instruments on human
rights,

81

A/41/510.

179

Recognizing the burden that coexisting reporting systems places upon Member States that are parties to various instruments and noting that this burden may become
more onerous as additional instruments come into force,
Welcoming the decision of States parties82 to the International Convention on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination to approve the practice of the Committee on
the Elimination of Racial Discrimination of considering
multiple overdue reports in consolidated form,
Reiterating the fundamental importance it attaches to
the fulfilment of reporting obligations under intemational
instruments on human rights,
Drawing attention to the need for States parties to submit reports in a timely manner to the various bodies that
have been set up to supervise implementation of United
Nations instruments on human rights and to co-operate as
fully as possible with those bodies to make the best use of
their meeting time, in particular by presenting their reports on scheduled dates or, ifthat is not possible, by providing sufficient notice to enable meeting time to be reallocated,
Bearing in mind the need for those bodies which depend
on funding from the regular budget ofthe United Nations
to improve their efficiency and cost-effectiveness, especially in view of the financia) emergency faced by the
United Nations,
l. Urges States parties with overdue reports to make
every effort to present their reports as soon as possible and
to take advantage of opportunities whereby such reports
could be consolidated;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to continue work on
developing a compilation of the general guidelines elaborated by the various supervisory bodies and the list of articles dealing with related rights under United Nations instruments on human rights;
3. Encourages States parties to take the relevant guidelines into account when preparing reports and to provide
reports that are as succinct as possible;
4. Invites the Chairmen of the supervisory bodies to
encourage their respective members:
(a) To give priority attention to consideration of
remedia) measures to deal with the problems highlighted
in the Secretary-General's report;
(b) To give further consideration to harmonizing and
consolidating the reporting guidelines developed by these
bodies and to other means whereby duplication could be
avoided in the submission of material by States parties to
the various supervisory bodies;
(e) To consider rearranging, where possible, the periodicity of reporting, especially in view of the future probable increase in the number of instruments;
(d) To report on the results oftheir deliberations to the
appropriate meetings of States parties;
5. Further invites the Chairmen of these bodies to
maintain communication and dialogue with each other on
common issues and problems;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to consider making
provision in his proposed programme budget for the biennium 1988-1989 for a meeting of the Chairmen of these
bodies in 1988;
7. Invites the new Committee on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights 76 to give early attention to the question of
the reporting system on implementation of the Interna-

82 See CERD/SP/SR.ló. para, ..'3 and 24.

General Assembly-Forty-first Session

180

tional Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights, 22 taking due account of reporting guidelines developed by the Sessional Working Group of Governmental
Experts on the Implementation ofthe International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights; 76
8. Reaffirms the importance of maintaining summary
records of the substantive proceedings of the bodies supervising implementation of United Nations instruments
on human rights, in particular for the presentation and
consideration of reports by States parties;
9. Endorses the Secretary-General's proposals to arrange, within existing resources and taking into account
the priorities of the programme of advisory services, training courses for those regions experiencing the most serious
difficulties in meeting reporting obligations under United
Nations instruments on human rights;83
10. Decides t~ include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-second sess1on a separate item entitled "Reporting
obligations of States parties to United Nations instruments on human rights".
97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986

41/122.

Second International Conference on Assistance
to Refugees in Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling ali its resolutions, particularly resolution
40/117 of 13 December 1985, relating to the Second International Conference on Assistance to Refugees in Africa,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on assistance to refugees in Africa, 84
Mindful that the fundamental purpose of the Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by the Second International Conference on Assistance to Refugees in
Africa, held at Geneva from 9 to 11 July 1984,85 was to
l~unch collec_tiv~ actio~ by the intemational community
aimed at ach1evmg lastmg solutions,
Grave/y concerned at the persistent and serious problem
of large numbers of refugees on the African continent,
Awareofthe heavy burden borne by African countries of
asylum on account ofthe presence ofthese refugees and its
consequences for their economic and social developmen!,
and ofthe great sacrifices made by them, despite their limited resources,
Deeply concerned that the refugee situation has been
severely affected by the critica! economic situation in
Africa, as well as by drought and other natural disasters,
Bearing in mind the United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development
1986-1990,86 adopted by the General Assembly at its thirteenth special session, the special session devoted to the
c_ritical economic situation in Africa, which refers in particular to the need for the speedy implementation of the
recommendations of the Second Intemational Conference
on Assistance to Refugees in Africa,
Recognizing that the efforts of the countries of asylum
require the concerted support of the international community to meet the needs for emergency relief, and for
medium-term and long-term development aid.

83 See A/41/S 10, ,cct IV.
84 A/41/572.
85 A/39/402, annex.
86 Resolution S-1 V2, annex.

Taking note of the declarations, decisions and resolutions adopted by the Assembly ofHeads ofState and Government of the Organization of African Unity at its
twenty-second ordinary session, held at Addis Ababa
from 28 to 30 July 1986, 15 and of the resolutions adopted
by the Council of Ministers of that organization at its
forty-fourth ordinary session, held at Addis Ababa from
21 to 26 July 1986, 16 on the situation of refugees in A frica,
Emphasizing the collective responsibility of sharing the
urgent and overwhelming burden of the problem of African refugees through effective mobilization of additional
resources to meet the urgent and long-term needs of the
refugees and to strengthen the capacity of countries of asylum to provide adequately for the refugees while they remain in those countries, as well as to assist the countries of
origin in rehabilitating voluntary retumees,
Reiterating once again the vital importance of the complementarity between refugee aid and development assistance,
Deeply concerned that many ofthe projects submitted to
the Second International Conference on Assistance to
Refugees in Africa have yet to be funded and implemented,
Desirous of ensuring the speedy implementation of the
recommendations and pledges made at the Second International Conference on Assistance to Refugees in Africa,
1. Expresses its deep appreciation to African host countries, which are the biggest donors, for their generous contribution and continuous efforts to alleviate the plight of
refugees in spite of their critica! economic situation;
2. Reiterates its appreciation to ali donor countries, the
organizations and specialized agencies of the United Nations system, regional organizations and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations for their initial
support and response to the projects submitted to the Second International Conference on Assistance to Refugees
in Africa; 87
3. Urges the intemational community to maintain the
momentum created by the Conference and to translate
ínto reality the projects submitted as well as the principies
of the Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by
the Conference;
4_. Emphasizes the vital importance of the complementanty of refugee aid and development assistance and of
ach!eving durable solutions to the problem of refugees in
Afnca and the necessity of providing assistance for the
strengthening of the social and economic infrastructures
of African countries receiving refugees and returnees;
5. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner
for Re!'ugees to continue to keep the situation of refugees
m Afnca under constan! review so as to ensure that adequate assistance is available for care and maintenance and
for bringing about durable solutions;
6. Requests the United Nations Development Programme to increase its efforts to mobilize additional resources for refugee-related development projects and, in
general, to promote and co-ordinate with the host countries and the donor community the integration of refugeerelated activities into national development planning;
7. Ca lis upon all Member States and organizations of
the United Nations system concemed, as well as relevan!
regional, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, to intensify their support for the speedy im

87 Sec A/41/57:'.

anne,
