S/2018/389

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
25 April 2018
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2363
(2017), by which the Council extended the mandate of the African Union -United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) until 30 June 2018 and requested me
to report every 60 days on its implementation. The report provides an update on and
analysis of the conflict, the political situation and the operational environment in
Darfur, and the main challenges to the effective impleme ntation of the mandate,
including violations of the status-of-forces agreement, for the period from
16 February to 15 April 2018. It also presents the steps taken by UNAMID towards
achieving its benchmarks and provides an update on progress in the implemen tation
of the recommendations contained in the special report of the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission and the Secretary-General of the United Nations on the
strategic review of the UNAMID (S/2017/437).

II. Conflict analysis
2.
The security situation remains generally stable with the dry season coming to
an end. Intermittent and low-scale skirmishes have taken place in the Jebel Marra area
between the Sudanese Armed Forces and the Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid
(SLA-AW). Government forces have also clashed with militias. Although
intercommunal violence has decreased significantly, disputes over land ownership
continue. The stalemate in the Darfur peace process persists while international
pressure on the armed movements increases. The implementation of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur remains constrained.
Fighting between government forces and armed groups
3.
While the Sudan Liberation Army-Minni Minawi (SLA-MM) and the Gibril
Ibrahim faction of the Justice and Equality Movement (JEM-Gibril) remained largely
inactive in Darfur, the Sudanese military progressively conducted small -scale
operations in areas previously controlled by SLA-AW in the Jebel Marra area. The
level of reported casualties and the low intensity of clashes indicate that there were
no large-scale confrontations. On 10 March, SLA-AW elements attacked a Sudanese
military camp in Jawa, approximately 7 km south-west of Deribat, and the following
day ambushed a military convoy near Bumuye, about 8 km north-east of Deribat. The
two clashes reportedly left five soldiers and three SLA -AW fighters dead and several

18-06196 (E)

300418

*1806196*

S/2018/389

civilians injured. In response, the Sudanese military deployed between 17 and
19 March in a search operation in the Layba, Feina and Funguli areas in East Jebel
Marra, where they were attacked by SLA-AW on 21 and 22 March. Reports on the
number of casualties conflict but the Sudanese military repelled the attacks and
captured one SLA-AW commander. Three civilians were killed. On 26 March,
intermittent exchanges of fire between the Sudanese military, supported by the Border
Guards, and SLA-AW reportedly continued in Gubbo, Gur Lambung and Gulobei,
south-east of Jebel Marra. As a result, some displaced persons moved to Kiding ir. On
28 March, clashes also took place in Sabun and Khormaley, east of Jebel Marra. The
number of casualties is unknown and an unspecified number of local residents fled to
the mountains seeking safety. Clashes also took place in Katur, East Jebel Marra, on
1 April, resulting in one person killed, one injured and 73 houses burned down. There
are also reports of militias carrying out attacks on 4 April in the Feina area, where
some 16 villages were destroyed and civilians killed. The arrival of the Rapid S upport
Forces (RSF) on the same day put a stop to the attacks.
4.
Following an incident on 12 March, in which SLA-AW rustled camels from
Nawaiba nomads, the latter exchanged fire with the armed group and the following
day burned down the village of Durgo, from where the population reportedly fled to
Boori, Dar al-Salam and Golo. Three civilians were reportedly killed in those
incidents and two Nawaiba tribesmen were also reportedly killed by SLA -AW cadres
in the village on 17 March.
5.
Government forces strengthened their control over other areas in Darfur. On
1 March, RSF captured the commander of Sudan Liberation Army-Historical
Leadership (SLA-Historical Leadership), Suleiman Marjane, along with two other
fighters in a vehicle with four assault rifles, near the Jebel Isa area in North Darfur.
In the same area, on 20 March, RSF personnel captured suspected JEM -Gibril
elements coming from Libya. Furthermore, on 19 March, the President of the Sudan,
Omar Hassan al-Bashir, extended the unilateral ceasefire announced by the
Government in all areas of operations until 30 June 2018.
Militias
6.
Tensions persist in the area around Kabkabiyah, North Darfur, following the
stand-off between RSF and Northern Rizeigat militiamen, who joined forces with
Musa Hilal in November 2017. On 27 February, RSF elements clashed with
militiamen in Misteriya, 30 km south-west of the UNAMID team site in Kabkabiyah.
One woman was killed and ten civilians were injured in the shooting incident as they
attempted to protect a local leader. RSF informed UNAMID that the incident took
place while it was implementing a weapons collection campaign.
Intercommunal conflicts
7.
The number of intercommunal clashes decreased significantly during the
reporting period, with two clashes reported. On 12 February, Zaghawa herders from
Chad clashed with Misseriya nomads over cattle rustling in the village of Milaibiday,
20 km north-east of Masteri, West Darfur. The incident resulted in nine fatalities
among the Sudanese nomads. On 8 April, the Awlad Zaid and Zaghawa communities
clashed over a cattle theft incident in the Kirkir area, 85 km north-west of El Geneina,
resulting in one fatality on each side. On both occasions, the government of West
Darfur intervened through the deployment of the Sudan -Chad Joint Forces to create
a buffer between the two groups. Intercommunal violence has decreased mainly
owing to interventions by the Government, the native administration, UNAMID and
the United Nations country team. Local communities consider that the weapons
collection campaign has contributed considerably to the mitigation of intercommunal

2/12

18-06196

S/2018/389

violence, although concerns remain that the nomadic groups have not been equally
disarmed.
Violence against civilians and human rights violations
8.
The overall human rights situation remained precarious but the number of cases
of human rights violations and abuses decreased compared with the previous
reporting period. UNAMID documented 77 new cases involving 203 victims,
including 22 children, compared with 84 cases involving 192 victims. Violations of
the right to life accounted for 15 cases involving 32 victims, and violations of the
right to physical integrity accounted for 34 cases involving 70 victims. There were 21
cases of sexual and gender-based violence, including conflict-related sexual violence,
in the form of rape and attempted rape, involving 27 victims, including 21 children
(with one male minor), and 5 cases of arbitrary arrest and illegal detention involving
72 victims. There was also one case of abduction and another of disappearance, each
involving one victim.
9.
UNAMID confirmed 51 cases of human rights violations and abuses involving
148 victims but could not verify the remaining 26 cases, involving 55 victims, owing
to such factors as lack of access to former UNAMID team sites. Twenty-seven of the
reported cases, involving 120 victims, were reportedly perpetrated by government
security forces and auxiliary groups, including RSF and the Border Guards. Thirteen
cases involving 13 victims were reportedly perpetrated by unknown and unidentified
civilians and the remaining 37 cases, with 70 victims, were allegedly perpetrated by
unidentified armed men. Investigations were reportedly initiated in only 40
documented cases and resulted in seven arrests, highlighting concerns about the
inefficiency of law enforcement and prosecutorial services in some areas.
10. Internally displaced persons were targeted in 88 crime -related incidents, which
led to seven fatalities. Other civilians were affecte d by 144 crime-related incidents
resulting in 46 fatalities, including cases of murder (21), armed robbery (16),
attempted robbery (2), assault and harassment (42), burglary and break -in (8),
abduction (4), arson (4), shooting (25), attack or ambush (1), t hreat of violence (2),
livestock theft (18) and other (1). In the previous reporting period, internally
displaced persons and other civilians were affected by 68 and 92 crime -related
incidents respectively, resulting in the deaths of 5 internally displaced persons and 17
other civilians.

III. Political situation
11. During the reporting period, President Al-Bashir effected changes in the
leadership of key security institutions. On 11 February, he reappointed Salah Abdallah
Mohamed Saleh as Director General of the National Intelligence and Security
Services, replacing Mohammed Atta Al Moula, who had served in the position since
2009. On 27 February, the President appointed Lieutenant General Kamal
Abdelmarouf as Commander of the Sudanese Armed Forces and announced other
promotions and appointments in the military.
12. On 2 April, the President announced in the National Assembly the Government ’s
intention to launch an inclusive consultation for the drafting and finalization of a
permanent constitution. He called upon all political stakeholders, including civil
society and armed movements, to participate in the consultations, which he described
as the second phase of the national dialogue. He stated that the draft constitution
would be submitted to a popular referendum. On 10 April, he issued a decree releasing
all political detainees in the country.

18-06196

3/12

S/2018/389

13. Against a backdrop of economic hardship, demonstrations against austerity
measures continued during the reporting period, mostly in Khartoum, resulting in
further arrests of protestors, including opposition activists. Subsequently, concerns
were raised over arbitrary arrests and the detention of protestors in degrading
conditions, including the denial of access to legal representation and family members
for detainees. On 18 February, the President ordered the release of political detainees
arrested during the protests against the 2018 national budget and subsequent inflation;
80 of an estimated 411 detainees were freed. More arrests of political activists,
including senior leaders of the Sudanese Communist Party, were reported.
14. As the austerity measures continued to have an adverse impact on the
socioeconomic environment, with inflation surging at more than 50 per cent and the
Sudanese pound weakened against the United States dollar, the Government
intensified efforts to find a more effective solution to the crisis. In March, the United
Arab Emirates injected $1.4 billion into the country’s central bank to address the
foreign exchange crisis.
15. From 13 to 17 March, the opposition Sudan Call, including the Darfur armed
movements, met in Paris to adopt a joint position on the review of the African Union
High-level Implementation Panel roadmap. It renewed its rejection of the
government-led national dialogue process and its outcome. Sudan Call appointed the
leader of the National Umma Party, Sadiq al-Mahdi, as Chair of the Leadership
Council. On 20 March, the Sudan Liberation Army-Transitional Council (SLA-TC)
criticized the meeting as an explicit move to abandon armed resistance. Two days
later, the President threatened legal action against any political pa rty that formed an
alliance with the armed movements.
16. At the regional level, the Sudan continues to play a constructive role. On
11 March, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Qatar, Mohammed bin Abdulrahman
Al-Thani, visited the Sudan for meetings with the President and the Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Ibrahim Ahmed Abd al-Aziz Ghandour. They agreed to establish a
joint political consultation committee, which would convene biannually to review the
status of their cooperation and other issues of mutual interest. They also discussed the
implementation of the Doha Document and the Darfur peace process. The Sudan
continues to maintain a position of neutrality with regard to the rift between the
members of the Gulf Cooperation Council. On 19 March, the President met the
President of Egypt, Abdel Fattah Al Sisi, in Cairo with a view to improving diplomatic
relations and security cooperation between the two countries.

IV. Humanitarian situation
17. Humanitarian access continues to improve in Darfur. In the northern Jebel Marra
area in Central Darfur, humanitarian actors were able to gain access to villages around
Rockero to conduct an inter-agency assessment from 14 to 21 February. Despite those
improvements, the Government continued to deny the humanitarian community
access to locations in other parts of Jebel Marra, such as Boldong and Kutrum in
Central Darfur and Suni, Jawa, Feina, Gurlang Bang, Tarantawra, Sabun El Fagor and
Kara in South Darfur.
18. Returns continued during the reporting period, with approximately 2,000 people
returning to Yasin, East Darfur, from camps for internally displaced persons in Salam,
Kalma, Otash and Sereif, South Darfur, in February. Clashes between the Sudanese
military and SLA-AW in East Jebel Marra on 10 and 11 March reportedly led to the
displacement of some people from Feina, who gathered in the Goroland, Bani,
Korenga, Tima and Golo areas. As a result of the fighting, some humanitarian
activities, in particular relating to the delivery of water, hygiene and sanitatio n, and
4/12

18-06196

S/2018/389

food security and livelihood packages, have been suspended temporarily in Deribat,
Kidingir, Jawa, Belle Sereif and Layba.
19. Food insecurity continues to be a major source of concern, in particular in North
Darfur. The situation has been compounded by poor rainfall in 2017, which resulted
in shortages of pasture and water for livestock and a poor harvest. Based on the latest
Famine Early Warning System Network outlook, parts of North Darfur, as well as
internally displaced person camps in Jebel Marra, are likely to face a situation of
crisis (Integrated Food Security Phase Classification level 3) until September. During
the peak of the lean season (June–September), internally displaced persons in Jebel
Marra could face a situation of emergency (level 4) food insecurity. The situation is
further compounded by the austerity measures recently imposed by the Government,
which have resulted in significant price increases (up to 47 per cent in January) for
staple foods such as wheat and sorghum. In February, the retail price of sorghum rose
by more than 15 per cent in seven states. The highest increases, of at 34, 25 and 16 per
cent, respectively, were recorded in East, West and North Darfur. Recent assessments
indicate that about 98 per cent of displaced households do not have sufficient income
to afford the food that they need. The macroeconomic trend could result in more price
rises and further reduce the ability of poor households to pay for food.
20. The acute watery diarrhoea outbreak that began in 2016 had subsided by January
2018. However, 461 new cases, including three deaths, were recorded in Central
Darfur between 9 February and 26 March, mainly in areas of Jebel Marra under SLA AW control. Humanitarian partners, in collaboration with the Governme nt, continued
their efforts to contain the disease through training of health-care staff, case
management, vector control, water quality control, the distribution of medicine and
medical supplies, and hygiene and health promotion. Because of the difficulty in
gaining access to the affected areas, available data on the seriousness of the situation
are limited. Nevertheless, efforts to reach communities continue.

V. Operating environment
Attacks and threats of attack targeting African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur, United Nations and humanitarian personnel
21. During the reporting period, 29 criminal incidents targeting United Nations and
humanitarian personnel were reported, compared with 26 in the previous reporting
period. On 24 February, an RSF member physically assaulted and injured a UNAMID
national staff member inside the RSF base in Mellit, North Darfur. The staff member
had been detained because he had waved at a speeding RSF driver to slow down while
crossing the road. Upon release after about three hours in detention, the injured staff
member was treated in hospital in Mellit and, later, at the UNAMID level II hospital
in El Fasher.
Access restrictions
22. UNAMID recorded three clearance denials by military intellige nce, resulting in
the cancellation of six sorties. In a positive development, the Wali of Central Darfur
approved regular flights from Zalingei to Golo. However, the Government continued
to deny the mission’s request for direct flights between team sites in different sectors
and permission to use El Obeid airport for flight-planning purposes as an alternative
airport for UNAMID aircraft. In relation to the recent fighting in East Jebel Marra,
movement to Feina was restricted on three occasions, on 25 March, 3 April and
9 April. Access to Katur was denied on 4 April but later allowed on 9 April. There
was also one case of restriction of movement in East Darfur on 22 February.

18-06196

5/12

S/2018/389

Visas and customs clearance
23. The Government granted 431 visas for UNAMID staff, including 20 for military
personnel, 49 for police personnel, 39 for official visitors, 42 for contractors, 5 for
dependants and 4 for civilian staff members. A total of 431 visa requests are being
processed, while 232 visa requests have been pending beyond the normal approval
period of 15 days, some since April 2016. They include 113 for contractors, 24 for
police, 14 for civilian staff, 46 for military personnel, 11 for United Nations
Volunteers, 23 for official visitors and 1 for a consultant. For th e Human Rights
Section, 1 visa application remains pending, while 13 visa requests pending for more
than a year have been withdrawn. Owing to reassignment and separation of staff, the
vacancy rate for the Section increased to 46 per cent from 32 per cent i n the previous
reporting period, while the overall vacancy rate for the mission’s international civilian
staff decreased from 17 to 6 per cent, half of which is owing to pending visas.
24. The Government continues to release food ration containers from Po rt Sudan.
Progress has been recorded in clearing other shipments but 35 shipments of
contingent and United Nations-owned equipment are still pending, 1 since 2015.
UNAMID continued to hold monthly technical-level meetings with government
officials in an effort to address pending issues. The Government informed UNAMID
in February that it would receive a communication detailing new procedures in place
of the tax exemption certificate. However, the mission is yet to receive it.
25. From 7 to 10 April, my Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Jean-Pierre Lacroix, and the African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security,
Smail Chergui, conducted a joint visit to Sudan. On 8 April, they attended a meeting
of the Tripartite Mechanism between representatives of the African Union, the United
Nations and the Government in Khartoum to discuss operational and strategic issues
relating to the implementation of the mission’s mandate. Improvements in that
regarded were noted and the Government reaffirmed its commitment to continuing
cooperation with UNAMID on all issues referred to at the technical level. They also
met the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Ghandour, and then travelled to El Fasher,
Darfur, to meet UNAMID leadership and staff, the Wali of Nort h Darfur State and
community representatives.

VI. Progress towards the achievement of the strategic objectives
of the mission
Protection of civilians
26. Across Darfur, there was an overall decrease during the reporting period in the
number of incidents relating to the protection of civilians, including the harassment
of internally displaced persons and members of other vulnerable groups during
livelihood activities and with regard to access to farmland. The freedom of movement
of civilians has also improved, mainly as a result of the government -led weapons
collection campaign. However, the persistence of cases of harassment and
intimidation of internally displaced persons during their livelihood activities, such as
the collection of firewood and grass, and the occupation of villages by armed groups
and nomads continue to be sources of concern.
27. UNAMID integrated field protection teams conducted 84 missio ns in North
(46), Central (1), South (5) and West (32) Darfur. In North Darfur, they visited
locations in Umm Barru, Korma, Sortony and Tawilah, where, although the situation
was found to be calm, internally displaced persons expressed concern about the
activities of Sudan Liberation Army-Peace and Development (SLA-PD) elements and

6/12

18-06196

S/2018/389

nomads in the Sortony area. Two internally displaced Fur people from Sortony were
killed in separate incidents in February, allegedly by nomads.
28. In Central, South and West Darfur, the teams were informed of similar
protection challenges, mainly in the vicinity of internally displaced persons villages
and camps. Local residents in South Darfur complained about the lack of basic
services, including the slow response by the Sudanese police to protection incidents
involving civilians. In Golo and Rockero, Central Darfur, the local population
complained not only about the gaps in basics services but also about sexual and
gender-based violence, the presence of a significant number o f unaccompanied
children, the danger posed by unexploded ordnance, the destruction of homes and
crops, allegedly by nomads, and the absence of rule of law and justice institutions in
most villages in Jebel Marra. In West Darfur, local communities reported issues
relating to land occupation and the harassment and physical assault of women and
girls engaged in livelihood activities.
29. The uniformed personnel of UNAMID provided 180 round -trip escorts for
humanitarian partners in support of the delivery and monitoring of humanitarian
assistance, inter-agency and verification assessments, the distribution and monitoring
of food and non-food items and operational activities. In addition, UNAMID
continued to provide daily escorts to humanitarian partners transpo rting water from
Kube to Sortony in North Darfur as part of water, sanitation and hygiene initiatives.
UNAMID also provided regular armed escorts for the transportation of humanitarian
supplies between Sortony and Kabkabiyah in North Darfur. Under special
arrangements with the World Food Programme (WFP), UNAMID escorted two WFP
convoys of 31 trucks delivering 283 tons of food in North Darfur.
30. The UNAMID military component conducted 5,512 patrols, of which 2,173
were for the protection of civilians (1,406 short-range patrols, 135 long-range patrols
and 632 night patrols) and 3,339 for the protection of UNAMID personnel and
equipment (2,774 routine patrols, 460 logistics and administrative escorts and 105
humanitarian escorts). In total, 1,017 visits to villages and 934 visits to internally
displaced persons camps were carried out. UNAMID police personnel conducted
2,544 patrols, including 958 confidence-building patrols to internally displaced
persons camps, 213 firewood- and grass-collecting patrols, 136 market patrols, 697
village patrols, 434 town patrols, 46 area of return patrols and 60 commercial route
patrols, to respond to the security needs of internally displaced persons, in particular
women and children engaged in livelihood activities outside th eir camps. Those
patrols contributed to the monitoring of security and provided a safe and protective
environment in camps for internally displaced persons, including through the
collection of information for the mission’s early warning system. Furthermore, 289
security coordination meetings, with the participation of the Sudanese police,
UNAMID
police
personnel,
non-governmental
organizations
(NGOs),
representatives of internally displaced persons and community leaders, were held in
all five states of Darfur. At those meetings, communities were encouraged to support
the implementation of community policing initiatives and enhanced safety and
security in internally displaced persons camps.
31. During the reporting period, UNAMID formed police units provided 46 escorts
for humanitarian agencies (WFP, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the
United Nations Children’s Fund) to the Kalma, Dali, Argo and Otash internally
displaced persons camps, Tawilah and Zalingei. The escorts enabled those teams to
obtain first-hand information on the needs of internally displaced persons and
facilitated the provision of humanitarian assistance to people in need.

18-06196

7/12

S/2018/389

32. Training courses on community policing, human rights and computer skills,
involving 235 internally displaced persons and community police volunteers, were
held across the five states of Darfur. The aim of the courses was to foster participants’
awareness of the importance of reporting incidents relating to the protection of
civilians to the Sudanese police. The mission is working on a policy framework on
institutional capacity-building for the Sudanese police.
33. Explosive ordnance remained a threat in Darfur. In six reported incidents, three
minors were killed and four other people, including a woman, were injured. The
incidents occurred at a cattle market in El Fasher in North Darfur, Layba in East Jebel
Marra, South Darfur, the Alsaayia area of Ed Daein in East Darfur, and Rockero and
Fanga in Central Darfur. UNAMID mine action teams conducted explosive hazard
assessment and disposal operations in eight villages in North and South Darfur,
including at the site for the temporary operating base in Golo. As a result, 2,898 item s
of unexploded ordnance and 24,492 rounds of expired ammunition were destroyed.
UNAMID conducted risk-awareness training that benefited 27,126 individuals: 6,908
men, 6,678 women, 5,661 boys and 7,879 girls. On 28 February, UNAMID and the
National Mine Action Centre organized a public event in Kuraynik, West Darfur,
which marked the successful completion of disposal operations in all areas in the
locality known to have been contaminated with explosive remnants of war.
34. UNAMID continued to engage with state authorities to address gender-related
protection issues, including through capacity-building for local institutions.
Approximately 70 medical personnel benefited from training on the clinical
management of rape conducted by the mission in Khartoum in February. A workshop
on the prevention of sexual exploitation was also held for humanitarian personnel in
Ed Daein, East Darfur, on 6 March. In a related development, on 4 March, the
authorities in West Darfur initiated the process of formulating legislati on on the
protection of women. On 26 and 27 March, UNAMID facilitated a global open day
on women and peace and security event marking Security Council resolution 1325
(2000), in which 100 women delegates from the five states of Darfur participated.
35. Pursuant to its mandate to provide advice and logistical support to strengthen
the capacity of rural courts to address community disputes, including land disputes,
the mission trained 120 rural court judges on civil and criminal legal proceedings and
mediation techniques in North, East, Central and West Darfur during the reporting
period. UNAMID, in collaboration with the Sudanese judiciary, published the
handbook that it had developed in the previous reporting period on Sudanese law and
dispute mediation techniques in Arabic and disseminated 50 copies each to 120 rural
court officials in four states of Darfur. Members of the mission also met
representatives of the Sudanese prison authorities in West and East Darfur and in
Khartoum to discuss the need to address prison conditions. On 27 and 28 February,
the mission organized a training programme for 20 journalists in Ed Daein, East
Darfur, as part of its continued efforts to build the capacity of local media t o
contribute to peace in the region.
36. During the reporting period, UNAMID trained 855 personnel (52 women and
803 men), comprising 224 civilian police, 625 military personnel and 6 civilian, on
Security Council resolutions on children and armed conflict , national and
international instruments for protecting children, the impact of armed conflict on
children and the prohibition of sexual exploitation and abuse against children in
peacekeeping operations. UNAMID also provided 1,190 people (818 women and 37 2
men), comprising 20 Sudanese police officers, 25 Sudanese military personnel, 12
staff members from NGOs, 18 media workers and 1,115 internally displaced persons,
with training aimed at enhancing local ownership of the protection agenda for
children affected by armed conflict. A total of 645 pocket cards were distributed and
messages on stickers translated into 12 languages underlining the policy of zero
8/12

18-06196

S/2018/389

tolerance of sexual relations with minors. The mission also established four child
protection committees in internally displaced persons camps and host communities in
North, West and South Darfur, which are expected to play a pivotal role in supporting
and facilitating the sharing of information on allegations of violations against
children. Furthermore, UNAMID rolled out a campaign entitled “No child soldiers —
protect Darfur”, aimed at ending and preventing the recruitment and use of child
soldiers by armed forces and militias.
37. During the reporting period, UNAMID, in collaboration with the Sudan
Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Commission and the United Nations
country team, supported the demobilization of 793 former combatants, including 268
women, in Nyala. In addition, the mission, in collaboration with the Darfur Ceasefire
Commission, verified 800 ex-combatants belonging to Justice and Equality
Movement-Peace Wing, Sudan Liberation Army-Peace Wing and Sudan Liberation
Army-Mother Wing (SLA-Mother Wing).
Support for the Darfur peace process and the implementation of the
Doha Document
38. The stalemate in the Darfur peace process continued with very little movement
by the parties from their entrenched positions. On 20 February, the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union issued a communiqué (PSC/PR/COMM.(DCCLIV)) in
which it urged the non-signatory Darfur armed movements to engage immediately for
peace and reconciliation in Darfur on the basis of the Doha Document and expressing
concern that the search for peace in Darfur was “unnecessarily prolonged”. The
Council called for an update on progress made on peace efforts within the following
three months and requested the African Union Commission, pending the outcome of
the engagement, by May 2018, to prepare possible measures including, for the first
time, sanctions on all those who continued to obstruct efforts towards lasting peace
and security in Darfur.
39. The African Union-United Nations Joint Special Representative for Darfur,
supporting the Co-Chair of the African Union High-level Implementation Panel, the
former President of South Africa, Thabo Mvuyelwa Mbeki, has maintained contact
with the Government and the non-signatory movements. The most recent contact with
two of the armed movements, SLA-MM and JEM-Gibril, was at a technical-level
meeting on 1 March in Addis Ababa, where the movements reaffirmed their
commitment to a negotiated settlement. On 11 March, the Joint Special
Representative also met the representatives of the Government and pled for flexibility
in the negotiations expected over the next three months. On 2 March, JEM-Gibril
accused the Government of frustrating the peace process and the Peace and Security
Council of siding with one of the parties to the conflict.
40. On 12 February in Nyala, UNAMID officials met representatives of seven
signatory movements to Doha Document: SLA-Historical Leadership, the Justice and
Equality Movement-Peace Wing, the National Liberation and Justice Party, the Sudan
Liberation Army-Free Will, the Justice and Equality Movement-Dabajo, the Sudan
Liberation Army-Mustafa Terab and SLA-Mother Wing. They expressed their
concern about delays in the implementation of the Doha Document, in particular the
security arrangements.
41. On 25 March, UNAMID, the East Darfur judiciary and Ed Daein University
facilitated the first of nine workshops on the policy on the right to land restitution
adopted by the legislative council of East Darfur in June 2017 for implementation
during 2018. The workshops are directed at raising the awareness of the key
stakeholders, in particular returnees and internally displaced persons, of the state’s
land policy and the specific provisions in support of voluntary returns. There were
18-06196

9/12

S/2018/389

60 participants, including 13 women, who recommended that the Government enforce
the rule of law and appealed for the political will to enable effective solutions.
Mediation of intercommunal violence
42. UNAMID pursued mediation initiatives at the community level. On
18 February, the mission, in collaboration with the government of South Darfur,
established a joint stabilization mechanism comprising the mission, the state
government, the United Nations country team and international and national NGOs
in South Darfur. The mechanism will support the implementation of the state ’s
stabilization plan for the period 2018–2019.
43. The mission is also monitoring state government initiatives related to the
settlement of the internally displaced. Twelve meetings were held with local
authorities and community leaders in Central, East, West and North Darfur in support
of the inclusive and sustainable implementation of those initiatives. In Central Darfur,
UNAMID was informed by the Commissioner for Nomads Development on
27 February of plans to relocate some nomadic groups from the northern area of
Nertiti to Khor Ramla, 8 km west of Nertiti.
44. On 4, 5 and 7 March, UNAMID officials met representatives of the internally
displaced population, the state government and the native administration in East
Darfur to gauge the available options to internally displaced persons. The majority
prefer to return to their villages of origin once security and basic services have been
provided but some prefer to remain where they are, provided that they have access to
basic amenities and maintain ownership of their traditional lands. The state
government has established two committees to facilitate their smooth return, one
focusing on proof of land ownership and registration and the other on conducting a
45-day awareness-raising campaign on the government return strategy.

VII. Progress in the implementation of the recommendations of
the strategic review
Implementation of phase one and preparations for phase two
45. In accordance with Security Council resolution 2363 (2017), the
implementation of phase two of the reconfiguration of UNAMID is on track. On
13 February, the Chinese engineering company was deployed to help with
establishing the temporary operating base in Golo, while the Pakistani engineering
company is improving the associated road infrastructure on the segment from
Kabkabiyah to Golo. The military component is realigning its administrative offices,
entailing the closure of three of its sector headquarters in North, East and West Darfur
and the establishment of the State Stabilization Assistance Force, based in Nyala, on
28 February. The Force will be responsible for the areas outside the area of operations
of the Jebel Marra task force. In addition, the Senegalese and Rwandan infantry
battalions were repatriated on 26 February and 17 March, respec tively.
46. UNAMID police are deployed in 9 out of 10 task force team sites: Kabkabiyah,
Sortony, Shangil Tobaya, Tawilah, Kass, Menawashei, Khor Abeche, Zalingei and
Nertiti. The police component has also adopted a revised concept of operations and
established coordination structures to ensure liaison, coordination and reporting of
task force activities. Moreover, the deployment of formed police units to designated
team sites from where the military has withdrawn began on 1 March as follows: the
Jordanian unit from Kabkabiyah to Saraf Omra, the Djiboutian unit from Tawilah to
Korma, the Senegalese unit from El Geneina to Sereif and the Nepalese unit from
Nyala to Masteri. By 30 March, all the team sites were fully operational. As at
10/12

18-06196

S/2018/389

7 March, the UNAMID police component strength stood at 2,560 (1,002 individual
police officers and 1,559 members of formed police units) personnel. That total is
expected to be reduced to the required strength under phase two of 2,500 by the end
of June 2018.
47. By 9 April, UNAMID officials had visited 8 of the 11 team sites closed as part
of the phase one reconfiguration (Tulus and Edd al-Fursan in South Darfur, Abu Shuk,
Zamzam and Um Kaddadah in North Darfur, Muhajiriyah in East Darfur, and Foro
Burunga and Habila in West Darfur) and obtained information from local sources
concerning the situation in the other three sites, Al-Malihah, Tine and Mellit (North
Darfur). Overall, the withdrawal of UNAMID from those areas has had no adverse
impact.
Joint fundraising strategy for sustaining peace in Darfur
48. UNAMID and the United Nations country team finalized a joint financing
approach for sustaining peace in Darfur. Taking into account lessons learned from
past experience, the approach envisages the political engagement of the United
Nations system and Member States in support of the transition from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding in order to reduce the likelihood of relapse into conflict. Options
include programmatic funding in peacekeeping budgets as a transitional measure
during the drawdown and voluntary contributions.

VIII. Observations
49. While encouraged by the positive developments in terms of security, I am
concerned that they are not matched by commensurate progress in the peace process
and implementation of the Doha Document. I reiterate my call upon the parties
concerned to commit themselves to a cessation of hostilities and direct negotiations
and for them to recognize that only a peaceful political settlement can guarantee the
people of Darfur durable peace and development. In that regard, I commend the
African Union High-level Implementation Panel, supported by the Joint Special
Representative, on its unflagging efforts to bring the parties to the negotiation table.
50. The comprehensive implementation of the Doha Document, in particular its
provisions on issues at the heart of the conflict, such as disputes over land and other
natural resources and their consequences, remains critical to achieving long -term
solutions for the Darfuris. I call upon the Government and the affected population to
engage constructively in the implementation of those provisions.
51. I am pleased by the significant progress made in reconfiguring UNAMID. In
this regard, I welcome the operationalization of the Jebel Marra task force and the
beginning of works to establish the temporary operating base in Golo. I should also
like to reiterate my appreciation to the Government for its continued cooperation. It
remains imperative, however, that the mission be guaranteed access throughout
Darfur.
52. In conclusion, I should like to thank the Joint Special Representative, Jeremiah
Nyamane Mamabolo, and all the personnel of UNAMID, the United Nations country
team and the humanitarian community who continue to work tirelessly to improve the
lives of the people of Darfur. I also commend my Special Envoy for the Sudan and
South Sudan, Nicholas Haysom, and the former Presidents of South Africa and
Nigeria, Thabo Mvuyelwa Mbeki and Abdulsalami Abubakar, of the African Union
High-level Implementation Panel, for their steadfast commitment to sustainable peace
and stability in the Sudan.

18-06196

11/12

S/2018/389

12/12

18-06196
