S/PRST/2008/4

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
6 February 2008
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5831st meeting of the Security Council, held on 6 February 2008, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Peace and security
in Africa”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the announcement of progress in the
negotiations, overseen by Kofi Annan, between Mwai Kibaki and Raila Odinga
on 1 February 2008, including the adoption of an agenda and timetable for
action to end the crisis in Kenya following the disputed 27 December 2007
elections. The Council welcomes the African Union communiqué, commends
the efforts of the African Union, President John Kufuor of Ghana and United
Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, and emphasizes its full support for
the Panel of Eminent African Personalities, led by Kofi Annan, in assisting the
parties in finding a political solution. The Council deplores the widespread
violence following the elections, which has resulted in extensive loss of life
and serious humanitarian consequences.
“The Security Council expresses its deep concern that, despite the
commitments made on 1 February, civilians continue to be killed, subjected to
sexual and gender-based violence and displaced from their homes. The
Council emphasizes that the only solution to the crisis lies through dialogue,
negotiation and compromise and strongly urges Kenya’s political leaders to
foster reconciliation and to elaborate and implement the actions agreed to on
1 February without delay, including by meeting their responsibility to engage
fully in finding a sustainable political solution and taking action to end
immediately violence, including ethnically motivated attacks, dismantle armed
gangs, improve the humanitarian situation and restore human rights. Recalling
the need to avoid impunity, the Council calls for those responsible for violence
to be brought to justice. It expresses its concern at the political, security and
economic impact of the crisis in Kenya on the wider region.
“The Security Council expresses its strong concern at the continuing dire
humanitarian situation in Kenya and calls for the protection of refugees and
internally displaced persons. The Council further expresses its concern at the
safety of humanitarian workers and United Nations personnel and calls on all
parties to facilitate their work and ensure their safety. The Council welcomes
the decisions, following consultations with the Government of Kenya, of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights and the Special Advisor for the

08-23010 (E) 060208

*0823010*

S/PRST/2008/4

Prevention of Genocide of the Secretary-General to dispatch missions to
Kenya. It calls on Kenya’s political leaders to facilitate the work of these
missions and looks forward to being informed by the Secretary-General of
their findings.
“The Security Council further requests the Secretary-General to report on
how the United Nations can further support the mediation efforts in Kenya and
on, as necessary, the impact of the crisis on the wider subregion and United
Nations operations in the subregion.”

2

08-23010
