S/PV.8527

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8527th meeting

Friday, 17 May 2019, 9.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Djani. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Indonesia)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Almunayekh
Mr. Ugarelli
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Sithole
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-14371 (E)
*1914371*

S/PV.8527

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 9.40 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the
Syrian Arab Republic and Turkey to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Peacebuilding
and Political Affairs, and Mr. Mark Lowcock, UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.
Ms. DiCarlo: We are at yet another juncture in the
Syrian conflict where civilians are paying the price
for a never-ending war. We have been here before: in
Aleppo, in eastern Ghouta and in Raqqa. Today it is
Idlib, where 3 million civilians are at risk.
Until recently the Russian-Turkish memorandum
of understanding, signed on 17 September 2018, had
significantly reduced violence in northwest Syria.
However, we now see increasing hostilities on the
ground. If the escalation continues and the offensive
pushes forward, we risk catastrophic humanitarian
fallout and threats to international peace and
security. The United Nations therefore welcomes the
announcement made on 15 May of a Turkish-Russian
working group as a means towards re-establishing
a cessation of hostilities in northwest Syria. That
cooperation is desperately needed.
The United Nations has followed with great
concern the dangerous intensification of violence in the
de-escalation area of north-western Syria, involving
Syrian Government forces, their allies, armed opposition
forces and the Security Council-listed terrorist group
Hayat Tahrir al-Sham. Between February and March,
we received reports of Syrian Government air strikes
resuming on areas inside the Idlib de-escalation area,
2/23

17/05/2019

Hayat Tahrir al-Sham stepping up its cross-line raids on
Government forces and mutual exchanges of mortars
and rockets. We have continued to receive reports
of Hayat Tahrir al-Sham launching attacks towards
Government areas, including a Russian airbase.
On 8 March, Turkey, in coordination with Russia,
began patrols inside the demilitarized zone. We
welcomed those coordinated patrols, which somewhat
de-escalated violence. Yet, outside the patrol hours or
patrols areas, attacks from both sides continued and
increased significantly in late April.
On 6 May, Government forces began a ground
offensive, which reportedly included Russian air
support, opening two fronts — one in northern Hama
and the other in north-east Latakia. As of 15 May,
the Government had seized several towns in northern
Hama inside the demilitarized zone.
Turkey reports that two of its soldiers were injured on
4 May by Government shelling on a Turkish observation
post in northern Hama. As the fighting moved closer to
the observation post, Syrian Government and Russian
strikes were reported in close vicinity to the post.
Since late April, this escalation in violence has
reportedly killed and injured more than 100 civilians
and displaced 180,000 people. The aerial bombardment
is alarming, including the use of barrel bombs on
populated areas. Air strikes, barrel bombs and shelling
have damaged or destroyed multiple health facilities
and schools in greater Idlib, several of which had been
deconflicted with the United Nations. There was also
reported shelling from the de-escalation zone into areas
under the Government’s control, including a rocket
strike on the Neirab camp for Palestine refugees.
We appeal to all parties to cease hostilities, uphold
international humanitarian law and protect civilians.
We condemn all attacks on civilians and civilian
infrastructure, in particular medical facilities and
schools, and urge the parties to respect the safety and
neutrality of health and humanitarian workers. The
Secretary-General has called for an urgent de-escalation
of the situation and urged the parties to recommit fully
to the Russian-Turkish ceasefire arrangements. He
has urged the Astana guarantors, in particular Turkey
and Russia, to ensure that this takes place. I strongly
reiterate that appeal today.
The current escalation once again reminds us of
the urgent need for a political solution to the conflict.
19-14371

17/05/2019

The situation in the Middle East

The international community agrees that the presence
of Hayat Tahrir al-Sham in Idlib must be addressed but,
with 3 million civilians in close quarters, combating
terrorism cannot be allowed to supersede obligations
under international law.
Special Envoy Pedersen has elaborated priorities for
the political process. The Council has expressed support
for his efforts. Alongside the urgent imperative to end
the current violence in north-western Syria, we need to
revitalize the United Nations-facilitated political track.
We must continue a sustained dialogue with the parties,
building trust and confidence. We should work together
in support of Russia and Turkey’s recommitment to a
ceasefire on Idlib. We can then work towards restoring
a nation-wide ceasefire and focus on advancing the
political road map in resolution 2254 (2015).
We need concrete action on the release of detainees
and the clarification of the fate of missing persons.
Reported estimates of the number of detained and
missing since 2011 are well in excess of 100,000 people.
The single greatest contribution that could be made
now would be the large-scale release of children, the
elderly, the infirm and women.
Much progress has been made towards convening
a credible, balanced and inclusive constitutional
committee. The United Nations continues to consult
parties on a package addressing the committee’s
composition and rules of procedure that would be
acceptable to both the Government and the opposition
Syrian Negotiation Commission. With a bit of
compromise, it could move forward, and that step could
help to unlock a broader political process. International
cooperation and support of the Geneva process
are critical if Special Envoy Pedersen is to realize
his mandate.
The conflict in Syria is complex but there is a
path forward. Let us unite today for the first step to
support an immediate de-escalation of the violence in
greater Idlib and work towards a political solution that
meets the legitimate aspiration of the Syrian people.
The President: I thank Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lowcock.
Mr. Lowcock: The past three weeks have seen
a deadly escalation of the conflict in north-western
Syria. The Secretary-General has been warning about
this for months. In a September 2018 press release
(SG/SM/19208), he stressed that it was, absolutely

S/PV. 8527

essential to avoid a full-scale battle in Idlib. And he
warned that that would “unleash a humanitarian
nightmare unlike any we have seen [in Syria]”. When I
briefed Council members here on 18 September, I said a
full-scale military onslaught could result in “the worst
humanitarian tragedy of the twenty-first century”
(S/PV.8355, p. 5). Despite our warnings, our worst fears
are now coming true.
As Ms. DiCarlo just summarized, the United
Nations estimates that 3 million people live in the
area of the de-escalation zone in the north-west of the
country. Even before the recent escalation, they were
among the most vulnerable people in Syria, particularly
the 1 million children and the 1.3 million people who
fled to Idlib from other parts of the country. The area
is now largely controlled by Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham — a
proscribed terrorist group. The innocent civilians, of
course, hugely out-number the men with guns.
We have briefed the Council every month as the
conflict has escalated. On 27 March, my Director of
Operations alerted the Council to the alarming spike in
civilian casualties and displacement owing to fighting,
noting that 90 people had been killed and nearly
90,000 displaced (see S/PV.8493). On 24 April (see
S/PV.8515), my Deputy briefed Council members here
on a further increase in air strikes and shelling, with
attacks both in the de-escalation zone and from the
zone into Government controlled areas. She described
how approximately 200 people had been killed since
February, and the number of newly displaced had
grown to 120,000 people.
Just days later, the pace of attacks increased even
further, with some of the most intense hostilities in
almost a year. My Director of Operations briefed the
Council once again last Friday on the effect of the
air strikes, the barrel bombs, the ground attacks and
the shelling. And yesterday the Deputy Regional
Humanitarian Coordinator updated the International
Syrian Support Group humanitarian task force in
Geneva on yet a further spate of barrel bombs from
helicopters, air strikes, heavy shelling, ground attacks
and counter-attacks. In the past three weeks, we have
received reports that up to 160 people have been killed.
At least 180,000 people have been displaced, and
millions of people are crammed into an ever-smaller
area — 180,000 in three weeks.
While many people have moved to camps, more
than 80,000 people have found themselves with nowhere

19-143713/23

S/PV.8527

The situation in the Middle East

to go. They are therefore simply parked in open fields
or sheltering under trees. We now have reports of
three internally displaced persons settlements being
attacked. Three days ago, an attack near a market
place in Jisr Al-Shughur reportedly killed at least eight
civilians and injured three others. Some 17 schools
have been damaged or destroyed, and many more are
closed, with more than 400,000 students unable to sit
for their exams.
Areas in Government-controlled western Aleppo
and northern Hama have also been affected by
hostilities, resulting in civilian casualties and injuries.
On 14 May, rockets hit the densely populated Al-Neirab
camp for Palestine refugees in Aleppo, killing at least
nine civilians and wounding 11. Humanitarian agencies
are trying to help people caught up in the fighting,
but the response is already stretched. Pre-positioned
stocks of food have been given to 100,000 people since
the start of this month. Tents and other shelter items
for 25,000 people are being distributed, but, as we
have told the Council before, a full military incursion
would overwhelm all ability to respond. We are rapidly
approaching that scenario.
I am most of all concerned about the number of
attacks damaging or destroying medical facilities. I
need not remind the Council that medical facilities are
specially protected under international humanitarian
law. Since 28 April, the World Health Organization
(WHO) and health actors have identified at least
18 facilities that have been damaged or destroyed by
air strikes, shelling or other fighting. All of them are
inside the so-called de-escalation zone. Following the
attacks, almost all are currently unusable, including a
hospital in Latmana, in Hama governorate, attacked
on 28 April; a hospital in Madiq Castle, in Hama
governorate, attacked on 28 April; a primary healthcare centre in Hbeit, in Idlib governorate, attacked
on 30 April; a primary health-care centre in Qastun,
in Hama governorate, attacked on 1 May; a WHOsupported surgical unit in the Kafr Nabudah area, in
Hama governorate, attacked on 1 May; and a primary
health-care centre in Al Madiq, in Hama governorate,
attacked on 2 May.
I know that the Council appreciates brevity, but
I could continue listing such attacks for some time.
The trend has continued day after day. In total, WHO
and health actors have reported 20 attacks on those 18
facilities, amounting to almost one a day over the past
three weeks. Some facilities have been hit twice. Other
4/23

17/05/2019

hospitals are closing for fear of being attacked. A total
of 49 health facilities have partially or totally suspended
activities. Among them, they provided an average
every month of at least 171,000 medical outpatient
consultations and 2,760 major surgical operations. They
helped more than 1,400 women deliver their babies
every month. Now they are not doing those things.
The 20 attacks are confirmed attacks, using WHO’s
global methodology for cataloguing attacks on health
facilities. That system relies on WHO’s global reporting
system and a specialized network of partners on the
ground to triangulate and confirm what has happened.
In the case of a reported attack, those partners on the
ground provide a detailed incident report. That is then
verified by WHO, and it is checked against additional
sources. Only those that are fully vetted and confirmed
by a variety of sources are included in the list of
confirmed attacks. That system, by the way, is the one
used for reporting on such attacks from Afghanistan to
Yemen. It is widely respected.
In the light of the events of the past three weeks,
my office and I have been asked a lot of questions
by Member States, non-governmental organizations
operating in the area, doctors in the hospitals and
families affected by the fighting. Let me tell the
Council some of the questions, and what I can say in
answer to them.
They ask: Who is bombing all these hospitals? I
answer that I cannot say, but that at least some of those
attacks are clearly organized by people with access to
sophisticated weapons, including a modern air force
and so-called smart and precision weapons.
Are our hospitals being deliberately targeted? I say
that I do not know. The people who do are the ones
dropping the bombs. What I can tell them is that there
are a lot of attacks on those health facilities.
Is it true that you provide details of where hospitals
are in order to protect them? I answer that, yes,
the obligation to protect civilian objects, including
hospitals, emanates from international humanitarian
law. We give details of some hospital locations to the
parties to the conflict so that they can comply with
those obligations.
Is the information being provided about the
locations of hospitals in fact being used not to protect
hospitals but to target them? I answer that I do not know.
Once again, the people who can answer that question
19-14371

The situation in the Middle East

17/05/2019

are the ones dropping the bombs. Many deconflicted
sites that are not hospitals have not been attacked.
Has this kind of thing happened before during the
Syria conflict? Yes. Last year, the then Special Envoy,
Staffan de Mistura, and I raised concerns about similar
attacks in eastern Ghouta with Council members that
we thought might have relevant information and could
prevent a recurrence. Did you get satisfactory answers
at that time? We have yet to receive full answers to the
questions we raised last year.
If I were a non-governmental organization running
a hospital, why would I want to give you details of my
location if that information were simply being used to
target the hospital? That is a good question. We are
thinking about what conclusions to draw from recent
events in respect of the de-confliction system insofar
as it covers health facilities.
What is your advice to parents of children who live
in the de-escalation zone; should they take their children
to the hospital in case of an illness or injury? That is a
very difficult question. I am deeply concerned about
the impact on the health of children and their safety,
when so many medical facilities are being attacked.
What would you do if you were the parent of a child
needing hospital care in the so-called de-escalation
zone in Idlib right now? I am sorry to say that I just
do not know. I feel desperately sorry for parents in
that horrible position. Has the Security Council not
adopted a resolution reinforcing the fact that countries
should not bomb hospitals? Yes: resolution 2286 (2016)
specifically covers that.
Finally, I am asked: what is the point of the
Security Council adopting such resolutions if States are
not going to comply with them? That, Mr. President,
is also a very good question. It is, of course, not really
addressed to me.
The President:
his briefing.

I

thank

Mr.

Lowcock

for

I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium): I deliver
this statement on behalf of the three co-penholders,
namely, Belgium, Germany and Kuwait, which
have called for this meeting, following last week’s
consultations, to follow up on the concerning military
escalation in the north-western de-escalation zone in
Syria. We would like to thank both Under-Secretaries-

S/PV. 8527

General, Mr. Mark Lowcock and Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, for keeping us up to date on the different
aspects of this crisis.
We would like to start by expressing our deep
concern about the escalation of violence in northwest Syria over the past few weeks, including aerial
bombardment, heavy shelling and the reported use of
barrel bombs. That has led to the loss of life of many
innocent civilians, including health workers, and has
forced more than 180 000 people to leave their homes.
We are particularly concerned about the attacks on
civilian infrastructure, as we have just heard, including
on 18 health facilities caring for 170,000 people, and at
least 17 schools, which are now unable to provide their
services, thereby impacting 480,000 students.
We acknowledge that there is a considerable
presence of members of United Nations-designated
terrorist organizations in Idlib. We clearly condemn
the violent attacks they have carried out. But the fight
against terrorism can in no way justify indiscriminate
attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure.
Counter-terrorism operations do not override the
responsibility of parties to protect civilians, nor should
they impede impartial humanitarian action. The use of
barrel bombs, in any place but especially in populated
areas, is completely unacceptable, as it demonstrates
complete disregard for human life and represents a
strategy of collective punishment.
We, the co-penholders, remind all parties of their
obligations under international humanitarian law, based
on the Geneva Convention and its Protocols, including
the humanitarian principles to protect civilians and
civilian infrastructure. Accountability must be ensured
for those who have committed violations of international
human rights law and international humanitarian law.
We stand firm in our commitment to fight impunity.
We also recall resolutions 2286 (2016) and 2427
(2018), which condemn attacks on hospitals and schools,
respectively. We are particularly alarmed and shocked
by reports of attacks on civilian infrastructure, such
as medical facilities whose location has been notified
under the de-confliction mechanism. That seriously
undermines the very purpose of such notification
as a tool to increase the security and acceptance of
humanitarian actors in the field.
The Russian-Turkish memorandum of understanding
signed in September 2018 was significant in de-escalating
the situation in north-west Syria. We reiterate our call

19-143715/23

S/PV.8527

The situation in the Middle East

for the continuous and full implementation of the
ceasefire arrangements of the memorandum. We recall
that 3 million people, including 1 million children,
live in that area. A wide-scale offensive would lead to
a humanitarian catastrophe for Syria and the region.
We, as the Council, must not let this happen. A lasting
ceasefire in Idlib is paramount. We urge all parties to
avoid further escalation and to use their influence to
that end.
Humanitarian access must be provided in an
unconditional, safe, timely, unhindered and sustained
manner. We would like to salute the heroic work of
humanitarian workers in these particularly difficult
circumstances. The United Nations and its partners
continue to deliver life-saving humanitarian assistance
based on humanitarian principles, including through
cross-border assistance in accordance with resolution
2449 (2018), which is a lifeline to millions of people in
the north-western part of Syria.
Finally, as we, the co-penholders, continue to
follow the situation in the north-west of Syria closely,
we reiterate our support for Special Envoy Pedersen
in his efforts to reach a political solution in Syria on
the basis of resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva
communiqué of 2012 (S/2012/522, annex).
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretaries-General DiCarlo and Lowcock for
their deeply concerning briefings today.
The United States believes that the September 2018
ceasefire agreement between the Russian Federation
and Turkey in Idlib and neighbouring areas is
absolutely essential to maintaining international peace
and security. Millions of civilian lives are in jeopardy
due to increased hostilities by Russia and the regime
over the past two weeks in Idlib and Hama governorates.
These intensified military operations continue
to destabilize the region. The escalation has killed
or injured at least 100 people and driven more than
180,000 from their homes, as we have heard — some
for the third or fourth time in eight years of war, fleeing
the Al-Assad regime’s barrel bombs and Russian and
regime air strikes. Recent fighting has forced civilians
to seek safety closer to the border of our NATO ally
Turkey, and the new wave of displaced persons has
overwhelmed the capacity of camps for internally
displaced persons in the area. The offensive has put aid
workers and humanitarian facilities in danger. Turkish
military forces on the ground to monitor and implement
6/23

17/05/2019

the ceasefire agreement are also in danger, with some
having already been injured, as we have heard.
For a year, the United Nations and many in this
Council have issued grave warnings about the scope of
the tragedy that would result from a military offensive
in Idlib. The Secretary-General was crystal clear in
September 2018 when he said that a military assault
on Idlib would unleash “a humanitarian nightmare
unlike any seen in the blood-soaked Syrian conflict”.
Under-Secretary-General Lowcock has been equally
clear in the past and again today about the scale of
the humanitarian catastrophe that would result from a
military assault on Idlib.
The Russian Federation, on behalf of the Astana
group, has assured the Security Council, as well as
my country bilaterally at the highest levels, that it is
committed to maintaining its own ceasefire. However,
Russia and the regime justify their attacks on civilians
and hospitals as counter-terrorism. The strikes have
destroyed 18 health facilities. Most alarming is the fact
that several of these facilities were on deconfliction lists
set up by the Russian Federation and the United Nations
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
The Syrian people are in grave risk of a catastrophic
humanitarian crisis if Russia and the Al-Assad regime
do not immediately halt their escalation and immediately
recommit to the ceasefire. The United States reiterates
that any escalation in violence in north-western Syria
would destabilize the region, and we call on the Russian
Federation to take the following steps with immediate
effect, in recognition of its ability to influence the
behaviour of the Al-Assad regime.
First, it must ensure the de-escalation of all
military activity in the Idlib demilitarized zone and
recommitment to the full implementation of the
17 September 2018 Sochi agreement. This means a full
cessation of all hostilities in the area — full stop.
Secondly, it must ensure that United Nations
cross-border humanitarian aid deliveries authorized by
resolution 2449 (2018) continue to reach populations in
Idlib, including in the demilitarized zone, with regular,
sustained and unimpeded access.
Thirdly, it must encourage Damascus to take all
steps necessary to ensure the safe and unhindered
access of relief personnel to the affected areas in Idlib.
Fourthly, it must finally ensure that the Syrian
regime does not deploy chemical weapons in Idlib.
19-14371

17/05/2019

The situation in the Middle East

The United States strongly supports Turkey’s
efforts to de-escalate the situation and preserve the
Sochi ceasefire agreement. The United States is not
alone in its calls for Russia and the regime to live up
to their commitments to maintaining the ceasefire. We
echo the important statement by the Turkish Foreign
Minister this week, calling on the regime to stop its
military aggression in Idlib, as well as similar calls by
our European partners. The United States’ resolve to
hold the Al-Assad regime accountable for any further
use of chemical weapons is unwavering, and we remind
the regime and its allies that any use of chemical
weapons, including chlorine gas, will be met by a
strong, swift response.
Russia’s involvement in this offensive is deeply
concerning because the violence threatens the
opportunity that we believe has arisen in recent days
thanks to the diplomatic push by the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Geir Pedersen, to
jump-start the political process through the creation of
a constitutional committee. The 6 May announcement
by the Al-Assad regime of a ground offensive is
incompatible with the Special Envoy’s goal of achieving
a political solution to the conflict. The United States
fully supports Special Envoy Pedersen’s efforts to form
the constitutional committee as soon as possible.
With agreement on the constitutional committee
within reach, Russia and the regime’s decision to launch
air strikes, fire heavy artillery and drop barrel bombs
sends a terrible signal of disregard towards the United
Nations political process. Today, we want to send a
clear signal to the Al-Assad regime and its supporters,
Russia and Iran, that there is no military solution to
the Syrian conflict. The only solution is a political
transition, as outlined in resolution 2254 (2015), namely,
a ceasefire; the establishment of credible, inclusive,
non-sectarian governance that respects the rights of the
Syrian people; constitutional revision; and free and fair
elections pursuant to the new constitution, supervised
by the United Nations, with the participation of all
Syrians, including members of the diaspora.
Russia has repeatedly claimed to agree that there
is no military solution to the conflict in Syria. A
peaceful and lasting political resolution of this crisis
must begin with the protection of civilian populations
from violence. The United States is therefore concerned
that the recent military escalation may be an attempt
by the Al-Assad regime to stall the formation of the
constitutional committee and the United Nations-led

S/PV. 8527

political process and undercut pragmatic efforts to make
progress on a trajectory to the political resolution of the
conflict. This is precisely the wrong course to pursue.
Finally, I have outlined what is the only solution to
the conflict endorsed by the international community
and every single member of the Security Council. The
United States remains firmly committed to Special
Envoy Pedersen’s efforts on the United Nations-led
political process in Geneva and to resolution 2254
(2015). Millions of lives depend on it.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank our briefers.
We will hear from the representative of Turkey
later, but I want to start by welcoming Turkey’s efforts
to agree to agree the Sochi ceasefire in September. As
we welcomed that then, so we welcome now its efforts to
restore that ceasefire and de-escalate. I think we heard
very clearly from both Under-Secretaries-General why
that is a matter of urgency. I also thank Kuwait for
calling for this meeting, which is clearly needed.
The situation in Idlib is so dire that I will not repeat
our well-known position on the political process, which
has not changed, nor indeed on chemical weapons. I
want to use this meeting to focus purely on Idlib, the
nightmare that is in Idlib and the slaughter that is
happening in Idlib. Mr. Lowcock asked a number of
questions; as he said, there are more questions than
answers. It will be good to get some answers for the
people of Idlib from this meeting today.
As we have heard, the regime offensive in northwestern Syria has left 180,000 people displaced since
28 April alone and many killed and wounded. Since
that date, at least 18 health facilities, including nine
primary health-care centres and nine hospitals, and
17 schools have been hit by air strikes. That is a clear
violation of resolution 2286 (2016) and of international
humanitarian law. As the Belgian Ambassador asked,
what has happened to the principles of proportionality,
distinction and necessity? What is necessary? What is
proportionate about bombing 18 health facilities, with
a devastating effect on the local population that the
Under-Secretary-General outlined?
I was interested in Mr. Lowcock’s confirmation
that the United Nations provides details of the locations
of hospitals to the parties to the conflict, and I note
with grave concern the international humanitarian law
obligations that he cited, which should not be taken
lightly. He asked the question: Who is bombing these

19-143717/23

S/PV.8527

The situation in the Middle East

17/05/2019

hospitals? Whoever it is has a modern air force and
precision weapons. Are the hospitals and other facilities
being deliberately targeted despite the deconfliction
mechanisms? It would be absolutely grotesque if
non-governmental organizations and health workers
providing coordinates to a mechanism which they
believe is there to ensure their safety were finding
themselves being the authors of their own destruction
because of deliberate targeting by the regime.

Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Mark Lowcock and
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo for their very useful briefings.
Given the tragic situation in Syria, particularly in the
north-west, I would like to underscore three priorities:
the critical need to preserve the ceasefire in Idlib, the
non-negotiable imperative to respect international
humanitarian law and the protection of civilians and
the urgency of reaching a lasting political solution.

But since we know that Russia and Syria are the
only countries that fly airplanes in the area, I would
like to know whether the answer to Mr. Lowcock’s
question is the Russian and Syrian air forces. I think
we need answers today, and if the answer is the Russian
and Syrian air forces, I would call on both Ambassadors
here today to give us an assurance that the attack will
stop and that there will be no more deliberate targeting
of civilians in this manner in facilities that every single
member of the international community has a duty
to protect.

The preservation of the ceasefire in Idlib must be
our top priority. France is extremely concerned about the
recent ground offensive launched by the Syrian regime
in the north-west, as well as the bombardments and
artillery fire by the regime and its allies. Those actions
are flagrant violations of the ceasefire agreement
between Russia and Turkey, which was reiterated in the
joint communiqué of the Istanbul summit last October.

The Belgian Ambassador also referred to the fact
that counter-terrorist operations are not a license for
indiscriminate attacks on civilians. I want to underscore
that point as well. It is in the Geneva Conventions. It is
a central doctrine of international humanitarian law.
Proportionality, distinction and necessity really matter,
and they do not seem to be in evidence in Idlib.
Russia has claimed that its so-called retaliatory
strikes, in support of the regime, were “surgical” in their
precision. I hope that I never need medical treatment in
Moscow, if surgical accuracy means what we have seen
on the ground in Idlib. Either those statements or the
strikes are therefore wildly inaccurate.
Russia must ensure that its own forces and those
of its ally in Damascus strictly abide by international
humanitarian law and the agreements and resolutions to
which, as a member of the international community and
as one of the permanent five members of the Security
Council, it has agreed.
There is one other question that struck me from the
Under-Secretary-General, which is why the resolutions
are not being complied with. I think that is a very good
question. I believe that every parent in Idlib has the
right to know the answer to that question. It is not a
$64,000 question — to use the vernacular phrase. It is
a question that is costing 160 lives in Idlib, and has cost
400,000 lives since the conflict in Syria began.
8/23

Reports that this offensive has ended still need to
be confirmed on the ground. We will remain vigilant
in that regard. Compliance with the ceasefire must be
ensured over the long term. We must do everything
we can to prevent another disaster in the north-west;
the lives of 3 million civilians, including 1 million
children, are at stake. To put it plainly, we must prevent
Idlib from becoming the new Aleppo at all costs. An
offensive would not only have drastic humanitarian
consequences, but would also pose a serious migration
and security threat to all of us, with a major risk of
terrorist fighters spreading.
In that context, it is the primary responsibility of the
guarantors to preserve the ceasefire, in accordance with
the agreement on Idlib, on which the Astana guarantors
reaffirmed their commitments at their meeting on
26 April. France especially calls on Russia to honour
its commitment to uphold the ceasefire in Idlib and
bring all the necessary pressure to bear on the regime
in that regard. Moreover, I repeat that France will be
extremely firm in the event of chemical weapons being
used again, and we stand ready to act.
Against that backdrop, the protection of civilians
and respect for international humanitarian law constitute
an absolute priority. The humanitarian consequences
of the escalating violence are of great concern. More
than 180,000 people have been displaced, 150 are
dead and 11 schools and 18 medical facilities were
attacked, including hospitals that were de-conflicted.
I reiterate here that France condemns in the strongest
terms all attacks on hospitals and health workers, as
19-14371

17/05/2019

The situation in the Middle East

they constitute war crimes. I repeat, once again, that
the protection of civilians, including humanitarian and
health workers, as well as civilian infrastructure, is an
imperative by which we all must abide and which is
non-negotiable.
Let us make no mistake about it: the current
offensive is not exclusively about the fight against
terrorism. It is part of the brutal retaking of areas that
are still outside the control of the regime and its allies.
That offensive contributes only to the amplification
and spread of the terrorist threat. We support Turkey
in stepping up its efforts to reduce the influence of
terrorist groups. In any event, fighting terrorism, which
is a priority for all of us, cannot be used to justify
violations of international humanitarian law.
As everyone can see, we are facing a new moment
of truth in Syria, the future of which is at stake. How
can we restore the necessary confidence for a credible
political process when the population of Idlib is targeted
by a violent military campaign? How can we both wish
for the return of refugees and launch an offensive that
will inevitably make hundreds of thousands of Syrians
flee? The reality is that an offensive in Idlib will ruin
the prospects for peace in Syria, which could otherwise
come to fruition today.
Only a credible, irreversible and inclusive political
transition will break the cycle of the Syrian tragedy and
pave the way for reconstruction. We must collectively
support the Special Envoy’s efforts to implement all the
elements of resolution 2254 (2015), including a credible
constitutional package. The regime’s obstruction,
which has been going on for months, is unacceptable.
It is equally important that Geir Pedersen continue his
work on confidence-building measures in parallel, with
a view to establishing a secure and neutral environment,
in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015) and the
Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex), and that
he start preparing for the holding of elections. On all
those points, Russia has a leading role to play vis-à-vis
the regime.
After years of failing Syria in the Security Council,
it would be yet another great moral and political mistake
to turn the page today and look elsewhere, whether
because we tired or not courageous enough. To think
that the Syrian tragedy is behind us would be a grave
lapse in judgement, also because we are convinced
that today, for the first time perhaps in eight years, a
small but real window of opportunity is opening for us

S/PV. 8527

to put an end to the conflict; we must not allow that
small window to close. That means that, as members
of the Security Council, we must assume our collective
responsibility to switch off our automatic pilot modes,
build upon our commonalities and at last achieve peace
in Syria.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We appreciate the convening of this
meeting and thank Under-Secretaries-General DiCarlo
and Lowcock for their valuable briefings.
The Dominican Republic notes with great concern
the increasing military escalation in southern ldlib and
northern Hama in the Syrian Arab Republic, which has
resulted in greater suffering, destruction and desolation
for the Syrian people. That area in particular had been
considered safe following the agreement reached
between the Russian Federation and the Republic of
Turkey in September last year. Today, however, we
see how violations of that agreement have led to the
displacement of 180,000 people. Of those who choose
to stay, nearly half a million are exposed to violence.
In a blatant and deplorable violation of international
humanitarian law, there have been reports of attacks on 18
hospitals and ambulances, where several health workers
died, as well as 10 schools and camps for internally
displaced persons, leading to the disruption of basic
services, such as education and health, especially for
women, children, the elderly, persons with disabilities
and young people. If we add the fact that humanitarian
actors who are still active are working at maximum
capacity and in an unsafe environment, it would appear
that the situation could not get any worse. Therefore, a
large-scale confrontation would lead to a humanitarian
crisis of catastrophic levels, given that it would put at
risk the access of cross-border humanitarian assistance
to 3 million people who live in the affected areas and
who depend, for the most part, on such assistance to
survive. We cannot allow that to happen.
We believe that the Council has an unavoidable
responsibility to show unity and decisively meet the
requests of the humanitarian community in Syria, which
were very clearly expressed by Mr. Lowcock, on behalf
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs and actors in the field. The possible serious
humanitarian consequences described today, and of
which all of us are aware, are definitely worrisome.
However, they must be the driving force behind unity in
the Council in order to, first, stop the current violence

19-143719/23

S/PV.8527

The situation in the Middle East

and demand the establishment of a safe humanitarian
corridor to ensure that humanitarian assistance can
continue to reach those affected; secondly, remind the
opposing parties in the most emphatic way possible of
their commitment to protecting civilians, in line with
the norms of international humanitarian law, and that
counter-terrorism activities must also respect such
norms; and, thirdly, call for an immediate end to the
use of, and attacks on, civilian infrastructure, such as
homes, hospitals and schools.
In conclusion, the Dominican Republic would
like to reiterate what was said here on 30 April (see
S/PV.8520). It is imperative to redouble efforts to
prevent a military escalation in Idlib, which, first and
foremost, affects the lives of millions of civilians,
jeopardizes the progress made in the political process
and, no less important, calls into question the capacity
of the United Nations to prevent further suffering and
be able to reach a credible and sustainable political
solution to the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic.
I end by asking that the bombing of civilians stop,
and stop now.
Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We thank
you, Mr. President, for convening today’s meeting, and
the briefers for the valuable information they provided.
We follow with deep regret and concern yet another
escalation of violence in Idlib and other areas in northwestern Syria, as a result of intense air strikes that do
not discriminate between combatants and civilians.
Peru strongly condemns terrorism and believes that the
terrorist groups in Idlib and other areas of Syria must
be brought to justice. We also acknowledge the need
to safeguard Syria’s sovereignty, unity and territorial
integrity. However, we underscore that in no case does
that justify the commission of additional attacks on
civilians and medical facilities, medical personnel and
essential health infrastructure.

17/05/2019

of millions of women and children in the area, which
leads us to highlight the responsibility of the Council
to protect them. We also emphasize the importance of
meeting the needs of hundreds of thousands of internally
displaced persons registered in recent months, mainly
from northern Hama and southern Idlib, who are in
precarious temporary shelters in areas close to the
Turkish border.
Given the delicate circumstances that bring us all
here today, we urge the Syrian Government and all
actors in the conflict to prevent further deterioration of
the situation and Idlib from again becoming a stage for
horror and destabilization, in particular when the lives
of millions of civilians are at stake. We underscore
that essentially that means preserving the ceasefire
brokered by Turkey and Russia last September and a
renewed commitment by all parties, and in particular
the Syrian Government, to the political settlement
process promoted by the United Nations, on the basis
of resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex).
We believe that it is crucial that the Astana
guarantors and other countries with influence over the
Syrian Government and the opposition contribute to
that goal by fostering a climate of moderation, calm,
dialogue and commitment to peace and the future of the
country and its people.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank you, Mr. President, for convening
today’s meeting. We also thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo
and Mr. Mark Lowcock for their excellent briefings.

We underscore that such acts are flagrant violations
of international law and, because of their intentionality
and impact on civilians, can and should be classified as
war crimes. They are also a violation of the provisions of
various Security Council resolutions, such as resolution
2286 (2016). We therefore hope that such reprehensible
acts will be the subject of exhaustive investigations that
will identify and duly punish those responsible.

When this second meeting was convened to address
the situation in Idlib, we could not help but wonder if we
should prepare for the worst-case scenario in Idlib and
if the United Nations should urgently review its state of
readiness in the event that developments took a tragic
course and we again found ourselves with a situation
similar to that of Aleppo, which has been virtually
completely destroyed by the war. Equatorial Guinea
believes that there is indeed cause for concern, as a
surge in ceasefire violations in the de-escalation zone
is increasingly worrisome, with serious consequences
for the humanitarian situation faced by civilians in
Idlib, an increase in the number of fatalities and a wave
of displacement, as Ms. DiCarlo and Mr. Lowcock
have described.

We are also alarmed that the upsurge in violence
appears to be exacerbating the extreme vulnerability

We are facing a devastating scenario in which
thousands of families and villages have been completely

10/23

19-14371

17/05/2019

The situation in the Middle East

annihilated and in which corpses, as has been
underscored, are arriving from hospitals and schools
on a daily basis, as well as a huge number of internally
displaced persons, many of whom are wounded and
face an acute lack of hospitals and means to care for
them. Worse still, the few hospitals that can still care
for the wounded are constantly under attack.
We call on all the parties to put an immediate
end to the escalation of tensions in Idlib and to do
everything possible to prevent the use of explosive
weapons in populated areas, health centres, schools
and other civilian infrastructure, and to comply with
their obligations under international humanitarian
law to prevent civilians from bearing the brunt of the
fighting. They also have an obligation to protect civilian
infrastructure, such as hospitals, schools, warehouses
and so on.
As we underscored recently, given this bleak
outlook, we cannot remain mere onlookers. Passivity
and the lack of genuine political will to bring an end
to the hostilities in Idlib will, in one way or another,
turn us into participants in the ongoing tragedy
in Idlib. We must therefore be unwavering in our
determination to resolve the situation in that supposedly
demilitarized zone.
We encourage better Russian-Turkish cooperation
aimed at stabilizing the situation in Idlib and stress
the need to take effective measures to combat terrorist
organizations in Syria. We recall that no one should
sabotage the effective coordination of those bilateral
actions, which could thwart the spirit of Astana and
increase the risk of tensions, as well as tear apart the
political process in Syria and the formation of the
constitutional committee.
In conclusion, we would like to echo some internal
Syrian voices who are calling on the United Nations
to consider deploying an impartial and independent
monitoring team in Idlib in order to ensure the cessation
of all acts of violence against women, document any
violations and a posteriori prosecute and punish those
responsible. We believe that measure deserves the full
attention of the Council, since it is aimed specifically at
protecting the Syrian people from a possible massacre
looming on the horizon in Idlib. We call on those
countries that have influence on the events that are
unfolding to exert the necessary pressure on the parties
to avoid a huge loss of innocent lives, as we are now
seeing in Idlib.

S/PV. 8527

Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
both Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo
and Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for
their briefings. Unfortunately, both briefings were
extremely alarming.
For the past two weeks, we have been following
with great concern the intensification of hostilities
in the de-escalation zone of north-western Syria. The
current fighting involves Syrian Government forces
and their allies, as well as armed opposition forces and
Hayat Tahrir al-Sham.
Let me be crystal clear: it is again civilians who are
paying the highest price. We have already encountered
similar escalations in Aleppo and eastern Ghouta. A
repetition of those scenarios is simply unacceptable.
Growing human suffering in north-western Syria only
adds to the tragedy of the Syrian people, and that is the
main reason why we have called for today’s meeting.
As already mentioned in the Chamber today, we
have been observing an increase in air strikes over
the Idlib province and in northern Hama for the past
weeks. I have to insist and underline that it is the
civilian population in the region that has been under
heavy shelling on a daily basis. I also want to be clear
that the United Nations-designated terrorist groups
have intensified their attacks. As there is no military
solution to the Syrian conflict, this situation must stop.
Over the past two weeks, the violence has resulted
in the death of more than 160 civilians. Air strikes
on population centres, bombardments and the use of
barrel bombs, as well as the targeting of civilian and
humanitarian infrastructure, notably schools and health
facilities, are violations of international humanitarian
law. It is unacceptable, particularly taking into
consideration the fact that in some cases attacks on
civilian and medical infrastructure happened even
though the GPS coordinates were communicated to the
parties to ensure their safety.
Poland condemns those atrocities in the strongest
possible terms and reiterates its call on all parties
affecting the situation on the ground, especially the
Astana guarantors, to uphold their obligations under
international humanitarian law and spare no effort to
protect civilians.
In that regard, Astana guarantors have a special role
to play and should therefore take all necessary actions
to arrive at a full cessation of hostilities, especially

19-1437111/23

S/PV.8527

The situation in the Middle East

while taking into consideration the crucial importance
of the memorandum of understanding between Russia
and Turkey signed in September 2018, which has been
already recalled at this meeting. It is our moral and
legal duty to do our utmost to alleviate the suffering of
civilians in Syria.
Let me conclude by underlining that any
military operation — even those aimed at countering
terrorism — should be fully in line with international
humanitarian law and human rights law. Not only is it
a legal, but also a moral, obligation to prevent harm to
thousands of civilians trapped in the middle of fighting.
Those who do not comply should be held accountable.
There can be no military solution to the Syrian
conflict and a political agreement in line with
resolution 2254 (2015), and the Geneva communiqué
of 2012 (S/2012/522, annex) remains the only way
towards peace. We look forward to the establishment
of a constitutional committee — the first step towards
a genuine political process under United Nations
supervision. In that context, United Nations Special
Envoy Pedersen has our full support.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks Under-Secretary-General Rosemary
DiCarlo and Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock
for their informative briefings on developments
related to the humanitarian situation in the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Côte d’Ivoire remains concerned about the new
military escalation in Idlib governorate, despite the
signing in September 2018 of the agreement between
Russia and Turkey on the demilitarized zone, which
is intended to separate insurgent territories from
Government areas and ensure a cessation of hostilities
in that region. According to the United Nations, that
offensive resulted in the displacement of approximately
180,000 people between 29 April and 9 May, including
many deaths. If we are not careful, that new outbreak
of violence risks undermining the many efforts of
the international community to achieve a peaceful
solution to the Syrian crisis and worsening the already
worrisome humanitarian situation.
In that context, Côte d’Ivoire, which condemns
the pursuit and intensification of fighting, including
its disastrous consequences, calls on the parties to
immediately cease hostilities throughout all Syrian
territory in order to give the peace process a chance
to succeed. In that regard, we call on the parties to
12/23

17/05/2019

the conflict to fully implement the Russian-Turkish
agreement on the demilitarized zone. In particular, we
urge all the parties to respect the obligation to protect
civilians and respect international law and international
humanitarian law, violations of which, we should point
out, can be subject to prosecution in the competent
international courts.
My delegation welcomes the meeting held in
Sochi on Tuesday, 14 May, between the United States
Secretary of State and his Russian counterpart, to
discuss issues of common interest, including that of
Syria. We hope that this meeting will open up other
areas for consultation with a view to identifying, in
the words of the Secretary of State, “pathways forward
in Syria ... to move the political process forward”. My
delegation hopes that the most urgent issues, such as
the humanitarian situation and the establishment of the
constitutional committee, can unite the views of all
stakeholders in the Syrian crisis.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate my country’s
call for a political solution to the Syrian crisis through
an inclusive dialogue among all the stakeholders, in
accordance with resolution 2254 (2015). In that regard,
Côte d’Ivoire affirms its full support for Special Envoy
Geir Pedersen’s tireless efforts to restore peace and
stability in Syria.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Ms. DiCarlo and Mr. Lowcock for
their briefings.
To be honest, we have a feeling of déjà vu all over
again. We frequently heard these kinds of appeals and
lamentations during the pacification of eastern Aleppo
and Ghouta. But I want to ask why the humanitarian
troika was in no hurry to call for a Security Council
meeting when the so-called coalition was razing
Baghouz and Hajin to the ground. Civilians were
dying then, and air strikes were destroying civilian
infrastructure, including hospitals and schools. And
what about Raqqa? Almost no one cared about the fate
of that city, which was basically obliterated.
Let us recall what happened in Raqqa. It is always
useful, especially because people do not like hearing
about it and would prefer to forget it. We recommend
reading a publication put out by the international
human rights organization Amnesty International on
the events of two years ago. Its careful, painstaking
work established that as a result of the thousands of
indiscriminate air and artillery strikes by the so-called
19-14371

17/05/2019

The situation in the Middle East

coalition and its allies, more than 1,500 civilians died
and more than 11,000 buildings and infrastructure
facilities were destroyed. I recall that at the time our
Western partners described the Raqqa operation as
possibly the most precise military aerial campaign
in history, acknowledging responsibility for only
159 deaths.
In general, it is time to stop using double standards
for what is happening in Syria. For instance, we are
hearing a lot of lectures about Rukban, even though
all of the problems there are related to the fact that
militants belonging to Maghawir Al-Thawra, with
the connivance of the United States, are preventing
internally displaced persons (IDPs) from leaving the
camp voluntarily and are restricting their rights. Despite
that, as of 15 May 12,000 people had left Rukban. We
hope that our United States colleagues will change their
unconstructive approach, or better yet, end their illegal
occupation of that part of Syria’s sovereign territory
as quickly as possible. In any event, the occupying
State is responsible for the population of the occupied
territories under the terms of the Geneva Conventions.
That is not a politicization of the Rukban issue, because
the Geneva Conventions are the very foundation of
international humanitarian law. In anticipation of
possible comments on this, I should say that there is no
fight against terrorism that justifies occupation.
In contrast to Rukban, we have heard none of the
breast-beating and anxiety about the dire humanitarian
situation in the IDP camp at Al-Hol in north-eastern
Syria, which is not under the Syrian authorities’
control. The camp is overcrowded, its residents are
mainly women and children whose rights are being
violated, and there is a disastrous lack of humanitarian
assistance. Instead of working to establish a steady
flow of humanitarian convoys from the areas
controlled by Damascus, attempts are being made to
consolidate deliveries through a non-transparent crossborder mechanism.
We categorically reject the accusations of violations
of international humanitarian law. Neither the Syrian
army nor the Russian aerospace forces is conducting
hostilities against civilians or civilian infrastructure.
Our target is the terrorists, which some of my colleagues
prefer not to mention. We once again call on the
Secretariat and the specialized United Nations agencies,
including the World Health Organization, not to hasten
to publicly spread unverified information about civilian
casualties or damage to civilian infrastructure. The

S/PV. 8527

information should come from reliable, non-politicized
sources and must be thoroughly checked, including by
ascertaining whether infrastructure that has supposedly
been hit has been through a deconfliction process.
While we are being fed information from so-called
reliable sources, when we ask about those sources they
categorically refuse to name them. Or is this once again
about those heroic White Helmets?
The Syrian Government and Russia’s representatives
have always tried to prevent violence and resolve
situations peacefully, when appropriate, even when
illegal armed groups are involved. Peace has been
restored in most of the territory of the Syrian Arab
Republic through this type of negotiation. However,
there is one obstructive factor in Idlib — the continuing
aggressive actions of Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham terrorists,
which have provoked a serious escalation of tensions in
the area. The militants continue to attack Governmentheld positions and shell nearby settlements, where
the victims are both civilian and military Syrians.
When we were told today about people being killed
by rockets, for some reason those speakers were too
embarrassed to mention that civilians in Aleppo and
Hama are being killed by rockets fired by the terrorists
of Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham. By the way, the Russian
Centre for the Reconciliation of Opposing Sides in
the Syrian Arab Republic has received actionable
information confirmed by independent sources that the
Al-Nusra Front terrorists are preparing yet another act
of chemical provocation in the town of Saraqib with a
view to subsequently blaming Damascus for it.
On 27 April, around 130 terrorists attacked
a defensive position of Government forces near
Al-Suqaylabiyah, in north-western Hama governorate.
The Syrian army retaliated, but sustained losses of 26
killed and more than 40 injured. As a result of attacks
by Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham terrorists, 22 Syrian soldiers
and four civilians were killed and about 100 wounded
in the first half of May alone. Provocative actions by
jihadists are also a serious threat to the security of the
Russian air base at Hmeimim and the lives of our troops.
The militants are actively using multiple-launch rocket
systems and attack drones. At the end of April and
beginning of May, for example, terrorists repeatedly
shelled the air base with rockets, and 18 attack drones
were destroyed on their approach to Hmeimim.
From 6 to 11 May, in response to such aggressive
attacks and provocations by terrorists from Hayat
Tahrir Al-Sham, including their use of multiple-launch

19-1437113/23

S/PV.8527

The situation in the Middle East

rocket systems and attack drones, Government forces,
supported by the Russian military, were obliged to
undertake countermeasures to drive the terrorists out
of the areas they were using to shell Hmeimim air base
and the Syrian army positions. The strikes were aimed
only at terrorist targets confirmed by intelligence.
As a result, we were able to clear the areas with the
highest concentration of terrorists in the southern part
of the Idlib de-escalation zone. However, even after
the Syrian army had stopped the militants’ active
hostilities, Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham terrorists continued
their acts of aggression. On 13 May, for instance, two
detachments of illegal armed groups totalling about
650 fighters, with artillery support, 10 tanks and four
armoured vehicles, attacked Syrian army positions in
the area of Kafr Zita and Al-Suqaylabiyah, killing two
Syrians and injuring nine.
Russia affirms its continuing commitment to the
agreements on stabilization in Idlib, including the
Russian-Turkish memorandum of understanding of
17 September 2018. Negotiations through our defence
ministries are currently continuing between Russia and
Turkey with a view to firmly stabilizing north-western
Syria and neutralizing the terrorist threat coming from
it. We want to emphasize specifically for the benefit of
those who from time to time raise the alarm about what
is going on in Idlib and about the actions of the Syrian
army and its supporters that the memorandum makes
no suggestion whatever that the terrorists should be
protected. On the contrary, it affirms the memorandum
participants’ determination to fight them. We refuse
to consider terrorists untouchable and will continue
to fight them despite the complaints of some of our
partners. In general, we are getting the impression that
the terrorists in Idlib are simply being covered for and
reserved for some nefarious purpose. The argument is
based on the issue of the protection of civilians, whom
we are just as concerned about as the rest of the Council
and who have become hostage to the terrorists in Idlib.
Rather than pushing a narrow, self-serving agenda
in Syria with the goal of regime change, we should
unite our efforts to stabilize the situation in Syria and
together eradicate terrorism, work on post-conflict
restoration and assist in the return of refugees. Here I
would like to push back on my American colleagues’
accusation that Russia has destabilized the region. We
have different views as to who destabilized the region
and continues to do so. What is truly important right
now is preventing any escalation in the Persian Gulf
14/23

17/05/2019

as a result of the growing disputes between America
and Iran. That would enable us to seriously advance a
political settlement throughout the region. Without it,
the region threatens to devolve into chaos.
Russia will continue to put its efforts into
restoring peace to Syria, in its national capacity and
as a permanent member of the Security Council and a
member of the Astana troika. More has been done in
the framework of the troika than in any other format to
ensure de-escalation, reduce the terrorist threat, provide
humanitarian assistance and prepare for the political
process, which is especially important at this stage.
Mr. Sithole (South Africa): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting on the
humanitarian situation in Syria. We also thank UnderSecretaries-General Rosemary DiCarlo and Mark
Lowcock for their briefings.
South Africa condemns the escalation of violence,
particularly in north-west Syria, and the unnecessary
loss of innocent lives. The attacks on civilians and
civilian infrastructure, particularly the destruction
of schools and health facilities, are unacceptable and
must be strongly condemned. It is worrying to note that
owing to the stark increase in violence, 16 humanitarian
agencies have suspended their activities in the area. The
people of Syria, particularly in the Idlib area, are in dire
need of humanitarian assistance. South Africa calls on
all parties to uphold international humanitarian law and
protect civilians, and would like to remind them of their
obligations under international humanitarian law and
international human rights law to protect civilians and
civilian infrastructure.
We urge the relevant parties to cease hostilities
immediately and make the necessary provisions to
enable the resumption of humanitarian activity. We wish
also to emphasize that counter-terrorism actions cannot
be undertaken at the expense of innocent civilian lives
and that any such actions should be taken only within
the parameters of international law. My delegation
supports the Secretary-General’s call for all parties
to respect international humanitarian law and the
protection of civilians, and further urges the parties to
the September 2018 memorandum of understanding on
the stabilization of the Idlib de-escalation area to adhere
to the commitments contained in the memorandum.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would first like to thank Under-Secretaries-General
DiCarlo and Lowcock for their briefings.
19-14371

17/05/2019

The situation in the Middle East

China is closely monitoring the situation in northwestern Syria. Last September, Russia and Turkey
signed a memorandum of understanding reiterating
their determination to combat terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations, with a view to maintaining stability
in north-western Syria. In the past few months, terrorist
groups have tightened their grip on Idlib, and in the areas
they control have threatened civilians’ physical safety
and launched frequent attacks on Russian military
bases and Government-controlled areas, which have
resulted in civilian casualties and seriously undermined
regional security. The international community will
not tolerate such reckless action on the part of terrorist
forces. China supports the counterattacks in response
to the terrorist groups’ heinous acts. We believe that
in order to bring about genuine improvement in the
situation in Syria, it is imperative to address both the
symptoms and root causes of the problem. Here I would
like to make the following three points.
First, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015),
we should continue to promote a Syrian-led and -owned
political process. The United Nations should continue
to play its role as the main mediation channel and
address the legitimate concerns of all parties, including
the Syrian Government, in a balanced manner.
China supports the joint efforts made to promote the
establishment of the constitutional committee and
the continued important role of the Astana process.
In this regard, we support the work of the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Envoy for Syria in consulting with
the relevant members of the international community
in Geneva, and we look forward to further progress in
the consultations.
Secondly, it will be imperative to fight terrorism
resolutely and safeguard the independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Syria in order to restore
security and stability across the country as soon as
possible. Counter-terrorism is a major part of the
solution to the Syrian problem. If terrorism is not
eradicated, there can be no peace for the Syrian people
and no security for the countries of the region. The
international community must harmonize standards,
crack down resolutely on all terrorist groups listed
by the Council and continue to consolidate counterterrorism achievements.
Thirdly, we must take into full account the
humanitarian situation throughout Syria. We commend
the United Nations and other relevant parties for
their humanitarian operations there. Humanitarian

S/PV. 8527

assistance should be provided to all regions and people
in need, and we also support targeted humanitarian
assistance measures in north-western Syria. In the long
term, the international community should help Syria to
restore its basic economic and social order and support
the participation of its people in the development and
building of their nation.
Since the beginning of the Syrian crisis, China has
provided the country with food, medical services, office
supplies, public transportation, personnel training and
other kinds of humanitarian assistance. In future, we
will continue to provide such assistance and support
to the best of our ability. China is ready to work with
the other members of the Council to promote a political
solution to the Syrian problem and jointly address
serious counter-terrorism and humanitarian challenges.
Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic):
A few moments ago, the Permanent Representative
of Belgium made a statement, on behalf of the
co-penholders, regarding the humanitarian situation in
Idlib and the neighbouring areas. I would now like to
address a few points concerning the political process of
the Syrian crisis.
The co-penholders — Belgium, Germany and
Kuwait — called for the convening of this meeting today
because we totally believe that the Security Council has
a responsibility to address the accelerated events that
are happening in Idlib and its environs. This meeting
is a precautionary step to prevent the deterioration of
the situation in Idlib. We agree with and support the
four appeals made by the Secretary-General António
Guterres as the Syrian crisis entered its ninth year.
They are as follows.
First, he urged all parties to maintain the RussianTurkish ceasefire agreement in Idlib. Secondly, he called
on the parties to respect international humanitarian law
and protect human rights when carrying out a military
operation. Thirdly, he insisted on the provision of
humanitarian assistance as a necessity on a sustained
basis. Fourthly, he urged increased international
support in order to achieve a political solution that
would meet the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian
people, as well as for support for Mr. Geir Pedersen in
the implementation of resolution 2254 (2015) and the
2012 Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex).
As stressed by the representative of Belgium on
behalf of the co-penholders, we condemn the terrorist
acts carried out by terrorist groups in Idlib. We also

19-1437115/23

S/PV.8527

The situation in the Middle East

affirm that the fight against terrorist groups cannot
exempt any belligerent party from its obligations
pursuant to international law, including respect for
the principles of distinction, proportionality and the
protection of civilians and civilian targets.
We once again condemn the deliberate attacks on
populated areas and medical facilities throughout Syria.
We call on all parties to respect the Council resolutions
on infrastructure, particularly resolution 2286 (2016),
on hospitals and health centres, and resolution 2427
(2018), on the protection of schools.
In conclusion, we underscore the importance of
making progress on the constitutional committee,
which must be balanced, credible and inclusive,
bringing together all components of civil society. We
reaffirm that there can be no military solution to the
conflict in Syria. The only solution is a political one
that realizes the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian
people, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015)
and the 2012 Geneva Communique, and maintains the
unity, independence and sovereignty of Syria.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): I too would like to start
by thanking our briefers, Mr. Mark Lowcock and
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo for their comprehensive, albeit
alarming briefings.
As the representative of Belgium has delivered a
statement on behalf of the three co-penholders — Belgium,
Kuwait and Germany — I will limit my remarks on
this particular issue and simply say again that it is
absolutely unacceptable that civilian infrastructure
is being targeted. We supported the people of Hama
and Idlib while they were under dual pressure from
the regime and terrorist groups like Islamic State. It
did not go unnoticed that the medical facilities that
we supported have been reduced to rubble, leading to
deaths, displacements and an even more dire lack of
medical care for civilians.
We are unified in our rejection of terrorist groups
such as Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham. They are not covered by
the Idlib agreement and their attacks endanger the wellbeing of the people they pretend to govern. However,
the fight against terrorism, as so many have already said
today, can in no way justify indiscriminate attacks on
civilians and civilian infrastructure. Counter-terrorism
operations do not diminish the responsibility of parties
to protect civilians, nor should they impede impartial
humanitarian action.
16/23

17/05/2019

Like my colleague from Kuwait, I would also like
to say a few words on the broader political picture.
First of all, let me reiterate that we continue to
fully support all the efforts of Special Envoy Geir
Pedersen. We remain convinced that only a political
solution on the basis of resolution 2254 (2015) and the
full implementation of all its elements can achieve
sustainable peace and stability in Syria. The formation
of a credible, balanced and inclusive constitutional
committee, with a clear mandate and transparent
operating procedures under United Nations auspices, is
overdue and urgently needed as a point of entry into a
political transition process.
The second observation I would like to make
is that the Syrian regime has to start to live up to its
responsibilities. That is part and parcel of a future
political solution. As long as basic human rights
continue to be massively violated on a daily basis; as
long as there is violence in Syria; as long as civilians
are being killed, arbitrarily detained, tortured and
denied access to humanitarian assistance; as long as
we do not see accountability; and as long as there is
no sustainable solution to the Syrian crisis, the Council
will need to keep its attention on the situation in Syria. It
is absolutely essential to create a safe, calm and neutral
environment in which political change can take place.
That will require, first and foremost, a change
in the behaviour of the Syrian regime. Violations of
international humanitarian law and abuses of human
rights must finally stop. It is the responsibility of
the Syrian Government to provide credible security
guarantees that would enable the voluntary, safe
and dignified return of Syrians to their country.
We emphasize again that it is first and foremost the
Syrian regime’s policies of repression, persecution and
injustice that is keeping internally displaced persons
and refugees from returning home. Regime-sanctioned
arrests, torture and killings continue to create a climate
of fear. Crimes and atrocities already committed on
all sides during the Syrian conflict, including horrific
accounts of murder, torture, sexual violence and
crimes against children, must be investigated and the
perpetrators brought to justice.
Finally, before concluding, I would add that
the Syrian regime continues to arbitrarily prevent
humanitarian access from reaching more than a million
people living in areas under its control. We urge the
19-14371

17/05/2019

The situation in the Middle East

Syrian regime to grant immediate, unimpeded and
lasting humanitarian access to all people in need.
The President: I will now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Indonesia.
My delegation wishes to thank Under-SecretariesGeneral Mark Lowcock and Rosemary DiCarlo for
their briefings.
Indonesia, like others, is very concerned about
the escalation of violence in north-western Syria,
which has resulted in human casualties, particularly in
recent weeks. The deteriorating situation has affected
the ability of many Syrians to enjoy their basic rights.
Schools and health facilities have been damaged, and
around 180,000 people have been displaced in the past
10 days alone. The very grim and desperate situation
on the ground, as depicted by Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock, represents a worsening situation and a
looming humanitarian crisis. That is unacceptable.
In this context, I would like to briefly highlight
three points.
First, civilians should not and must not continue
to be the targets and victims of military operations.
Moreover,
education
facilities
and
medical
infrastructure, such as hospitals, must not be subject
to direct attacks of a military purpose. All parties
should abide by international humanitarian law and
faithfully implement resolution 2286 (2016). It is indeed
frustrating to see that the current situation in Idlib is
at a stage where a military solution is becoming more
attractive than pursuing a peaceful resolution.
Secondly, the Council needs to continue reminding
all relevant parties to recommit to the Russian-Turkish
ceasefire agreement. Indonesia also believes that it is
crucial for the Astana guarantors and other countries
with influence over the parties to the conflict to help
prevent further escalation and to engage in a genuine
dialogue that would yield concrete measures, with the
aim of stabilizing the situation in north-western Syria.
A genuine commitment of all parties to pursuing a
political solution and reconciliation is needed now
more than ever.
Thirdly, my delegation wishes to ensure that
the current escalation will not overshadow or derail
the progress of the ongoing political process that is
being facilitated by Special Envoy Pedersen, in close
consultation with all relevant parties. We would
therefore like to reiterate our strong support for his work

S/PV. 8527

and his priorities in advancing a political solution in
Syria, based on the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522,
annex) and resolution 2254 (2015).
Indonesia is of the view that unless there is a durable
political solution to the conflict, the humanitarian
crisis will be increasingly difficult to resolve. In the
meantime, it is important for all parties to step up their
efforts to ensure that the humanitarian effort in Syria
goes forward without hindrance. At the moment, taking
an approach of naming and shaming is not the solution.
It is clearly not going to take us anywhere, nor will it
contribute to saving innocent Syrians on the ground.
We must work together to find solutions. Civilians and
refugees do not care about words but about deeds and
actions to save their children. We on the Council should
really be united in saving people’s lives. The Syrian
people have every right to live in peace and dignity and
without fear.
In conclusion, we urge all the parties to cooperate
fully in ensuring the protection of the millions of people
in Idlib so as to contribute to stability on the ground at
this perilous time. In this holy month of Ramadan, I
make a humble appeal. Let there be restraint. Let there
be respite so that all citizens in Idlib can break their
fast without fear and with food on the table. Let there
be peace.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, and your friendly country of Indonesia
on your successful management of the work of the
Security Council this month. Your presidency has taken
the task entrusted to it of maintaining international
peace and security and respecting the provisions of the
Charter seriously, as your important statement showed.
I wish you a happy month of Ramadan.
Contrary to the belief of some, we are not opposed
to this open meeting, as it provides my country
and others with an opportunity to speak the truth
about what is happening in the city of Idlib, which is
controlled by the terrorist organization Hayat Tahrir
Al-Sham. However, we have reservations about the
systematically politicized approaches taken by some
members of the Security Council, who call for such

19-1437117/23

S/PV.8527

The situation in the Middle East

meetings every time the Syrian Government and its
allies take legitimate action to protect Syria’s citizens
from the acts of terrorist groups.
Those same States closed their eyes and kept
silent with regard to the war crimes and crimes against
humanity committed by the illegitimate United States
alliance in association with militias such as the so-called
Syrian Democratic Forces. They totally destroyed the
city of Raqqa, killing and displacing its population,
as was recently confirmed by Amnesty International,
which found that the international coalition’s attacks
had resulted in the greatest recorded destruction of a
city in modern history. They also committed horrible
crimes in Deir ez-Zor governorate that resulted in the
deaths of thousands of civilians and the displacement
of tens of thousands more, especially in the area of
Baghouz and, just a few days ago, in the village of
Al-Shuhail. Besides that, tens of thousands of civilian
Syrians have been held hostage as human shields in the
Rukban camp.
The selective approach of some Council members
is helping terrorist groups and obstructing the efforts
of the Syrian State and its allies to protect the Syrian
people and combat terrorism. They are mobilizing
against the Syrian Government and its allies in order
to raise the terrorist groups’ morale and provide them
with protection and political cover to continue their
bloodshed and blackmail. It might be useful for all of
us, when discussing the situation in the city of Idlib, to
have a description of the actual situation there, which
may be summarized as follows.
First, Idlib is a Syrian governorate. It is not in
Germany, Belgium or Kuwait. It is therefore the
Syrian State that is responsible for protecting it and
its Syrian inhabitants from terrorism. It is the Security
Council’s responsibility to help the Syrian Government
in that respect. Idlib covers an area of 6,097 square
kilometres, 15 times larger than that of New York City’s
five boroughs. We are not talking here about caves in
the Tora Bora mountains but about a vast territory in
Syria occupied by terrorist gangs that the Council has
described as a branch of Al-Qaida. Indeed, in Syria,
Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham means Al-Qaida.
Secondly, we all agree that the city of Idlib and
some areas in its vicinity in north-eastern Syria are
controlled by the Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham terrorist group,
which is in fact the Al-Nusra Front, which the Security
Council has included on its list of terrorist groups and
18/23

17/05/2019

entities as an arm of Al-Qaida in Syria. It controls
85 per cent of Idlib.
Thirdly, that terrorist group has exploited the
Turkish regime’s disregard of its obligations regarding
the de-escalation zone and under the Astana and
Sochi agreements in order to seize control of Idlib and
create a hotbed of terrorism as a way of blackmailing
the Syrian Government. In response to the comments
by the representative of Belgium on behalf of the
penholders, I would like to point out that there have
been no random attacks on Syrian civilians in Idlib.
There are military operations being conducted by the
Syrian army and its allies against a terrorist entity
listed by the Security Council, aimed at liberating
the civilian population of Idlib and saving them from
being used as human shields by Al-Qaida in Syria. The
terrorists who control Idlib would not have been able to
blackmail millions of Syrians — as the representative
of Belgium indicated — without the support of the
Turkish authorities for that terrorist group and without
their disregard of their commitments under the Astana
and Sochi agreements.
Fourthly, that terrorist group has tens of thousands
of foreign terrorist fighters in its ranks who were
recruited and sent by countries well known to all of
us, some of which are unfortunately members of the
Council, with the full knowledge of their Governments.
They were sent from all over the world to join terrorist
organizations with multiple names and allegiances,
such as Huras Al-Din, Jaish Al-Muhajireen Wal-Ansar,
the East Turkestan Army and others, as various United
Nations reports have corroborated. None of the names
of those groups have anything at all to do with Syria.
However, some would like to call them the moderate
armed Syrian opposition.
Fifth, this terrorist group uses hundreds of thousands
of civilians as human shields, commits the most heinous
crimes against them and spreads death and destruction,
as well as destroying civilian infrastructure, including
hospitals and schools, which it turned into military
barracks and centres for detaining and torturing all
those who reject their extremist takfiri ideologies and
thinking. Even worse, those who sponsor it have created
a criminal media arm for its support, namely, the White
Helmets, which receives care and aid from its sponsors.
Sixth, the crimes committed by this terrorist group are
not limited to the areas under its control but include the
neighbouring populated cities and villages, which were
bombed and shelled with random rocket fire, resulting
19-14371

17/05/2019

The situation in the Middle East

in the killing of scores of civilian martyrs, most of
whom are women and children, in the cities of Aleppo,
Hama, Latakia, Muhradah, Al-Suqaylabiyah and others
in peaceful Syrian regions. We did not hear anything
from the humanitarian co-penholders in the Council
regarding a call upon the Council to meet and discuss
this inhumane and dangerous development. There
should be just one legitimate question to ask, not three
or five or six that we all must answer. It is a question that
can reassure everyone within and outside the Security
Council. It is as follows: when will the Governments
of certain countries, members and non-members of the
Security Council, stop supporting terrorism in Syria?
My American, British and French colleagues have been
commending the Turkish policy in north-western Syria.
That alone denies credibility to everything they say.
Seventh, the de-escalation agreement in Idlib is a
temporary arrangement. It cannot continue indefinitely.
It resulted from the Astana agreement and is renewable
for six months. Everyone should understand that
upholding that agreement means that the Turkish
regime must end its occupation of vast areas of Syrian
territories. The Turkish regime must also honour its
commitments to the Russian and Iranian guarantors and
the host country, Kazakhstan. It must stop supporting
terrorist groups in Idlib and cease its operations aimed
at imposing Turkish identity and building a wall along
the border south of the city of Manbij.
Against that backdrop, we believe that the question
that should be asked is the following: what options
are available to counter this terrorist threat? In order
to further simplify the question, let us imagine the
following scenarios. Let us imagine, for example, that
an Al-Qaida-affiliated terrorist group with thousands
of fighters takes over the city of Dortmund, Germany,
commits heinous crimes against its inhabitants and
attacks the cities of Düsseldorf, Bonn and Cologne
with rockets and missiles. Let us imagine that a
similar group takes over Antwerp, Belgium, and starts
carrying out heinous crimes against its inhabitants and
shelling Ghent and Brussels with rockets and missiles.
Let us imagine that a third group takes over the city
of Abdali, Kuwait, for example and commits heinous
crimes against its habitants while attacking Bubiyan
Island and the capital with rockets and missiles. Let
us imagine that a similar fourth group takes over the
city of Yonkers, north of New York, perpetrates serious
crimes against its inhabitants and attacks Manhattan,
Brooklyn and Queens with rockets and missiles. Maybe

S/PV. 8527

then we call on Mr. Lowcock to send humanitarian
assistance to the Security Council in order to continue
holding its meetings.
We never want to see those scenarios take place
but, in the case of such a situation, what options would
the Governments of those countries have to protect
civilians? I believe the answer is simple. No Government
will agree to surrender to terrorist threats. No country
will agree to endanger the lives of civilians while
waiting for the political machinations of some and the
hypocrisy associated with humanitarian slogans. No
country will allow its sovereign and constitutional rights
to protect its territory and its citizens to be undermined.
It is a right that is guaranteed by international law, the
Charter of the United Nations and all Security Council
counter-terrorism resolutions.
Putting an end to the suffering of the Syrians in Idlib
means ending hypocrisy and politicization; ceasing to
invest in terrorism; stopping to manipulate the fate of
peoples; and adopting objective and logical approaches
based on a profound knowledge of the realities and
available alternatives. It would require a minimum of
repatriating foreign terrorist fighters to their countries
instead of stripping them of their nationality. Those
countries should stop playing the immoral game of
telling the Governments of Iraq and Syria to host the
terrorists and once again suffer the consequences of
their terrorism, which the two countries have already
endured for many long years. My questions to the
countries that offer us such advice is the following: are
you ready to repatriate your citizens who are involved
in terrorist acts in Syria? Are you ready to indicate
which Governments recruited, funded and trained
those terrorists as well as facilitated their transfer into
Syria and enabled them to kill Syrians? Are you ready
to do that?
We once again warn the members of the Council
that the armed terrorist groups are determined to
perform a great play to accuse the Syrian Government
of using toxic chemical products in Idlib. They fabricate
evidence and train some of their elements to pretend
that they are suffering from the consequences of a
chemical agent and to be filmed by well-known media
networks and then accuse the Syrian Arab Republic
of such acts, similar to what has happened on several
occasions in the past.
In that regard, we have sent hundreds of letters to
the Secretary-General, the President of the Security

19-1437119/23

S/PV.8527

The situation in the Middle East

Council and relevant United Nations counter-terrorism
entities involved in the non-proliferation of chemical
weapons. However, we are sure that some within the
United Nations will once again not hesitate to adopt the
rhetoric of armed terrorist groups and accuse the Syrian
Government. Why? Simply because the agenda of some
within the Organization make it incumbent upon them
to become partners in blackmailing the Syrian Arab
Republic and to target it along with its allies, which are
combating terrorism on behalf of all States.
In conclusion, the continued trade in shedding the
blood of Syrians and the suffering that they endure,
which is not limited to a purely humanitarian issue,
will not prevent the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic, supported by its allies, from discharging
its constitutional and legal responsibilities in order
to combat terrorism and protect its citizens. The
humanitarian issue is something, the political track
is something else and combating terrorism is yet
another thing.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Representative of Turkey.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): I would like to thank
Under-Secretaries-General Rosemary DiCarlo and
Mark Lowcock for their briefings on the situation in
Idlib. We express our appreciation and gratitude to all
humanitarian workers for their tireless efforts. Those
unsung heroes provide lifeline services to millions of
Syrians in need.
Let me repeat what has been said many times in
the Chamber: a large-scale military assault on Idlib
would cause a major humanitarian catastrophe. So
far, we have been able to avoid a major tragedy thanks
to the Idlib memorandum of 17 September 2018. It
ensured relative calm in the governorate. It is extremely
important for the millions of people in Idlib that that
remains the case. However, the significant increase in
ceasefire violations by the regime, with their number
exceeding 600 since the last days of April, is deeply
alarming. We are faced with a disaster in the making.
The recent aggression of the regime might displace an
additional hundreds of thousands of people. It entails
serious humanitarian and security risks for Turkey, the
rest of Europe and beyond.
The civilian casualties caused by those
indiscriminate attacks have surpassed more than 500
in number. There has been yet again an intense use of
barrel bombs. The regime deliberately targets civilians,
20/23

17/05/2019

schools and hospitals with complete disregard for
human life. Some 243,000 people have already been
displaced, and a trend of migration towards the north
is on the rise.
On 4 May, an observation post of the Turkish
armed forces was attacked and two of our personnel
were injured. Such actions can in no way be justified
as part of the fight against terrorism. No country
appreciates the need to combat terrorism more than
Turkey. However, innocent people cannot be sacrificed
in the name of fighting terrorism. That will only create
new hotbeds of terrorism and extremism.
The Idlib memorandum has also served the
ultimate goal of accelerating the political process and
finding a negotiated resolution to the crisis in Syria. It
provides the oxygen for the political efforts. The recent
belligerence of the regime risks disrupting the political
process at a time when we are at the final stages of
forming the constitutional committee.
We continue to coordinate with Russia to preserve
the status of Idlib as a de-escalation area and end the
regime’s violations. President Erdoğan and President
Putin are in close contact to discuss the measures to
be taken to address the current situation on the ground.
The Turkish and Russian Ministers for Foreign Affairs
and Ministers of Defence maintain an exchange of
views on a regular basis. As a result of contacts at
the highest level, a Turkish-Russian working group
convened in Ankara in the past two days in order to
bring the situation in the de-escalation zone of Idlib
under control.
The rest of the international community must also
make every effort to ensure that the regime respects
the ceasefire. The regime has frequently committed
crimes against humanity. Red lines have often been
crossed. We cannot repeat the same mistake again. The
consequences of inaction are immense. Shelling as well
as ground offensives must stop immediately. A return
to the status quo ante is essential.
We all agree that there can be no military solution
to the conflict in Syria and that the only way to end the
conflict is through a United Nations-mediated political
process in line with resolution 2254 (2015). Turkey and
neighbouring countries continue to bear the brunt of
the humanitarian crisis in Syria, but our means and
capabilities are not limitless. The Council is responsible
for preventing a humanitarian catastrophe. It is time to
take action. That requires unity, courage and resilience.
19-14371

17/05/2019

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8527

We cannot and should not leave the Syrian people to the
mercy of the regime.

and hamper the political solution, all of which are
inherently interlinked.

With regard to the statement delivered by the
regime’s representative, I do not consider him as
a legitimate representative of the Syrian people.
Therefore, I will not honour him with a response.

In conclusion, I would like to stress once again the
need for full respect by all for the sovereignty, political
independence, unity and territorial integrity of Syria.
As underlined in the joint statement by the guarantors
on the international meeting on Syria in the Astana
format held in Nur-Sultan on 25 and 26 April, no action,
no matter by whom, should undermine those principles.
In that context, the guarantors of the Astana format
also rejected all attempts to create new realities on the
ground under the pretext of combating terrorism. In that
regard, the United States must therefore immediately
end its illegal presence in parts of Syria.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran):
Along with other guarantors of the Astana format, the
Islamic Republic of Iran continues to support keeping
Idlib as a de-escalation area. That approach is based on
a reality and a fundamental principle. There are a large
number of civilians there whose lives must be saved.
At the same time, certain questions are in order.
Can and should this situation continue indefinitely?
Should the Government allow internationally
designated terrorist groups to maintain their control
over its territory. Should the international community
allow such terrorist groups to take a large number of
civilians as their hostages?
The answer is clear. The establishment of the Idlib
de-escalation area was only a temporary measure,
with the exclusive objective of protecting civilians, not
providing terrorist groups with such a safe haven. It does
not limit the right of the Syrian Government to fight
Security Council-designated terrorists, which of course
has to be carried out in accordance with international
humanitarian law. Therefore, both defeating terrorists
and releasing civilians is necessary.
The current situation in Idlib — in which the most
dangerous terrorist groups are allowed to use more than
2 million civilians as human shields, continue their
control over a large part of a sovereign State’s territory
and conduct their operations therefrom, attacking both
military and civilian targets beyond that area — cannot
and must not continue indefinitely. The persistence of
that situation would enable the terrorists to kill more
civilians. That is in contradiction with the objective of
the Idlib de-escalation area’s creation. We should be
vigilant enough not to confuse the protection of civilians
with the protection of terrorists. The continuation of the
current state of affairs in Idlib would further interrupt
the restoration of the Government’s control over all its
territory and securing the safety and security of all its
citizens, prevent the return of refugees and internally
displaced persons, delay the country’s reconstruction

With that in mind, the Syrian Government must be
assisted in the formation of the constitutional committee,
facilitated by the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Syria, Mr. Pedersen, whose efforts we
support. We encourage him to further strengthen his
consultations with the Government of Syria.
As stated in the aforementioned joint statement,
there is no military solution to the Syrian conflict, and
the only option is to advance the Syrian-led, Syrianowned and United Nations-facilitated political process.
Ultimately, the right to determine the future of Syria
belongs exclusively to the Syrians themselves. We must
genuinely support the realization of that objective.
The President: The representative of the United
Kingdom has asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I apologize for
taking the floor once again, but I do not think that we
have heard an answer with regard to the hospitals. I
want to return to that. We are very clear. We do not
support terrorism or terrorist acts, and we agree with
the representative of Germany that the attacks on
Russian bases should be condemned. I also wanted to
say, however, that the Al-Assad regime is not leading
and has never led the fight against Da’esh. It is the
Global Coalition that cleared Da’esh from Raqqa.
The Syrian Ambassador also talked about the
Syrian regime only taking legal measures and having
responsibility for protecting civilians in Idlib. I
therefore ask once again: What is the answer concerning
the hospitals? If only Russia and Syria are flying
aeroplanes over Idlib, what is happening with regard
to the targeting of hospitals? I believe that we need
further information. We need to know if the hospitals

19-1437121/23

S/PV.8527

The situation in the Middle East

are being deliberately targeted, we need to know if the
deconfliction mechanism is not working, and we need
to know what is going to be done to stop the attacks on
the hospitals. Where are the assurances to halt attacks
on hospitals, health facilities and schools in areas in
which ordinary people, not terrorists, live? What is
being done to stop those attacks?
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of the Syrian Arab Republic to respond to the
questions raised.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Some years ago, Aleppo had a very advanced
eye hospital called Al-Kindi, one of the best in the
Middle East. Some Western Governments claimed that
it had been bombed by the Government of Syria. At the
time, we allowed the representative of the World Health
Organization (WHO) in Syria to visit it and to produce
a WHO report for all concerned on the reality of the
Al-Kindi hospital’s situation. As Council members
may recall, at that time eastern Aleppo was still under
the control of terrorists. The WHO representative
visited the hospital under a special arrangement with
the Syrian Arab Red Crescent. When he reported back
to us and to the WHO, he said there was no Al-Kindi
hospital. He said that he entered a building that was
full of terrorists, with no signs of any kind that it was
a medical hospital. By the way, the terrorist entity
that was occupying Al-Kindi was the same Al-Nusra
Front that has been mentioned today and is currently
in Idlib. That was the testimony of the United Nations
representative who visited Al-Kindi at the time.
That episode was repeated many times. My
colleague Mr. Nebenzia mentioned how hospitals in
the city of Raqqa have been destroyed by United States
planes, something that no one talks about, not even the
penholders for humanitarian, social and philosophical
affairs. Dozens of hospitals in Raqqa have been razed
to the ground. However, no one has a problem with that
because it was the Americans who did it. Furthermore,
the British Government sponsored the creation of
another terrorist group, the so-called White Helmets,
whose main task was to fabricate scenes of chemical
attacks in Syria to provide a reason for American,
British or French — or tripartite, as they sometimes
like to term it — acts of military aggression against
my country.
I would like to point out, for the information of
our newer colleagues, who may be hearing about the
22/23

17/05/2019

chemical issue for the first time, that the first chemical
attack in Syria occurred in March 2013 on the small
village of Khan Al-Assal in rural Aleppo governorate.
As a result, 18 Syrian soldiers and a number of civilians
were killed. I was instructed by my capital a few hours
after the attack to inform then-Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon and ask him to provide assistance in verifying
whether an attack using a chemical weapon had taken
place, and by whom. That was in 2013. Mr. Ban is
still alive, so anyone here can check with him about
it. He asked me to give him some time. He called me
at home a few hours later, at 11 p.m., and told me to
inform my Government that he was ready to assist in
verifying whether a chemical substance had been used
in the attack on Khan Al-Assal. However, with regard
to identifying the perpetrator, he apologized, saying
that as Secretary-General of the United Nations, he
could not assist in the matter. The reason was that the
people he was consulting with, both on the Council
and beyond, knew who had launched the attack and did
not want to reveal the identity of those who were using
chemical weapons at the time.
We agreed to cooperate fully with the SecretaryGeneral and to let him help us verify whether or not
a chemical weapon had been used in Khan Al-Assal.
We hoped that the assistance would be forthcoming
as soon as possible, given that the use of chemical
materials involves factors such as the so-called chain
of custody, evaporation and wind. Every feature of
a chemical attack could disappear within a matter
of hours or days. We therefore asked the SecretaryGeneral, in the language of Shakespeare, to provide
assistance “as soon as possible”. I would like to inform
the British Ambassador that it took the SecretaryGeneral four months and 11 days to send Mr. Sellström.
“As soon as possible” for the Secretary-General meant
four months and 11 days to send Mr. Sellström to
investigate what happened in Khan Al-Assal. When
Mr. Sellström reached Damascus and was on his way
to Aleppo, incidentally, paradoxically and incredibly
another chemical attack also took place, this time in
Ghouta, in Damascus. The Secretary-General then
instructed Mr. Sellström to go, not to Khan Al-Assal,
but to Ghouta.
The crux of the story is that what took place in Khan
Al-Assal in March 2013 has still not been investigated
nor the perpetrators identified, although everyone
knows the identity of the people who carried out the
attack. We have sent the Council dozens of messages
19-14371

17/05/2019

The situation in the Middle East

that include full details of the issue and that identify
the people who used the chemical weapon, as well as
how the substance was transported, first from Libya to
Istanbul and then across the Syrian border to Aleppo.
I would like to ask Council members to stop asking
questions that can only cause embarrassment, because
we have answers that will embarrass every one of them.
And we actually have more information than that.
The President: The representative of the
Russian Federation has asked for the floor to make a
further statement.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russia Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The representative of the United Kingdom
asked a question that implied that the representatives of
Syria and Russia should respond to it. She was absent
from the Chamber when I made my statement, for what
I know was a perfectly good reason. I want to let her
know that we put the same question to the representative
of the World Health Organization (WHO), for example,
asking for information about the medical infrastructure
that had been destroyed and the identity of the source
that informed him about it. Our request was met with a
categorical refusal and the excuse that it could endanger
the people who had provided the information. We are
therefore no less interested than our British colleague
in this question.
By the way, she also mentioned in connection with
the surgical — or allegedly non-surgical — strikes that

S/PV. 8527

the Russian Aerospace Forces allegedly conducted on
targets in Idlib governorate that she would not want to
receive medical care in Russia. I certainly do not wish
for her to need any kind of medical care, heaven forbid,
but I want her to know that there are good medical
facilities in Russia, should she ever need them. So if
the WHO or any other United Nations entity shares
information with her on the sources we have been
discussing today and she could see her way to sharing it
with us, we would be extremely grateful.
The President: The representative of the
United Kingdom has asked for the floor to make a
further statement.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I will be really brief.
I just want to say one thing to my colleague the Russian
Ambassador. I thank him for his queries about the
World Health Organization. That suggests to me that we
should get together with the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs and others to really drill down
into what the problem is with deconfliction and the
coordinates, because it obviously is a problem.
But I want to say to the representative of Syria that
first, I am not embarrassed, and secondly, I did not hear
the assurances that I was asking for. I want to state for
the record that I did not get the assurances that I was
asking for about the civilians in Idlib and protection
from air strikes.
The meeting rose at noon.

19-1437123/23
