SECURIT’k COUNCIL
THIRTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

2466th

MEETING:

NEW

12 AUGUST

1983

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional
Adoption

agenda

(S/Agenda/2466)

of the agenda

.,..................................

1

...............................................

1

Letter dated 8 August 1983 from the Charge d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
to the United Nations addressed, to the
President of the Security Council (S/15914) . ..*.....................*...

1

WPV.2466

.. .
:-:.
_. . .

::_ .
-.

NOTE

::

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the OfficiaaI Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2466th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday,
President: Mr. Luc de La BARRE
(France).

12 August 1983, at 4 p.m.

de NANTEUIL

to narticinate in the discussion of the item on the agenda.
In ionfo&ty
with the usual practice, I propose, w%h the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Zarif (Afghanistan), Mr. Vongsay (Lao People’s Democratic Republic),
Mr. Eyaki (Sudan) and Mr. Le Kim Chung (Viet Nam) took
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

Provisional agenda (WAgeW2466)
1. Adoption
2.

of the agenda

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
Members of the Council have before them a letter dated
11 August from the representative of the Sudan to the
President of the Council [S/Z5922].

Letter dated 8 August 1983 from the Charge
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15914)

4. The first speaker is the representative of Cuba. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

The meeting was called to order at 5.25 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda

5. Mr. GARCfA ITURBE (Cuba) (interoretation from
Spanish): Permit me first, Sir, to congmtulaie you on’;our
assumption of the presidency for the month of August.
We are sure that in that position you will once again bring
to bear your experience as a diplomat. I should also like
to thank you for the opportunity you have given us to
address the Council.

The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 8 August 1983 from the Chargh d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15914)

6. Similarly, we should like to mention the competent
presidency of the Council by the representative of the
People’s Republic of China during July.

1. The PRESIDENT (interpretationfromFrench):
In conformity with decisions taken at the previous meeting on
this item [246&h meeting], I invite the representative of the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to take a place at the Council
table; I invite the representatives of Cuba, Democratic
Yemen, the Islamic Republic of Iran and the Syrian Arab
Republic to take the places reserved for them at the side of
the Council chamber.

7. Once again the Council has had to meet to discuss
new threats and acts of aggression by the Government of
the United States against a non-aligned country.
8. We are dealing today with renewed acts of provocation and hostility by the Government of the United States
against the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. Among those acts,
we would mention in particular the violation of Libyan
air and sea space by warplanes and warships of the United
States navy and air force; the concentration of forces and
electronic espionage equipment on the Libyan frontier;
and the threatening and alarming statements by high off&
cials in Washington, who claim the right to dictate the
norms of conduct to a people, small but worthy of
respect, the people of Libya, a country which as a result of
its 14 years of triumphant revolution has succeeded in
throwing off the yoke of imperialism.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Burwin (Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya) took a place at the Council table; Mr.
Garcia lturbe (Cuba), Mr. AI-Al& (Democratic Yemen),
Mr. Rajaie-Khorassani (Islamic Republic of Iran) and Mr.
AI-Atassi (Syrian Arab Republic) took the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): I
should like to inform memb
of the Council that I
have received letters from the representatives of
Afghanistan, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, the
Sudan and Viet Nam, in which they request to be invited
1

16. We all know of the situation around Libya. A naval
task force of the Sixth Fleet of the United States, including the nuclear aircraft carrier Eisenhower, is off the
Libyan coast. The Bright Star manoeuvres, with the participation of land, sea and air forces of the United States
and some other countries from within the region, are
being held on Libya’s borders. AWACS aircraft are flying
on reconnaissance missions, accompanied by tighter
planes.

9. Libya has every ground for making its complaint.
Ever since the current United States Administration came
to power, it has proliferated acts of aggression against
Libya. We would mention the economic measures, including the withdrawal of technicians and the closing of
markets, all designed to paralyse the Libyan economy.
We also recall the brutal attack by United States warplanes on Libyan aircraft and the pressure exerted on
other countries to join the diplomatic boycott of Libya.
Together with all this, there has been an hysterical propaganda campaign on the Goebbels model in an attempt,
among other things, to discredit the leaders of the Libyan
revolution.

17. Whether or not those manoeuvres are called joint
training activities and previously announced exercises of
limited purpose and scope, they constitute a sheer demonstration of force, a show of military power aimed at intimidating those whose policies might not be to the liking of
those imperialistic circles which see in increased tension
better possibilities for the carrying out of their sinister
plans and designs.

10. We draw the attention of members of the Council to
the refusal of the United States-quite inadmissible in the
light of international law-to recognize Libyan sovereignty over the waters of the Gulf of Sidra, which are
adjacent to its territory, and the incursion of United
States warships into the territorial waters of that country,
in flagrant violation of its sovereignty.

18. The threats and provocative acts against Libya that
we are witnessing today are unfortunately nothing new. It
is not long since the Council last dealt with them [24I5fh
to 2418th meetings]. The patterns of development of the
situation then and now are quite similar.

11. It is noteworthy that a brief recounting of these
actions by the United States in the Mediterranean and
north Africa shows that they seem to be the twins of the
actions being carried out in the Caribbean and Central
America, and in their turn fall within the framework of
the world-wide military build-up being carried out by the
current United States Administration.

19. As we all recall, in February of this year the aircraft
carrier Nimitz and other vessels of the United States Sixth
Fleet approached the coast of Libya. AWACS aircraft
were, we were told, sent there for the purpose of joint
manoeuvres.

12. The situation is dangerous. Libya has proclaimed its
legitimate right to defend its sovereignty, and there is the
risk that an imperialist act of provocation will unleash
large-scale aggression against that country. The accumulation of United States land, sea and air forces in that north
African area and the United States’ growing intervention
in the Chad problem have aroused legitimate concern in
the international community.

20. Today the region of the Mediterranean and northern
Africa bordering on the most sensitive region of the Middle East has once again become the part of the world to
which forces and military equipment are being dispatched
from outside the area and where rapid-deployment units
are. being engaged in exercise activities the character of
which is clearly visible. At the same time one can easily
see the efforts of imperialistic Powers involved anew in
neocolonial policies and attempts to take advantage of the
long-complicated internal affairs of other countries-such
as Chad, for example-meddling
and interfering and
eventually engaging in direct intervention. Those countries see their stepped-up role in the war. The number of
advisers, instructors and mercenaries, as well as regular
and special forces, is constantly growing. Those troops
are accompanied by an increasing flow of arms, including
weapons such as Redeye missiles. The French paratrooper and the United States adviser have once again
become a common feature in certain areas. Beyond any
shadow of a doubt their presence makes solution of the
conflict more difficult. There are brazen imperialistic
efforts to intemationalize the conflict. The pressure being
brought to bear on some African States to drag them into
military or political intervention is growing. The efforts of
imperialism
to impose neocolonial solutions on other
nations and to use their territories for activities directed
against those countries whose internal and foreign policies do not suit the interests of the United States and the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) continue to
be undertaken without the slightest hesitation, ruthlessly
and with full determination.

13. Cuba categorically repudiates the United States acts
of aggression and threats against Libya, which are also a
threat to other peoples of the region. These imperialist
actions must cease.
14. Our Government reiterates its active solidarity with
Libya, and at the same time calls upon the Council to
come out firmly in defence of a small, independent, nonaligned country worthy of respect-one which is threatened today, as are other peoples in Central America, the
Middle East and Africa, by the aggressive, interventionist,
illegal policies and actions of the imperialist Government
of the United States.
15. Mr. NATORF (Poland): The letter dated 8 August
addressed to you, Mr. President, by the representative of
the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, which is now before us,
draws the Council’s attention to the serious deterioration
of the situation in the region of the Mediterranean, the
Middle East and Africa that has resulted from acts of
intimidation and steps of a provocative character directed
against that country and requests urgent consideration of
the complaint by the Council.
2

.

21. All these negative phenomena on the political scene
of the region cannot but cause us profound concern. Such
policies in the Mediterranean, North Africa and the Middle East are not limited to those regions only: they extend
even beyond them. Everywhere they constitute a flagrant
violation of the norms of international law. They pose a
serious threat to peace and security.

cil for affording my delegation the opportunity to speak
before the Council for the second time this month.

22. It is not only direct military pressure that is being
applied against the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. There is also
the specific pressure of aggression through propaganda.
This instrument has been very well known for years in the
arsenals of imperialism. It is used as a supplement in exacerbating tension, as a means of conducting psychological warfare. Different methods are used to paint a black
picture of the country that is the object of such attacks.
Yet all these methods-be they official statements or articles in the mass media, be they brief and simple remarks
or lengthy and elaborated texts giving so-called evidence,
which is but distorted facts-have the same purpose. The
many allegations and charges against Libya testify to the
fact that that country has become an object of constant
attacks by the propaganda machine.

29. Although Libya has been a target of imperialist
designs since the victory of the September revolution, the
most blatant form of imperialist aggression against that
relatively small country was recorded almost two years
ago when the United States Sixth Fleet naval armada
invaded the territorial waters of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya in the Gulf of Sidra and shot down one of the two
Libyan planes which were in reconnaissance flight over
national waters [S/24636, para. 33.

28. The item before the Security Council, namely, the
United States aggression against Libya, has been a subject
of many debates at various United Nations and other
international meetings.

30. The international
community,
through various
groups and organizations of States, strongly condemned
that naked aggression and other acts of intimidation and
provocation against Libya.
3 1. The Group of Arab States in the United Nations in a
statement issued on 21 August 1981 [S/Z4638/Rev.I,
annex], denounced and condemned that aggression which
came in the wake of a series of threats and provocations
that constituted a most dangerous precedent in international relations.

23. Threats to international
peace and security and
efforts to inflame tensions and rekindle the fires of conflict should be stopped. An end should be put to interference by imperialistic
and neocolonial States in the
domestic affairs of other countries. The problems that
exist in the region can and should be solved by political
means, with the participation of the Organization of African Unity (OAU), which is capable of playing a significant role in enhancing settlements in the interests of the
peoples of the region.

32. The Coordinating
Bureau of the Non-Aligned
Countries convened in an extraordinary session on 28
August 1981 to consider the grave situation arising from
the provocative naval manoeuvres conducted by the
United States Navy. In a statement, the Coordinating
Bureau considered those provocative actions by the
United States, one of the permanent members of the Security Council, as a serious threat to the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of the non-aligned
countries in the region and the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
in particular. The Co-ordinating Bureau drew the attention of the Security Council at that time to that grave
situation which threatened international
peace and
security.

24. The Council’s consideration of the complaint of the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya should contribute to the achievement of those ends. As an organ responsible for the maintenance of peace and security, the Council should
eliminate hotbeds of tension, and combat actions that
flout the sovereign inalienable right of countries to solve
their problems, to carry out their independent policies
and to decide their destinies for themselves.
25. The present consideration of the item on the agenda
has shown clearly that many countries of the region are
not turning a blind eye to the threats and dangers stemming from the involvement of the neocolonial States constantly seeking attainment of their strategic goals, which
have nothing to do with the real interests of the peoples of
that area. It has proved clearly that those policies are
being condemned as inconsistent with the letter and the
spirit of the Charter of the United Nations.

33. The Ministers for Foreign Affairs and heads of delegation of the non-aligned cot&tries to the thirty-sixth session of the General Assembly expressed deep concern
over the aggression by the United States of America
against the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya in a communique.
issued on 28 September 1981 [see S/14713, annex, sect.
vll.
34. The Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the States
members of the Organization of the Islamic Conference
also condemned the American act of aggression against
Libya in their statement of 3 October 1981.’

26. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): The
next speaker is the representative of Afghanistan. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

35. It was logically expected that in the face of such
strong reaction and condemnation by the international
community, the United States would abandon its policy
of pressure and threat against Libya.

27. Mr. ZARIF (Afganistan): Mr. President, I should
like to thank you and the members of the Security Coun3

36. All the meetings convened, the time spent, the condemnations made and the appeals launched, it seems, did
not prove effective enough to deter the Government of
the United States to cease forthwith its militaristic, aggressive designs against the Socialist People’s Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya.

ist leaders, destabilized independent governments, staged
military coups d&tat or intervened directly and in the most
brazen manner.
43. Should that defmnt attitude of the United States
imperialism continue unabated, one may wonder what
would be the fate of other small independent nations
which become targets of similar actions and which do not
have the sufficient means to protect themselves in the face
of such events.

37. Regrettably, not only were those actions not stopped,
but the United States Administration
resorted to various
other means of intimidation and threat. That, in our view,
did not come as a surprise, given the nature of American
imperialism. Since then, the United States has increased its
military presencein a number of countries in the region and
surrounding areas. More and more sophisticated weaponry
has been introduced to the region. Several provocative
manoeuvres have been conducted off Libyan coasts and in
the territories of some neighbouring countries. A huge campaign of lies and malicious propaganda to discredit the
leadership of that country and its foreign policy towards the
region accompanied other aggressive and interventionist
United States actions. Baseless accusations are made with
regard to Libya’s intentions, while Libya itself has been a
target of the repeated use of force and threat of use of force.

44. The Council theoretically serves as an instrument in
which the international community and, in particular,
small nations have invested their hopes and aspirations.
45. If the Council were to tolerate this and other piratical actions of the United States against other Member
States of the United Nations, the confidence of the international community in this veryimportant Council would
soon inevitably vanish.
.46. Let us not forget that this body, which is charged
with the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international
peace and security, very often became
totally paralysed whenever it had to discuss a situation
where the ‘United States was involved. That in turn
resulted in the recourse by small countries to their
national and bilateral means in order to avert the threat
directed against them.

38. Why ,Libya is subjected to such a defamatory campaign is known to everybody. It is the independent nonaligned policy of that country and its courageous refusal
to submit to pressures that have angered the United States
and its regional allies.
39. The most recent invasion of Libyan territorial
waters in the Sidra Gulf by the aircraft carrier Nimitz and
other military vessels of the United States Sixth Fleet and
provocative interception of Libyan patrol planes by.
United States fighter planes serve as yet another example
of United States outlawry and its disrespect for rules of
international conduct.

,
_‘_.
,
__
___’
_‘,I
‘,
_-_
s’,
_‘,
_-_
.I_
_‘.
_’

,’,’
‘/
_-

47. For the sake of the credibility of the Organization,
and especially that of the Council, we call for prompt
action to be taken to discourage the United States from its
activities that endanger the peace and security in that and
other parts of the world.
48. I should like, in conclusion, to reiterate the full solidarity of the people and Government of the Democratic
Republic of Afghanistan with the people and Government of the Socialist People’s Libyan Arab Jamahiriya in
the struggle for safeguarding their independence, sovereignty and territorial ‘integrity.

40. The United States, which has extended its spheres of
“vital interest*’ to practically every corner of the world,
arrogates to itself the right to violate the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations that should govern the
relations among States and has tried to make them subservient to its national interests. It spares no means from
indirect political, economic and military pressure to direct
armed intervention in the internal affairs of other States.

49. Mr. SINCLAIR
(Guyana): Sir, ‘my delegation has
already had an opportunity to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency for the month of August.
However, since this is the first time that I have addressed
the Council personally this month, allow me to renew our
congratulations. My delegation recalls with pride the efficiency and skill with which you discharged the numerous
and onerous responsibilities of the presidency during the
long, hot summer days and nights of June 1982. Of course,
we have also been able to have even finer appreciation
of your wisdom and your talent as a diplomat during our
work with you in the ensuing months. .We have every
confidence that under your stewardship the work of the
Council this month will be satisfactorily. concluded.

41. The Charter has burdened the United States, as a
Member of the Organization and as a permanent member
of its Security Council with enormous responsibilities for
observing the principles enshrined in the Charter and for
the safeguarding of international peace and security.
42. A brief glance at the United States record of compliance with those principles will immediately reveal that
the trust which the international community had placed on
the United States as a permanent member of the Council
has been repeatedly betrayed. Suflice it to remind ourselves of the United States infamous adventures .in Iran,
the Congo, the Dominican Republic; Viet Nam, Haiti,
Chile, El Salvador, Afghanistan, and many, many other
countries, where United States armed forces and intelligence services set up assassination plots against national-

50. I should also like to extend my delegation’s congratulations to Mr; Ling Qing, representative .of China, with
-which my country enjoys relations of great friendship and
solidarity, for the efficient, methodical and serene manner
4

56. My delegation shall in due course be addressing
itself to the complaint made by the Government of Chad.
On that occasion, we shall deal more substantively with
our concerns regarding the immediate threat to intemational peace and security in that area.

in which he conducted the business of the Council in the
month of July.
5 1. It is in faithful discharge of its primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security
that the Council is now convening to address itself to the
complaint made by the Government of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya.

57. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): The
next speaker is the representative of the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic. I invite him to,take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

52. My delegation paid very careful attention to’ the
statement made by the representative of Libya at the start
of the Council’s consideration of the question now before
us and to that made by the representative of the United
States, as indeed to all the subsequent statements made in
,
the course of this debate [2464th meeting].

58.. Mr. VONGSAY (Lao People’s Democratic Rep&
lit) (interpretation from French): Sir, first of all I should
like most warmly to congratulate you on your assumption _
of the presidency for this month. My delegation is convinced that, under the guidance of a seasoned diplomat
whose wisdom is well known and who represents a country and a people with which my own country and people
maintain. traditional relations of friendship and co-operation, the work of the Council will lead to a successful
conclusion.

53. This series of meetings is taking place in a period
characterized by a marked heightening of tension in interState relations. There is increasing resort to the threat of
use of force as a means of coercing other States or of
settling inter-State differences. Preparations for war intensify. In such a conjuncture, it behoves the Council, as the
body with major responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, to seek ways of exerting
maximum influence for the exercise of restraint and for
the promotion of inter-State relations firmly rooted in the
rule of law and the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.

59. Also, we wish to thank you, and through you the
other members of the Council, for having granted our
request to participate in the current discussion of the item
on the agenda.
60. Yesterday [2463rd mehing], the Council had before
it the item on the events afflicting Chad and its people,
which some 10 days ago had already been discussed in
this chamber [2462nd meeting]. My delegation noted with
satisfaction the statement of neutrality made by the representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya with’regard to
the bloody conflict occurring in the northern part of
Chad, a conflict involving the interested Chadian parties
exclusively. The Lao delegation deplores the direct intervention of the United States of America, as well as of
other countries, in this conflict, thus seriously jeopardizing both regional and international peace and security.

54. Guyana has consistently held the position that in
relations between States the principles of international
law must be inviolate and scrupulously respected. The
best guarantee of the maintenance of stable international
relations lies in the strictest respect by all States for independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity. In their
relations with each other States must abide by the principles of the Charter and by those contained in such solemn
international instruments as the Declaration on Principles
of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and
Co-operation among States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations* and the Declaration on the
Inadmissibility
of Intervention and Interference in the
Internal Affairs of States.3 States must refrain from the
threat or use of force in their international relations., We
cannot accept the use of force as an instrument of State
behaviour. We believe disputes between States must be
settled by exclusively peaceful means and that full respect
must be shown for the right of all States to pursue their
own paths free from intervention or outside interference
and without coercion or pressure.

61. The .second’ matter brought before the Council on
the very same day by the representative.of the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya in his letter of 8 August addressed to the
President is also an urgent and a serious matter, since it
undermines the independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of that country and jeopardizes peace and security in the region.
62. In this affair, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya has,
through its representative, quite rightly questioned and
condemned the reprehensible acts of provocation, intimidation and armed intervention the United States of America is now committing against it. This has been reflected
by the setting in motion and deployment of American air
and naval forces of the Sixth Fleet in proximity to the
land and sea borders of Libya with the stated objective,
according to American official sources, of dissuading that
country from committing
aggression against its neighbours. That is a false accusation.
:’

55. My delegation calls for the application of these principles to all conflict situations, whether in North Africa,
the Middle East, the Far East, Central America or elsewhere. In focusing our attention specifically on the issues
now before this Council, we‘call on all States to refrain
from actions which endanger peace and stability in that
region and to take positive steps, including the use of
dialogue, to find political solutions to whatever differences may exist between them and to ensure the maintenance of stable, harmonious relations.

63. My delegation joins those of other countries in condemning and rejecting this artifice, the representative of
5

Libya having already himself done so. The following question arises: What are the basic reasons for the heavyhanded tactics that the American Government has in the
past systematically resorted to-and
has just resorted
to-with regard to Libya? For us the answer is clear and
obvious: The American Government could not tolerate
and will never be able to tolerate that Libya and other
progressive countries of the region and elsewhere should;
after having succeeded in carrying out revolutionary
changes-political,
economic and social-pursue an internal and external policy of peace, independence, cooperation and non-alignment, a policy which is precisely
the antidote for imperialism, hegemonism and Zionism.

say, all these hostile acts committed by the imperialists
against the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and other countries
in the world are in flagrant violation of the fundamental
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, as well as
of the universally recognized -norms of international law
governing relations among States.
68. The Lao People’s Democratic Republic expresses its
unfailing solidarity with the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya in
the heroic struggle it is waging to protect and consolidate
the achievements of its September revolution, a struggle
which we are sure will in the final analysis be victorious.
69. The delegation of Laos would request the Council,
the supreme body primarily responsible under the Charter
for the maintenance of international peace and security,
to take the necessary steps to de-escalate the situation,
reduce tension and put an end to the threat of aggression.

64. That is why the American Government is feverishly
intensifying its political, military and economic support
for its strategic allies, the Pretoria and Tel Aviv regimes,
in their criminal undertakings and actions of repression,
occupation and annexation with regard to Arab, Palestinian and African countries and peoples.

70. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): The
next speaker is the representative of Viet Nam. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

65. This fresh act of hostility committed against the
Government and people of Libya, which I have mentioned earlier, is in fact part of a series of adventurous acts
of which the United States of America has been guilty for
at least a decade. Still more significant are the acts of
subversion and aggression committed by that country
against the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya last February, events
which, it will be recalled, were discussed in the Council
[2415th to 2418th meetings]. My delegation today has been
following closely the debate under way in the Council and
was surprised last evening [2464th meeting] to hear the
United States representative state that the deployment of
United States naval and air forces was part of a training
programme or a routine military exercise that had been
planned long in advance. This is not, I think, a very good
alibi. Indeed, the real intention behind this culpable act,
as was stated by several speakers who preceded.me, was
to attack and strangle politically and economically the
valiant people of Libya and their Government.

_-_
--,
.-:*-,
.‘,.
.*,,,_,
I-.
,‘.
_-_
,-,
,‘_
:_
,‘,
,-,‘_
,‘_
‘,‘_
_’

71. Mr. LE KIM CHUNG (Viet Nam) (interpretation
from French): I should like first of all, Sir, on behalf of the
delegation of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, to congratulate you most warmly on your assumption of the
presidency this month and to wish you every success in
carrying out your noble mission.
72. I should like to thank most cordially all the
members of the Council for making it possible for me to
take part in the discussion of the important issue at present before the Council.
73. The situation in the regions of the Mediterranean,
North Africa and the Middle East has deteriorated dangerously in recent days because of the intensification of
United States intervention in the affairs of those regions,
where it is constantly enhancing its military presence and
increasing acts of intimidation
and provocation against
the Socialist People’s Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.

66. The Lao people and Government approach this
issue with a perfect knowledge of the facts because our
country as well as other fraternal Indo-Chinese countries
have already had bitter and painful experience of the
aggressive adventure launched by the United States imperialists not very long ago. Those imperialist circles should
have learned a lesson from their stunning defeat in IndoChina, but such is not the case. It would seem that, on the
contrary, they are, in collusion with the hegemonists and
expansionists, trying to perpetrate acts of sabotage and
destabilization
against our democratic and popular
regime, resorting to all types of illicit measures extending
from espionage with permanent tension in the border
regions, intimidation,
psychological warfare and economic blockade to calumnious propaganda. This is the
global strategy of aggression and destabilization that the
imperialists are applying feverishly the world over.

74. Imposing naval forces of the United States have
approached the shores of Libya with the open threat of
entering Libyan territorial waters and increasing provocative flights. At the same time, AWACS radar aircraft and
substantial numbers of United States troops are preparing
for joint manoeuvres with the military forces of Egypt, the
Sudan, Somalia and Oman. In yesterday’s edition of The
New York Times a Western observer was quoted as saying
that this was “the biggest American show of force across
northern Africa since the Second World War’?.
75. This provocative and threatening display against the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya is not an isolated act but stems
directly from the anti-Libyan policy of the United States,
a policy which was planned and systematically carried out
immediately after the victory of the Libyan Revolution in
September 1969 and whose various episodes were
reviewed recently in the Council with a great deal of accuracy and eloquence by the representative of the Libyan

67. The demonstration of force, reminiscent of the time
of gunboat diplomacy, the United States Government is
now undertaking in Central America, especially -against
Nicaragua, speaks eloquently of this scheme. Needless to
6

Arab Jamahiriya [ibid.]. Moreover, it will be recalled how
many stormy meetings-the Council had urgently to devote
to a consideration of the United States threat against
Libya throughout all these years. Indeed, those were
opportunities for us to censure and to condemn United
States imperialist schemes in an extremely sensitive region
because of its great strategic, military and economic
importance.

“The people and Government of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam sternly condemn these adventuristic and
belligerent actions by the American imperialists and
demand that the latter put an end to all their plans and
acts of intervention and aggression against Libyan and
other African countries, so that those countries can
themselves settle their own internal affairs.
“The people and Government of Viet Nam reaffirm
their total support for the struggle of the Libyan people
to safeguard its national independence and sovereignty
and to build a prosperous and happy Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya.”

76. However, United States ambitions are not confined
to those regions of North Africa and the Middle East.
Indeed, they extend to other regions of the globe: Central
America, the Caribbean Sea, the Indian Ocean, SouthWest Asia, South-East Asia and the Pacific. In all those
regions the United States is feverishly trying to whip up
tensions and confrontation everywhere in order to intensify the arms race and to consolidate its role as international policeman.

81. My delegation wishes to conclude this statement by
calling on the Council, after it has considered the explosive present situation in the regions of the Mediterranean,
North Africa and the Middle East, to adopt the measures
necessary for putting an end to the acts of provocation
and the threats of aggression now issuing from the United
States against the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. In so doing it
would make an effective contribution to the defence of the
independence and sovereignty of a State Member of the
United Nations as well as the international peace and
security in those regions and throughout the world.

77. But let us dwell for a moment on one single phenomenon in order to get a more specific idea of the threat
which could be posed by these American global ambitions
to the peace and security of peoples. My delegation would
like to draw the attention of +members of the Council to
the deployment of United States military forces in various
regions of the world in recent times. In fact, this year the
United States has constantly resorted to demonstrations
of force nearly everywhere in the world, sending here and
sending there nuclear aircraft-carriers and submarines,
reconnaissance and combat aircraft and substantial weap
onry and infantry forces in order to carry out ‘joint
manoeuvres with the military forces of many countries
which are satellites of the United States. What could be
the .aim of the United States in carrying out all these
feverish activities if it is not to spread its threat against the
independence and sovereignty, of peoples and against
international peace and security7

82. The PRESIDENT
(inrerpretution from French): The.
next speaker is the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
83. Mr. RAJAIE-KHORASSANI
(Islamic Republic of
Iran): As I stated yesterday [2463rd meeting], the conflict
between Chad and Libya is a family problem which should
be resolved within the family of African countries. My
delegation -avoided taking a side because to reduce the
problem to a conflict in Chad would be too simplistic. What
is going on in Chad is, in fact, the effect of a more fundamental problem, from which many African countries and
Latin American countries are suffering now.

78. But it is very fortunate that the history of recent
decades has made it abundantly clear that American military force cannot bring to their knees peoples determined
to struggle to defend their independence and sovereignty.
That force was unable to crush the peoples of the Indochinese Peninsula, and at the present time it is certain that
that force cannot bring about the retreat of the heroic
people of the Socialist People’s Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.

84. I therefore had no intention of arguing the legitimacy of the present Government of Chad, or of any other
Government; only supporters of Chad themselves spoke
of serious insurgency groups large enough to move
towards ‘the capital and to threaten the central government. Defensive statements in justification of the deployment of troops in Chad by some countries in the region in
support of-Chad against some of its own population can;
of course, raise questions regarding ,the legitimacy of the
present regime of the country, but such doubts, without
direct attention to the more fundamental adversity underlying all the political problems of the region, remain irrelevant and may even confuse the masses in the area by
diverting their attention from -the essential problem to
minor issues:Many of the issues that were brought up in
,the -meetings convened upon the request of Chad yesterday and today were, my delegation would say, very secondary. I would thank the delegation of.Libya for bringing
the main issue to the Council table today,

79, The people of.Viet Nam was the victim of the longest of wars of aggression, imposed on- it by the United
States, and it must now confront a sort of-war of attrition
on many fronts waged against it by the expansionists and
hegemonists of Asia; hence it stands in deep sympathy
and total solidarity with the Libyan people in these critical times and firmly believes that the Libyan people will,
with dignity, succeed in thwarting all attempts at intimidation and aggression made against it.
80. When the news of the United States acts of provocation and intimidation
towards Libya reached Hanoi, a
spokesman for the Vietnamese Foreign Ministry made the
following statement on 6 August 1983:

85. There is another point that I should like to raise,
although it is not unknown to the Council, that is, the
7

..

direct involvement of France in Chad, on the one hand,
and France’s presidency of the Council, on the other. In
the circumstances, I feel in an awkward position because I
have to address myself to the President and at the same
time refer sometimes to his country as an active party to
the conflict in the area. The presence of the United States
in the Council as a permanent member which can exercise
its veto privi-iege at will is indeed another factor which
adds to this ‘awkward position. If the Council were conducted according to the principles of normality and sanity, the procedure.wouid require France and the United
States to participate without the right to vote; but in the
circumstances-well!

present at the scene of every crime. They selfishly underestimate the fact that some allies-like
France, for
instance-participate
mainly for their own colonial purposes, not for the sake of providing a face-saving device
for the United States.

86. Representatives are well aware of the conspicuous
contradiction that strikes the attention of every observer
at a first glance of Africa and Latin America, namely, the
presence of the poorest populations of the world in those
two richest continents of the globe. The reason for this
poverty is quite clear. I wonder to what extent the professional skills of diplomacy allow some members of the
Council to feign obliviousness to those reasons.

91. The objective behind all these roars and teethshowing is also quite clear: oil, copper, gold, diamonds,
strategic elements and metals and, in the case of Chad,
radioactive resources which were recently reported to be
available there. The people of that part of the world therefore must prepare themselves for a long struggle, because
the good Administration of your ‘country, Mr. President,
that of the United States and others will not give up that
delicious dish so easily.’ Besides, the resources in the area
have also resulted in.the subjugation of many other peopies in the region whose legitimate Governments have
“friendly’‘-and,
of course, legitimate-relations
with
satanic Powers. This much is quite understandable.
’
92. The struggle against imperialism is following its natural course too. I am sure the number of prisoners in
many of these “friendly”
countries and the charges
against them may be quite revealing in this context. I am
sure France’s officials and the officials of the United
States know very well who is and who is not legitimate.
’ They also hear the echoes of the Islamic Revolution ail
over the Moslem world. We believe that ail their struggles
against the liberation movement, and particularly against
the energizing cries of Allah Akbar, are ail in vain. The
United States and its allies will come to this conclusion
only when it is too late, as has always been’ the case.

87. The role of the Western countries in the coionization
of countries in Asia, Africa and Latin America for years,
the swift change from colonialism to neo-coioniaiism and
the contemporary role of global imperialism headed by
the United States of America are too obvious to be
explained to the Council. Fortunately, the criminals and
the victims, the predator and the prey, are both present
here. Although instructions from some capitals require
them to adopt certain positions, the individuals through
their personal capacities know the truth very well.
88. The fact is that, according to the United States, your
Government, Mr. President, is not assuming a more
active role in. North Africa, particularly in Chadalthough it has been sending considerable amounts of miiitary hardware to the area. Although Chad has been in
the domain of French colonial territory; the United St.ates
of America, owing to its vast involvement in the area, IS of
course more active. But the United States should not
blame your country, Mr. President, for this underachievement, because the United States is present everywhere. It
is present in the Indian Ocean, its boats are fishing around
the Persian Gulf and the Oman ,Sea, and they are near
Libyan waters. Americans are carrying on ,military
manoeuvres in Honduras, Egypt, El Salvador, Somalia
and the Sudan. They have AWACS in Saudi Arabia and
North Africa. They ‘are behind the Zionists in Palestine
and South Africa. They’are in the Far East. As a matter of
fact, they are everywhere-and, of course, in the Security
Council as well.

90.’ In the case of Chad the United States has done quite
well in making use of the troops of some other legitimate
regimes to save the legitimate regime of Chad and further
to hide its own face by trying to find fault with Libya-in
exactly the same manner that it is blaming Nicaragua in
the case of the Latin American tragedy.

93. What worries the imperialist forces is the fear that
after the ‘kicking out of the Western’ ,bloc Russians will
come‘ and replace them,. particularly when the American
wing of imperialism observes that Russians can find footholds among the deprived masses more easily than Americans and Westerners. Believe me, the masses are more
intelligent than to fail into a trap after rescuing themselves
from imperialists’ claws. They shall not surrender to
another subjugation after liberating themselves from one.
The’ communist threat is only a pretext for United States
officials by which they justify their illegal interventionsand some United States senators know that, too.

89. This ever-present nature of the great Satan in ail
troubled parts of the world-and everybody knows that
the Security Council is also a troubled part of the woridhas put the United States Administration
in front of a
very crucial dilemma: on the one hand, their foreign poiities require them to be present everywhere; on the other
hand, they reaiize that .if they are singled out, as they are
now, the current’of events may soon turn against them.
That is why they are encouraging their allies to be more
I’

94. The struggle of the oppressed masses ail over the
world is, therefore, the crux of the problem, the crux of
the matter. And Chad is just one very small example of
this struggle. The struggle is everywhere and United States
marines, boats, planes, troops and mercenaries are also
everywhere. But in an effort to confuse public opinion,
the United States usually resorts to the most simplistic
and naive excuses.
8'

95. I would just like to quote one of the sentences of the
United States representative which was poured out in the
Council yesterday:

American Administration
whose diplomacy of brokery
has brought them enough failures in the Middle East as
well as in Latin America. Please, Mr. President, remind
the United States offtcials that they are neither the United
Nations representatives in the rest of the world, nor the
United Nations peace-keeping forces.

“If that aggression is permitted to go unpunished, then
the Council will be revealed as impotent and Qaddafi’s
brutal ‘new colonialism’
will threaten even more
urgently the security of northern and north-central
Africa.” [2464th meeting, para. 47.1

100. The Government and the people of the Islamic
Republic of Iran strongly support the Libyan struggle in
the defence of their independence against American imperialism and its allies and puppets in the area. It is obvious
that imperialist forces headed by the United States have
never supported, any humane liberating movement, any
revolutionary regime, any independent small country.
The very opposition of these satanic forces against Libya
and the people of the region demonstrates the humanitarian and anti-imperialist
position of the people of the
region and justifies our support for and solidarity with
Libya. This is a good enough reason for all the oppressed
peoples of the world to stand by Libya and against all its
adversaries.

96. First of all, if the impotence of the Council can be
confessed even by the United States then it is definitely
impotent, and members are all wasting their time; but this
quality of the Council is not a new discovery. What is new
about it is that the impotence of the Council has brought
it to the stage where it has lost all its serious-looking
outward. projections, or, let us say, its tourist attraction.
No one, not even the United States delegation, is taking
the Council for more than what it really is. That is why to
speak of the impotence of the .Council seems to be the
only serious talk which adds some spice to its deliberations; but this spice is too hot and probably too good for
United States diplomacy.

101. The Council must condemn United States provocative acts against the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and the
threats it exercises against the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of that country.

97. Secondly, bearing in mind all the gigantic fleets and
forces that the present Administration
of the United
States has dispatched all over the globe, United States
officials must have a very low opinion of American public
opinion when they flatly call a small, third world country
like Libya a “brutal new colonialism”.

102. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): I
shall now speak as the representative of FRANCE.
103. The representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran
has stated, in a tone neither agreeable nor serious, that
France should be stripped of its right to vote in the Council. Moreover, he added that the Council was not serious.
Hence I shall reply to him in the same neither agreeable
nor serious tone and say that he might also not have made
false accusations against France.

98. Let me ask a simple question, one I have asked very
often: just why does the United States Administration not
give a chance to good and patriotic people in the region to
defend themselves? Why should the United States and its
puppets always arrogate to themselves the quality of some
sort of foreign patriotism?
99. American warmongers must leave our area unconditionally. That part of the world does not belong to them.
They must go as simply as the Russians must go from
Afghanistan. They must stop finding fault with Libya or
any other people. This century is that of the victory of the
oppressed over the oppressors. Our problem is that some
lions of Africa are, unfortunately, tamed, encaged and
then turned into spoon-fed pussycats. Otherwise they
would not remain aloof spectators to so much plunder
and crime which ‘is perpetrated on the entire African
nation. United States foreign policy is now responsible for
all that, since it is the leading force on the imperialist
front. If the Council were what it should be, then things
on the globe would be different and then such members as
the United States would conduct their foreign policies in
such a way as not to make the current meetings necessary
at all. I can therefore pray for, and look forward to, a
change in the structure and content of the Council. I
regret that the Council does not have the power to condemn the interventionist foreign policy of the United
States. I wonder if it could possibly advise the global arrogant Power to keep its satanic forces a bit away from the
area, and let the oppressed people of the region sort out
their differences without any American mediation or
observation. This advice might bring relief even to the

104. That being so. I noted with measure that he had
not called into diubt’the legitimacy of the Government of
Chad, and thus recognized the legitimacy of that Government and, implicity, the legitimacy of the assistance
France has given it. And that is why, as the representative
of France, I thank him most sincerely for his statement.
105. I shall now continue
Council.

as PRESIDENT

of the

106. The next speaker is the representative of Sudan. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
107. Mr. ELFAKI (Sudan) (interpretation from Arabic):
Mr. President, it gives me great pleasure to express to you
and to the other members of the Council sincere thanks
for allowing me to speak before the Council this evening.
108. History repeats itself. Libya’s designs and plots
have one and the same source and present an unchanged
scenario. In the past-last February, to be specific-while
Libya prepared to launch aggression against my country
it hastened to complain to the Council [s/Z.56153 about
the provocations and threats of the United States of
9

(

America, which were said to jeopardize its security and
safety and to be part of an aggressive plot aimed at toppling the regime in Libya. The Council convened [241.5fh
to 2418th merings], and all members know the rest of the
story, which I need not go over once again. Suffice it to
say that the regime which was said to be threatened has
remained intact and unharmed to date. Today, while
Libya is flagrantly and directly intervening in another
neighbouring country, using all kinds of land and air
weapons against it and against the suffering people of’
Chad, subjecting the country to the worst torture, displacement and murder, Libya once more comes before
the Council claiming, as it has in the past, that its security
and safety are threatened. What we are again witnessing
today reminds us of a popular saying in Sudan, a saying
that unmasks such deception: “He transgresses against
me, then with crocodile tears hastens to complain.” That
is an exact expression of the essence of what Libya has
now had recourse to at the international level to camouflage its aggressive plots and designs against its neighbouring States and peoples.
109. Libya’s request for an urgent meeting of the Security Council is nothing but a ploy, a poor attempt to
deceive the Council as well as the whole international
community and to divert their attention from the present
situation. Whereas attention should be focused on the
wanton, stark aggression perpetrated by Libya against the
people and Government of Chad, Libya is trying to
obstruct the Council from continuing its meetings on that
subject, which started on 3 August [2462nd meeting], to
consider the legitimate
complaint
raised by Chad
[UZSPUZJ against Libya’s aggression and intervention,
striking by land and air towns and villages in Chad, using
internationally prohibited weapons, such as phosphorous,
fragmentation and napalm bombs, as we were told yesterday by the representative of Chad [2463rd meeting] and as
we learn from the various mass media on a daily basis.
Libya also helps the rebels and insurgents, and recruits
mercenaries to work against the sovereignty, independence, security, safety and territorial integrity of Chad.

the leadership of its valiant symbol, Yasser Arafat, with a
view to dismembering it and imposing domination and
hegemony on it, or liquidating it altogether. We all know
who is responsible for this repugnant sedition, denounced
by the whole world. Both the people and the Government
of Sudan have denounced and condemned this, and it has
also been denounced by the rest of the Arab peoples that
have struggled truly, by deeds, not just words, for the
restoration of the occupied Arab territories and for the
complete rights of the Palestinian people.
111. My delegation addressed the Council last February
[2416fh meeting] when the Council was considering a similar complaint by Libya. We spoke then of Libya’s flouting of the principles that govern sound relations between
nations, including non-intervention in the affairs of other
countries and the non-recourse to the threat or use of
force in international relations. This is the essence and the
crux of the conflicts, tensions and disputes governing
Libya’s relationship with its neighbouring States of the
area. I do not want to make a long statement to the
Council, which has already been informed of many
aggressive practices by Libya against neighbouring States.
I do not believe that its repeated hostile acts against
Sudan have been forgotten, especially its aggression and
use of mercenaries against Sudan in July 1976, [see
S/12122, annex], resulting in our people’s suffering great
human losses and damage. That forces us to take part in
this meeting.
112. In a letter of 6 August 1983 [S/15912] to you, Mr.
President, it was claimed that the military exercises in
which my country is participating this month constitute a
threat to Libya’s security and safety and to the security of
the whole area. That is a false allegation. It has been made
up and has no basis, as was demonstrated by Mr.
Mohamed
Mirghani Mubarak,
Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Democratic Republic of the Sudan, in his
message to you, Mr. President, of 11 August [S/Z592Z].
Despite the fact that that letter has been distributed to
members of the Council as an official document, and despite the fact that the joint military exercises were
announced and open and were common knowledge for a
long time, which shows the essence of the exercises and
disproves any false allegations that they are directed at
anybody, it is appropriate to emphasize the following
facts.

110. We are confident that Libya’s stratagem will not
deceive the international community and that it will not
attract the Council. The Council must continue to discharge its responsibilities by continuing to consider
Chad’s complaint against Libya, with a view to securing
an end to the Libyan aggression and the withdrawal of
Libyan troops from the lands of Chad, to enable the
Government of Chad to restore the peace and security
and stability necessary for economic and social reconstruction and development, and to secure and safeguard
security, peace and stability in the whole area. Who
knows? Maybe Libya has wanted this time, too, in coordination with some of its allies, to divert the attention
of the whole world, particularly the Council, away from
the ferocious fighting that is taking place in southern
Africa, Namibia and even the Middle Past, and from the
plight of fraternal Lebanon, suffering from aggression,
occupation and tragedies for which the conscience of
humanity bleeds. Or perhaps Libya has meant to divert
attention especially away from the seditions and conspimties to which the Palestinian revolution is exposed, under

113. First, this is not the first time that our armed forces
have conducted military exercises with friendly countries,
be they situated in our region or outside it. The nature of
the previous military exercises was no secret in terms of
the place, the time, the size or the objective of those exercises. They were not directed against any neighbouring
States or any other States. They always had the objective
of training our armed forces and raising the level of their
efficiency, ability and readiness to defend themselves, our
people and our land, should there be reason to do so. The
previous military exercises gave rise to no suspicion or
fear on the part of our neighbours, including Libya. Why,
then, all the noise that Libya is making today, unless it
has the ulterior motive to which we have already
referred-that
is, to divert the attention of the Council
10

and the international community from the questions of
occupation, aggression and the flagrant use of force in our
region and in other regions of the world?

119. I was highly offended by the remark of the representative of Afghanistan. When the United States
“invaded” Libya’s waters, and airspace, which of course
we did not do-to the best of my knowledge, not even the
Soviet Union joins Colonel Qaddafi in Colonel Qaddafi’s
expansive interpretation
of territoriality-we
did not
shoot down one’ of Qaddafi’s Soviet-supplied jets: we shot
down two of them.

114. Secondly, consideration must be given to the rights
of sovereignty and independence that we enjoy within the
framework of international law, the United Nations, the
OAU, the League of Arab States and the Organizatidn of
the Islamic Conference, and within the framework of the
principles and objectives and the basic ground rules of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, which unequivocally guarantee for us and other members the right to be
ready to defend durselves at difficult times, when we are
exposed to aggression, invasion or occupation, or any foreign ambitions directed against the sovereignty of our
country or the security and safkty of our people.

120. The Cuban representative, obviously speaking out
of rich and varied personal experience, spoke in moving tones of small countries being threatened. I thought
at first he might be speaking of Chad, or even conceivably
of El Salvador. But yes, I agree with the representative
of Cuba. Indeed there is a certain analogy between the
posture of my country in Central America and the posture of my country today in the northern part of Africa:
the United States always stands ready and always reserves the right to commit its resources-often financial, economic, technical, military-when
the situation
demands, in situations when independent Governments
are threatened, whether by their neighbours or by indirection at the behest of far distant Powers in the interests of
colonial expansion.

115. Thirdly, Sudan has always called for strict adherence to the law and to international covenants and principles in its relations with other countries and peoples and
stressed the necessity of pursuing policies of co-operation
and good-neighbourly relations between countries, especially between African and third world tiountries suffering
from poverty and underdevelopment, which need education, health services, tractors and agricultural harvesters
more than they need military arsenals and the modern and
sophisticated weapons which have been flowing into these
areas in quantities far exceeding the needs of selfdefence,
as in the case of Libya. We are committed to these noble
principles, not just as slogans to be used when necessary or
for the purpose of trickery and deception, as some States
have used them, but in our relations with our neighbours
and other friendly countries and peoples with which we are
keen to co-operate and work in many areas for our joint
interests. The record of our good and developing relations
with all our neighbours with the exception of Libya provides categorical proof of what I am saying. We hope that
Libya will find in this a good example and that it will work
for respect for laws, principles and international covenants
in word and in deed and steer clear of schemes of aggression and sedition and intervention in the internal affairs of
other countries and peoples. When that happens, all our
peoples, including the fraternal people of Libya, will
enjoy peace, security, stability and development.

121. The representative of Poland also saw analogous
situations in this case between the problem that the Council faced last February and the problem that it confronts
today.
122. I join my friend, the representative of the Sudan,
in affirming that, yes indeed, there is a high degree of
similarity between those two problems. In February,
Libya was thwarted in its plot to overthrow the’Government of the Sudan. Today, it commits aggression against
another neighbour, against Chad. And if the so-called
intervention of Chad’s friends is adequate to its needs,
then it may be that once again Libyan aggression, Libyan
adventurism, Libyan contempt for the Charter of the
United Nations, will be thwarted.
123. Finally, a brief remark addressed to my good
friend and neighbour and valued colleague, the representative of Guyana. His statement was an eloquent one. It is
one with which everyone here must fundamentally and
instinctively agree. My delegation and my Government
agree with it. Would that we could reconcile our differences through reason and reconciliation and mutual accommodation. Would that no one did come to this table with
sanguinary hands and with ambitions against its neighbours, which are not to be tolerated by this community,
by this institution, by my Government.

116. Mr. LICHENSTEIN
(United States of America):
As I have listened to the representative of Libya and to
those who have joined him in the not-quite-credible
attempt to rationalize Libyan aggression against Chad by
diverting attention to allegations of intervention by my
country in affairs that do not concern it, I have been
reminded of the tale often told of the young lad who,
having -just murdered his mother, and having just murdered his father, throws himself on the mercy of the court
because he is an orphan.
117. The case of Libya and its friends might be received
more sympathetically by members of the Council were
they’ to come to the table with less sanguinary hands.

124. The United States will join with all who come to
this and to all other tables of reconciliation with clean
hands and genuine and sincere hearts and there need be
no confrontations, no interventions, no threats. But that
attitude must be present in both parties in order for the
appeal of the representative of Guyana to succeed.’

118. I wish to make just a few comments about some of
the specific comments we- have heard in the course of
today’s debate.

125. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): The
representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya has asked
to speak in exercise of the right of reply. I call on him.
II

,

126.

Mr.

ADDABASHI

(Libyan

Arab

Jamahiriya)

(interpretation from Arabic): I should like at the beginning

to express my satisfaction at being called upon to exercise
my right of reply.‘1 shall limit myself to some specific and
brief points. I should like to mention what was pointed
out by my brother, the representative of brotherly Sudan.
I know that he was very embarrassed because he was the
only representative who came to the Council to defend
the United States of America. Undoubtedly he was forced
to do so because he is returning a favour to the American
Government, which is working by every possible means
to keep the Sudanese regime afloat. The United Nations
Administration
has tricked the regime in Sudan several
times and has created the impression that that regime is
threatened by Libya, which has led that regime to move
its military arsenal and forces in the vicinity of the Libyan
borders. It has done so repeatedly in order to be able to
send its forces to the Sudan and to place that country
under United States hegemony. It is very unfortunate that
that illusion has lived on and has pervaded the thinking of
the Sudanese regime, because it knows full well that it is
unpopular with the Sudanese people. It is threatened from
within. The question is, however, what is the result of all
that? The result of that continuing illusion is the presence
of a large number of American forces and American aircraft in Sudan, as well as 12,000 Egyptian soldiers in
Khartoum in order to protect the Sudanese regime and to
ensure that it will continue to support the policies of the
United States in the Arab region and, more particularly,
the Camp David accords.
127. We all know that what threatens Sudan is not any
external factor but rather the unwise policies of its
Government. Those policies have placed Sudan in an
extremely difficult economic situation and, according to
the .press in the United States itself, we all realize what
that situation is in the Sudan and what the facts are. For
its part, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya has tried to assist the
brotherly people of the Sudan to overcome that deterioratingceconomic situation and has advanced several projects, including the establishment of a joint agricultural
company. I believe that the capital of that company is
greater than all the annual American assistance provided
to the Sudan. However, United States plots and schemes
have prevented that fruitful economic co-operation
between the two peoples of the Sudan and Libya from
taking place.

threats directed against Libya. However, indications are
very clear. In our statement to the Council on 11 August
[2464zh meeting] we provided details of these threats since
1972, and there is no need for me to repeat these facts
anew. I shall only say to him that some of these acts have
been the subject of various statements and declarations by
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, in which it condemned these acts and expressed its deep concern.
130. Here I should like to point to a statement by the
Co-ordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned Countries of
August 1981, as well as other statements issued by that
Coordinating
Bureau meeting in Managua and the statement of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs and heads of
delegation of the non-aligned countries, who met here in
New York in October 1982 during the twenty-seventh session of the General Assembly.
131. I wish also to refer to the way in which the United
States representative spoke just now and the arrogance
and the pride he showed while insisting that his country
downed two Libyan aircraft and not just one, as though
Libya were one of the super-Powers of this world and as
though the members of the Council did not realize that the
population of Libya were merely one-third that of the City
of New York.
132. I do not wish to go any further on this point.
133. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): The
representative Cuba has asked to speak in exercise of the
right of reply. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
134. Mr. GARCiA ITURBE (Cuba) (inrerprerafion from
Spanish): Mr. President, I thank you for allowing me to
address the Council once again-something
I had not
intended to do. But the words of the representative of the
United States make this statement necessary.
135. That representative referred to our statement and
said that Cuba was speaking out of rich and varied experience of small countries being threatened with aggression. It is true that Cuba does have a rich and varied
experience, since Cuba was precisely the target of a considerable number of various acts of aggression stemming
from the .United States of America: acts of aggression in
the sense of invasion, like that of the Bay of Pigs, the
results of which we are all familiar with; attempts at assassinating our leaders; economic aggression; and every
other kind of aggression which, in fact, was carried out by
no other country but the United States of America.

128. With respect to the allegations put forward by the
representative of Sudan concerning the situation in Chad,
I believe that they have already been rejected and are
groundless; what was mentioned in our previous statement
is sufficient. With respect to the allegations concerning the
relations between the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and the
Palestinian people and the Palestine Liberation Organization, we know that the United States wants Sudan to act in
that way and the representative of the Sudan has complied.
I cannot possibly allow myself from a nationalist point of
view to respond to those allegations.

136. The representative of that country in referring in
his statement to the words we uttered here said that his
country had, always been ready to make available its
human and economic resources wherever in the world it
considered that necessary; and in a display of arrogance
and frivolity towards recognition of international law, he
assumed that famous right to play the role of policeman,
which that country has always arrogated to itself, against
the will and the determination of peoples.

129. Allow me also to mention what has been pointed
out recently by the representative of the United States of
America. He has tried to say that there are no American
:..-.
:.:.

._
.. ..

12

137. I believe this is a further demonstration of the
imperialist policy of intervention carried out by the current Government of the United States of America. It is
not a new policy; it has already been used and has also
proved to be a blunder of the United States Government
in its relations with the peoples of the world-that famous
“big stick” policy of intervention and interference.

141. The-representative of Libya spoke about the regime
in the Sudan, describing it as unpopular among the
people of the Sudan, as if he had wanted to conlirm once
more before the Council the extent of the insistence of
Libya and its representative on arrogating to themselves
the role of passing judgement on the destinies of peoples.
This is the very question of which the Council is seized
these days, namely, the aggression and intervention in the
internal affairs of Chad under the,pretext of the illegitimacy of its regime.

138. I think one of the best summaries of that policy was
that made by General Butler in 1933, at a celebration of
Armistice Day in Philadelphia, when he spoke as follows:

_

142. The Libyan representative spoke also of the economic problems of’the Sudan, and, like any other thirdworld country, we certainly have economic ,.problems,
which we do not hide.

“I spent 33 years and four months in active military
service as a member of the best military forces of our
country: the Marines. I held various ranks-from
second-lieutenant to general-and during that period I
spent most of my time in the service of big business and
of Wall Street bankers. To put it briefly, I was a blackmailer, a tool of capitalism. At that time I suspected
that I was part of a great conspiracy; now I am sure of
it. Like any member of the military, I was never able to
verify this until I left the service. My mental faculties
were kept blocked while I merely followed orders from
above. This is typical of anyone in military service.

143. As for the allegations of the Libyan representative
that his country extended economic aid to the Sudan, I
wish to state to him-and
I am fully acquainted with the
matter-that
the Sudan is not indebted to Libya at all; he
may remember that the only loan that Libya ever
extended to the Sudan, when we enjoyed good relations,
had, at the request of Libya, to be paid off on the spot by
the Sudan; and the whole people of the Sudan, on its own
initiative and without giving the Government a chance to
do it, paid it off. I hope he remembers that.

“I was sent to Mexico-specifically,
Tampicwa
safe haven in 1914 for American oil interests; I helped
to make sure that Cuba and Haiti were appropriate
places for the boys of the National City Bank to go and
collect their profits. I helped engineer coups d&t in
half a dozen Central American Republics for the
benefit of Wall Street.

144. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): I
call on the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran,
who has asked to speak in exercise of the right of reply, to.
take a place at the Council table,
145. Mr. RAJAIE-KHORASSANI
(Islamic Republic of
Iran): The exercise of the right of reply this evening is
probably not very appropriate because everybody is tired.
I just wanted to bring to the attention of the Council that
its conclusion regarding my delegation’s recognition of
the legitimacy of Chad might not be exactly what I
intended to convey. I believe that all through my statement I was consistent in maintaining that I had no intention of arguing over the,idea of the legitimacy of this or
that tigime, because I thought it was a secondary issue
and that the main issue was something more important
and more relevant. I did not, however, commit myself as
to the legitimacy of the present rCgime of Chad.

“The list of crimes is long. I helped purify Nicaragua
from 1909 to 1912 for the international banking house
of Brown Brothers. I was in the Dominican Republic
in 1916, in the service of Americansugar interests. In
1927 in China I helped Standard Oil settle in without
being disturbed.
“Throughout
those years, as the boys in the backroom would say, there was magnificent business; I was
rewarded with honours, medals and promotions: two
medals of honour from Congress and 16 other war
decorations. When I look at all that happened, I think
that perhaps I might have given some ideas to Al
Capone. The best he could do was to operate in three
districts, while I operated on three continents.”

146. There is, however, one part of my statement that I
should like to repeat as follows: “In the case of Chad the
United States has done quite well in making use ,of . . .
some other legitimate regimes to save the legitimate
regime of Chad” Cparu. 901. Those who listened to my
delivery of the sentence and not to the interpretation can
clearly understand that the two adjectives legitimate were
pronounced as if they were in quotation marks, by which
I meant so-called legitimate or allegedly legitimate. I presume that in the interpretation the intonation was not
rendered so accurately.

139. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): The
representative of Sudan has asked to exercise the right of
reply. I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
140. Mr. ELFAKI (Sudan) (interpretation from Arabic):
I totally share the point of view of our brother from
Libya. It is most embarrassing and distressing to me to
have to speak twice before the Council for the same reason: the policy of aggression, intervention and resort to
force carried out, unfortunately, by a fraternal African
Arab country. I hope there will be no reason for me to do
so again.

147. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): I
thank the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran
for the preciseness he has brought us.
13

.

_

148. I believe that the representative .of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya wishes to speak again in exercise of the right
of reply, and I call on him now.

Sudan mentioned the loan extended to the Sudan by
Libya, this undoubtedly supports what I said and proves
the good will of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.

149. Mr. ADDABASHI
(Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)
(interpretation from Arabic): I wish merely to say to my
brother the representative of the Sudan that I did not say
that the Sudan was indebted to Libya. What I did say was
that Libya had tried to assist brotherly Sudan to overcome its deteriorating economic situation. However,
United States plots and designs prevented fruitful economic co-operation between the Sudan and Libya. This is
what I said, and since my brother the representative of the

The meeting rose at 7.30 p.m.

in IJnitrd

Nstionr.

New

York

NOTES

’ See A/36/603,
.annex.
* General
Assembly
resolution
3 General
Assembly
resolution

00400

2625 (XXV),
361103.

annex.

90-60205-September

1991-2.050
