UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1995/48
26 September 1995
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3583rd meeting of the Security Council, held on 26 September 1995,
in connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The
fiftieth anniversary of the United Nations", the President of the Security
Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has met on 26 September 1995, at the level of
Foreign Ministers, to commemorate the Fiftieth Anniversary of the United
Nations and to exchange views on the challenges which the Security Council
faces.
"Since its establishment the Security Council has played a crucial
role in the maintenance of international peace and security on which
development and cooperation among nations are based. The past few years in
particular have been ones of momentous change, bringing fresh hope and new
challenges. Operations mandated by the Council have assisted in the
restoration of peace and stability to countries long-plagued by war.
Although such operations have largely been successful, there are areas
where success has not been achieved. The Council must continue to spare no
effort in working for the maintenance of international peace and security,
and build upon its experience of past and existing operations.
"The Security Council recognizes that the challenges facing the
international community demand a resolute response, based on the principles
and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations. The members of the
Security Council consider that the United Nations must be strengthened and
revitalized to help meet these challenges. They take note of the
conclusions of the Working Group of the General Assembly on the Question of
Equitable Representation on and Increase in the Membership of the Security
Council and other Matters Related to the Security Council, inter alia, that
the Council should be expanded, and that its working methods should
continue to be reviewed, in a way that further strengthens its capacity and
effectiveness, enhances its representative character and improves its
working efficiency and transparency; and that important differences on key
issues continue to exist. The Council also believes that effective use
should be made of instruments for preventive action, and the Organization’s

95-28991 (E)

260995

/...

S/PRST/1995/48
English
Page 2

capacity to conduct effective peace-keeping operations should continue to
be improved. The Council will continue to attach utmost importance to the
safety and security of all who serve under the United Nations flag in the
field.
"The members of the Security Council reaffirm their commitment to the
collective security system of the Charter. On the solemn occasion of the
Fiftieth Anniversary of the United Nations, the Council, along with other
United Nations bodies, commemorates what has been achieved so far, but also
commits itself once again to the maintenance of international peace and
security for which it has primary responsibility, and to working to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war."

-----
