8

General Assembly -

United Nations by facilitating the mission of the Committee on South West Africa,

Convinced that it is both the right and the duty of the
United Nations to discharge fully and effectively its
obligations with respect to the proper implementation,
under its supervision, of the Mandate for South West
Africa conferred upon His Britannic Majesty, to be
exercised on his behalf by the Government of the Union
of South Africa,
Noting with grave concern the continuing deterioration in the situation in South West Africa resulting
from the continued application, in violation of the letter
and spirit of the Mandate, of tyrannical policies and
practices, such as apartheid, of the administration of the
Union of South Africa in South West Africa,
Reiterating its concern that this situation constitutes
a serious threat to international peace and security,
1. Recognizes and supports the passionate yearning
of the people of South \Vest Africa for freedom and the
exercise of national independence and sovereig-nty;

2. Rejects the position taken by the Government of
the Union of South Africa in refusing to co-operate
with the United Nations in the implementation of General Assembly resolution 1568 (XV) as well as other
resolutions concerning South \Vest Africa ;
3. Deplores the attempts at the assimilation of the
Mandated Territory of South West Africa, culminating
in the so-called referendum held on 5 October 1960, as
totally unacceptable, having no moral or legal basis and
being repugnant to the letter and spirit of the Mandate;
4. Considers that the full and effective discharge of
the tasks assigned to the Committee on South West
Africa in paragraph 4 of General Assembly resolution
1568 (XV) is essential to the protection of the lives and
property of the inhabitants of South West Africa, to
the amelioration of the prevailing conditions in South
West Africa, the continuance of which is likely to endanger international peace and security, and to the
exercise of the right of self-determination by the people
of South West Africa in complete freedom and of their
right of accession to national sovereignty and independence with the least delay ;
5. Requests th~ Committee on South West Africa,
therefore, immediately to proceed to discharge the special and urgent tasks entrusted to it in resolution 1568
(XV) as fully and expeditiously as possible with the
co-operation of the Government of the Union of South
Africa if such co-operation is available, and without it
if necessary ;
6. Requests the States Members of the United Nations to extend to the Committee on South West Africa
such assistance as it may require in the discharge of
these tasks ;
7. Decides to call the attention of the Security Council to the situation in respect of South West Africa
which, if allowed to continue, will in the General Assembly's view endanger international peace and security,
and to the present resolution, the full implementation of
which is necessary to bring that situation to a speedy
end;
8. Takes note with grave concern of reports of the
terrorization of, and armed action against, the indigenous inhabitants, and calls upon the Government of the
Union of South Africa to desist from such acts;

Fifteenth Session

9. Requests the Committee on South West Africa
to submit to the General Assembly at its sixteenth session a report on the implementation of resolution 1568
(XV) as well as the present resolution.
979th plenary meeting,
7 April 1961.

1605 (XV). Question of the future of RuandaUrundi
The General Assembly,
B caring in mind the provisions of the General Assembly's Declaration on the granting of independence to
colonial countries and peoples, 1
Recalling its resolutions 1579 (XV) and 1580 (XV)
of 20 December 1960 concerning the future of the Trust
Territory of Ruanda-Urundi,
Having received the interim report of the United Nations Commission for Ruanda-G rundi a appointed under
resolution 1579 (XV),
Regretting the failure of the Administering Authority
to implement fully and effectively the terms of resolution
1579 (XV), the resistance to such implementation liy
the local representatives of the Administering ;\llthority
in Ruanda-Urundi and their failure to co-operate fully
and effectively with the United Nations Commission for
Ruanda-Urundi,
Regretting the de facto recognition by the Administering Authority of governmental bodies in Ruancla
which were established by irregular and unlawful means
and which cannot be regarded as fully representative of
all segments of the population in the absence of free and
fair elections on the basis of direct universal adult
suffrage, as envisaged in resolution 1579 (XV),
Regretting also the setting up of governmental bodies
in Urundi on the basis of communal elections, contrary
to the assurances given by the Administering Authority
that communal elections were purely administrative and
had no political character,
S oting the several statements of the representatives
of the Administering Authority conveying assurances
that it will co-operate fully with the United Nations in
Ruanda-Urnndi,
Having heard the views of the petitioners from
Ruanda-Urundi,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the members of the
United Nations Commission for Ruanda-Urundi for
their conscientious discharge of the duties entrusted
to them under General Assembly resolutions 1579
(XV) and 1580 (XV);
2. Calls upon the Government of Belgium as the
Administering Authority to ensure that the provisions
of resolution 1579 (XV) are fully implemented by its
representatives in Ruanda-Urundi before the legislative
elections;
3. Recogni:::es that the Government of Belgium is
alone responsible for the administration of the Trust
Territory of Ruanda-Unmdi and accountable to the
United Nations, and that its responsibilities as Administering Authority cannot in any way be abdicated to
local political bodies and leaders until after appropriate
democratic institutions have been set up and the Trus• !bid., agenda item 45, addendum, documents A/4706 and
Add.I.

9

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

teeship Agreement has been terminated, all with the
approval of the United Nations ;
4. Considers it necessary that, pending the establishment of popular governments on the basis of the
legislative elections to be held in 1961, broad-based
caretaker governments be constituted immediately in
both parts of the Trust Territory to attend to current
affairs of administration and to act in strict conformity
with the obligations of the Administering Authority
for the implementation of the resolutions of the General
Assembly;
5. Declares that it is clearly the obligation and the
responsibility of the Administering Authority to create
the necessary conditions and atmosphere for the proper
conduct of the national elections and not to permit any
local authorities to impede the implementation of the
resolutions of the General Assembly;
6. Decides that the referendum on the question of
the Mwami, contemplated in resolution 1580 (XV), and
the legislative elections in Ruanda-Urundi should be
held in the month of August 1961 on the basis of direct
universal adult suffrage, under the supervision of the
United Nations, and that these be organized by the
Administering Authority in full consultation with the
United Nations Commission for Ruanda-Urundi, the
actual dates to be fixed, after mutual consultation, in
the light of the prevailing circumstances ;
7. Decides further that the questions to be put at the
referendum on the question of the M wami in Ruanda
should be the following :
"1. Do you wish to retain the institution of
the M wami in Ruanda?
"2. If so, do you wish Kigeli V to continue as the
M wami of Ruanda ?";
8. Requests the United Nations Commission for
Ruanda-Urundi, composed of three members elected by
the General Assembly on 20 December 1960, hereafter
to be designated United Nations Commissioners, to
return to Ruanda-Urundi at the earliest possible time
to assist and advise the Administering Authority in the
full and proper implementation of resolution 1579
(XV) and the present resolution, and to perform the
other tasks entrusted to it ;
9. Notes the information given by the representative
of the Administering Authority concerning measures
of amnesty already implemented, and recommends
that:
( a) Full and unconditional amneiity, as envisaged in
resolution 1579 (XV), be immediately granted by the
Administering Authority;
( b) The few remaining cases which, in the Administering Authority's view, are guilty of "very grave
crimes" be examined by a Special Commission composed of the representatives of three Member States to
be elected by the General Assembly, with a view to
securing their release from prison or return from abroad
in the full implementation of the Assembly's recommendation concerning amnesty not later than two months
before the national elections ;
10. Notes the observations contained in paragraphs
199-203 of the interim report of the United Nations
Commission for Ruanda-Urundi and calls upon the
Administering Authority to observe strictly its international obligations under the Trusteeship Agreement;
11. Requests the Administering Authority to ensure
that the material conditions essential to the successful

discharge by the United Nations Commissioners of their
responsibilities, such as housing, office space, travel
facilities, information and the free use of official broadcasting facilities are provided, and that the local authorities co-operate fully with them;
12. Requests the United Nations Commission for
Ruanda-Urundi to submit a report on the implementation of the present resolution to the General Assembly
at its sixteenth session;
13. Decides to maintain this item on the agenda of
the present session, without closing the debate thereon,
and authorizes the United Nations Commission for
Ruanda-Urundi, in the event that the performance of
its duties is hindered through deliberate obstruction or
lack of the requisite co-operation from any quarter, to
return to United Nations Headquarters and request the
President of the General Assembly to reconvene the
Assembly immediately to consider further measures
essential to the discharge of the United Nations obligations with respect to the Trust Territory of RuandaUrundi;
14. Calls upon the Administering Authority to rescind Legislative Order No. 221 /296 of 25 October
1960, so as to ensure that there is no unwarranted interference with the exercise of public freedom and that
no persons may be removed or detained without recourse
to due process of law;
15. Reiterates its conviction that the best future for
Ruanda-Urundi lies in the accession of that Territory
to independence as a single, united and composite State ;
16. Considers that the full implementation of all the
provisions of the present resolution will enable the
General Assemblv at its sixteenth session to consider
the termination ~f the Trusteeship Agreement at the
earliest possible date.
994th plenary meeting,
21 April 1961.
*

*

*

At its 994th plen-0ry meeting on 21 April 1961, the General
Assembly appointed the members of the Special Commission
established under the terms of paragraph 9 (b) of the above
resolution.
The Special Commission is composed as follows:

BRAZIL,

CANADA and TUNISIA.

1606 (XV).

Land tenure and agrarian reform
in Ruanda-Urundi
The General Assembly,
Recalling that the United Nations Visiting Mission
to Trust Territories in East Africa, 1960, stated in its
report on Ruanda-Urundi that since the November 1959
disturbance,, the question of the necessary changes in
the land tenure system has become even more urgent,
and that the present position represents an obstacle to
lasting peace in the country and impedes the rational
utilization of land, without which agriculture and stockbreeding canm,t properly develop,4

Recalling that the Trusteeship Council at its twentysixth session adopted the following recommendation :
"The Council, noting that basic reforms are needed
in the land tenure system of the Trust Territory, expresses the hope that the new representative bodies
• 0 fficial Records of the Trusteeship Council, Twenty-sixth
Session, Supplement No. 3 (T/1551), document T/1538, para.
-t94.
