S/2016/53

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
22 January 2016
English
Original: Spanish

Identical letters dated 19 January 2016 from the Permanent
Representative of Colombia to the United Nations addressed to
the Secretary-General and the President of the Security Council
For the purposes of circulation to the members of the Security Council and
issuance as a document of the Security Council, I wish to transmit to you the note
wherein the President of the Republic of Colombia, Juan Manuel Santos Calderon,
on behalf of the Government of Colombia and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia (FARC-EP), requests the participation of the United Nations in the
international component of the tripartite monitoring and verification mechanism of
the Agreement on the ceasefire and definitive and bilateral cessation of hostilities
and the abandonment of arms, in accordance with joint communique No. 65, issued
on 19 January 2016, which is enclosed for your information.
(Signed) Maria Emma Mejia
Ambassador
Permanent Representative

16-00870 (E)

220116

*1600870*

220116

S/2016/53

Annex to the identical letters dated 19 January 2016 from the
Permanent Representative of Colombia to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General and the President of the
Security Council
[Original: Spanish]
I have the honour to address you, and through you the members of the Security
Council, to report on the progress made in the negotiations between the Government
of the Republic of Colombia and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia — Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP), on the basis of the General Agreement
for the Termination of the Conflict and the Construction of a Stable and Lasting
Peace, signed on 26 August 2012 in Havana. These negotiations have gone forward
with major support from the Republic of Cuba and the Kingdom of Norway as
guarantor countries, and with the Governments of the Republic of Chile and the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela as monitors.
Over the past three years of talks, we have achieved agreement on fundamental
issues; the points concerning the end of the conflict, including the ceasefire and
bilateral and definitive cessation of hostilities and abandonment of arms, as well as
those relating to verification, implementation and endorsement of the Final
Agreement for the Termination of Conflict and the Construction of a Stable and
Lasting Peace, among others, remain pending.
With regard to the latter, I would like to express the wish of my Government
and FARC-EP to request the participation of the United Nations, through a politi cal
mission made up of observers from member countries of the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States, as the international component of the tripartite
mechanism for monitoring and verification of the Agreement on the ceasefire and
bilateral and definitive cessation of hostilities and abandonment of arms.
We have also decided to request the international component to chair and
coordinate the tripartite mechanism in all its aspects, to settle disputes, make
recommendations and present reports. I have attached for circulation among the
members of the Security Council the text of joint communique No. 65, issued on
19 January 2016, which contains these proposals (see enclosure).
Along those lines, we have agreed to request the immediate establishmen t of a
special political mission for that purpose, for a period of 12 months, which can be
extended by request of the Government and FARC-EP, made up of unarmed
international observers, with a mandate in keeping with the agreement between the
Government of Colombia and FARC-EP concerning the monitoring and verification
mechanism for the ceasefire and the bilateral and definitive cessation of hostilities
and abandonment of arms.
The Government of Colombia and FARC-EP have agreed to invite the member
countries of the Community of Latin American and Caribbean States to take part in
the group of unarmed international observers which we are requesting the United
Nations to form.
We are likewise requesting the mission to consider making preparations for
deployment once the Security Council resolution is adopted. The mission will enjoy
full security guarantees.

2/4

16-00870

S/2016/53

On behalf of the Republic of Colombia, I take this opportunity to thank you
and the Member States of the United Nations for the willingness they have s hown to
support the people and Government of Colombia in this process.
A positive response to our request and the immediate establishment of this
mission for monitoring and verification of the Agreement on the ceasefire and
bilateral and definitive cessation of hostilities and abandonment of arms will make a
significant contribution to progress in the final phase of the negotiations, which
should quickly result in the signing of a Final Agreement for the Termination of
Conflict and the Construction of a Stable and Durable Peace between the
Government of the Republic of Colombia and FARC-EP.
(Signed) Juan Manuel Santos Calderon

16-00870

3/4

S/2016/53

Enclosure
Joint Communique No. 65
Havana, 19 January 2016
The Government of the Republic of Colombia and the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia — Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP):
Reiterate their commitment to the negotiations to achieve a Final Agreement
for the Termination of the Conflict and the Construction of a Stable and Lasting
Peace (Final Agreement), including an agreement on a ceasefire and bilateral and
definitive cessation of hostilities and abandonment of arms.
They also reiterate their commitment to the implementation of all the
agreements contained in the Final Agreement and the implementation of effective
monitoring and verification mechanisms, with international oversight, that
guarantee full compliance with the commitments made.
We have decided to establish a tripartite mechanism for monitoring and
verification of the Agreement on the ceasefire and the bilateral and definitive
cessation of hostilities and abandonment of arms to build confidence and to
guarantee its fulfilment, comprising the Government of Colombia, FARC -EP, and an
international component that will chair and coordinate the mechanism in all its
aspects, settle disputes, make recommendations and present reports; it will begin its
work once this agreement has been achieved. With regard to the abandonment of
arms, this international component will verify it under the terms and with the due
guarantees to be established under the protocols of the agreement.
We have agreed that this international component will be a United Nations
political mission made up of observers from member countries of the Community of
Latin American and Caribbean States.
For this purpose, we have decided to request the United Nations Security
Council immediately to establish this political mission with unarmed observers for a
period of 12 months, to be extended at the request of the Government and
FARC-EP, and to ascertain the availability of the member countries of the
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States to contribute to this mission to
be established by the United Nations.
We further request the mission to begin the necessary preparations, in close
coordination and collaboration with the Government of Colombia and FARC -EP, for
its deployment. The international observers will enjoy full security guarantees.
We thank the United Nations and the Community of Latin American and
Caribbean States for their willingness to support Colombia in its search for peace.

4/4

16-00870
