United Nations

A/RES/66/187

General Assembly

Distr.: General
14 February 2012

Sixty-sixth session
Agenda item 17 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 22 December 2011
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/66/438/Add.2)]

66/187. International financial system and development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 55/186 of 20 December 2000 and 56/181 of
21 December 2001, both entitled “Towards a strengthened and stable international
financial architecture responsive to the priorities of growth and development,
especially in developing countries, and to the promotion of economic and social
equity”, as well as its resolutions 57/241 of 20 December 2002, 58/202 of
23 December 2003, 59/222 of 22 December 2004, 60/186 of 22 December 2005,
61/187 of 20 December 2006, 62/185 of 19 December 2007, 63/205 of 19 December
2008, 64/190 of 21 December 2009 and 65/143 of 20 December 2010,
Recalling also the United Nations Millennium Declaration 1 and its resolution
56/210 B of 9 July 2002, in which it endorsed the Monterrey Consensus of the
International Conference on Financing for Development, 2 the Rio Declaration on
Environment and Development, 3 Agenda 21, 4 the Programme for the Further
Implementation of Agenda 21 5 and the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit
on Sustainable Development (“Johannesburg Plan of Implementation”), 6
Recalling further the Doha Declaration on Financing for Development:
outcome document of the Follow-up International Conference on Financing for
Development to Review the Implementation of the Monterrey Consensus, held in
Doha from 29 November to 2 December 2008, 7
_______________
1

See resolution 55/2.
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18–22 March
2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
3
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June
1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and
corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
4
Ibid., annex II.
5
Resolution S-19/2, annex.
6
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa,
26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum),
chap. I, resolution 2, annex.
7
Resolution 63/239, annex.
2

11-47004

*1147004*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/66/187

Recalling the Conference on the World Financial and Economic Crisis and Its
Impact on Development and its outcome document, 8
Recalling also the High-level Plenary Meeting of the General Assembly on the
Millennium Development Goals and its outcome document, 9
Recognizing the work undertaken by the Ad Hoc Open-ended Working Group
of the General Assembly to follow up on the issues contained in the Outcome of the
Conference on the World Financial and Economic Crisis and Its Impact on
Development, and taking note of its progress report, 10
Expressing deep concern about the ongoing adverse impacts, particularly on
development, of the world financial and economic crisis, cognizant that the global
economy is entering a challenging new phase with significant downside risks,
including the turbulence in global financial and commodity markets and widespread
fiscal strains, which threaten the global economic recovery, and stressing the need to
continue to address systemic fragilities and imbalances and the need for continuing
efforts to reform and strengthen the international financial system,
Noting that, while some developing countries have been the main contributors
to recent global economic growth, the economic crisis has reduced their capacity to
withstand further shocks, recalling the commitments made to support strong,
sustainable, balanced and inclusive growth, and reaffirming the need to work
cooperatively to meet development commitments to achieve the Millennium
Development Goals by 2015,
Reaffirming the purposes of the United Nations, as set forth in its Charter,
including to achieve international cooperation in solving international problems of
an economic, social, cultural or humanitarian character and to be a centre for
harmonizing the actions of nations in the attainment of common ends, and
reiterating the need to strengthen the leadership role of the United Nations in
promoting development,
Reiterating that the international financial system should support sustained,
inclusive and equitable economic growth, sustainable development, and hunger and
poverty eradication efforts in developing countries, while allowing for the coherent
mobilization of all sources of financing for development,
Recalling the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed
Countries and the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the
Decade 2011–2020, 11 and recognizing, in this context, that the international
financial system should be supportive, as appropriate, of the special needs and
priorities of the least developed countries,
Stressing the importance of commitment to ensuring sound domestic financial
sectors, which make a vital contribution to national development efforts, as an
important component of an international financial architecture that is supportive of
development,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General; 12

_______________
8

Resolution 63/303, annex.
See resolution 65/1.
10
A/64/884.
11
Report of the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, Istanbul, Turkey,
9–13 May 2011 (United Nations publication, Sales No. 11.II.A.1), chap. II.
12
A/66/167.
9

2

A/RES/66/187

2.
Recognizes the need to continue to enhance the coherence and
consistency of the international monetary, financial and trading systems and the
importance of ensuring their openness, fairness and inclusiveness in order to
complement national development efforts to ensure sustained, inclusive and
equitable economic growth and the achievement of the internationally agreed
development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals;
Stresses the need to act decisively to tackle the challenges confronting
3.
the global economy in order to ensure balanced, sustainable, inclusive and equitable
global growth with full and productive employment and quality jobs;
Notes, in this regard, the important efforts undertaken nationally,
4.
regionally and internationally to respond to the challenges posed by the financial
and economic crisis, including the efforts to reinforce the banking sector by
increasing its transparency and accountability;
Also notes that the United Nations, on the basis of its universal
5.
membership and legitimacy, provides a unique and key forum for discussing
international economic issues and their impact on development, and reaffirms that
the United Nations is well positioned to participate in various reform processes
aimed at improving and strengthening the effective functioning of the international
financial system and architecture, while recognizing that the United Nations and the
international financial institutions have complementary mandates which make the
coordination of their actions crucial;
Recalls, in this regard, the resolve to strengthen the coordination of the
6.
United Nations system and multilateral financial, trade and development institutions
so as to support economic growth, poverty eradication and sustainable development
worldwide, on the basis of a clear understanding of and respect for their mandates
and governance structures;
Also recalls that countries must have the flexibility necessary to
7.
implement countercyclical measures and to pursue tailored and targeted responses to
the crisis, and calls for conditionalities to be streamlined to ensure that they are
timely, tailored and targeted and that they support developing countries in the face
of financial, economic and development challenges;
Further recalls, in this regard, the improvement of the lending
8.
framework of the International Monetary Fund through, inter alia, streamlined
conditions and the creation of more flexible instruments, such as a precautionary
and liquidity line, while also noting that new and ongoing programmes should not
contain unwarranted procyclical conditionalities;
Recognizes the role of private capital flows in mobilizing financing for
9.
development, stresses the challenges posed by excessive short-term capital inflows
to many developing countries, encourages further review of the benefits and
disadvantages of macroprudential measures available to mitigate the impact of
volatile capital flows, and requests the Secretary-General to take this into account in
preparing his report on the implementation of the present resolution;
10. Notes that countries can seek to negotiate, as a last resort, on a case-bycase basis and through existing frameworks, agreements on temporary debt
standstills between debtors and creditors in order to help to mitigate the adverse
impacts of the crisis and to stabilize macroeconomic developments;
11. Reaffirms the importance of broadening and strengthening the
participation of developing countries in international economic decision-making and
norm-setting, and in this regard takes note of recent important decisions on reform
of the governance structures, quotas and voting rights of the Bretton Woods
institutions, better reflecting current realities and enhancing the voice and
3

A/RES/66/187

participation of developing countries, and reiterates the importance of the reform of
the governance of those institutions in order to deliver more effective, credible,
accountable and legitimate institutions;
12. Notes, in this regard, the decisions taken by the World Bank Group on
voice and participation and further institutional reforms to meet new challenges, and
the addition of the twenty-fifth Chair to the Boards of Executive Directors of the
World Bank Group, and looks forward to progress in its institutional reforms, calls
for the swift implementation of the 2010 quota and governance reform of the
International Monetary Fund, and reiterates the importance of an open, transparent
and merit-based process for selecting the heads of the International Monetary Fund
and other international financial institutions;
13. Recognizes the role of special drawing rights as an international reserve
asset, and acknowledges that recent special drawing rights allocations helped to
supplement international reserves in response to the world financial and economic
crisis, thus contributing to the stability of the international financial system and
global economic resilience;
14. Reiterates that effective, inclusive multilateral surveillance should be at
the centre of crisis prevention efforts, and stresses the need to continue
strengthening surveillance of economic policies of countries;
15. Invites the international financial and banking institutions to continue
enhancing the transparency of risk-rating mechanisms, noting that sovereign risk
assessments made by the private sector should maximize the use of strict, objective
and transparent parameters, which can be facilitated by high-quality data and
analysis, and encourages relevant institutions, including the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development, to continue their work on the issue,
including its potential impact on the development prospects of developing countries;
16. Calls upon the multilateral, regional and subregional development banks
and development funds to continue to play a vital role in serving the development
needs of developing countries and countries with economies in transition, including
through coordinated action, as appropriate, stresses that strengthened regional
development banks and subregional financial institutions can add flexible financial
support to national and regional development efforts, thus enhancing their
ownership and overall efficiency, and in this regard welcomes recent capital
increases at multilateral and regional development banks and, in addition, encourages
efforts to ensure that subregional development banks are adequately funded;
17. Encourages enhanced regional and subregional cooperation, including
through regional and subregional development banks, commercial and reserve
currency arrangements and other regional and subregional initiatives;
18. Stresses the need to continuously improve standards of corporate and
public sector governance, including those related to accounting, auditing and
measures to ensure transparency, noting the disruptive effects of inadequate
policies;
19. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
sixty-seventh session a report on the implementation of the present resolution, to be
prepared in cooperation with the Bretton Woods institutions and other relevant
stakeholders;
20. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-seventh session,
under the item entitled “Macroeconomic policy questions”, the sub-item entitled
“International financial system and development”.
91st plenary meeting
22 December 2011
4
