S/PV.7834

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7834th meeting

Tuesday, 13 December 2016, 12.15 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Spain)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Martins
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Bessho
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Power
Mr. Bermúdez
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-43608 (E)
*1643608*

S/PV.7834

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 12.15 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, to whom I now give
him floor.
The Secretary-General: I have been invited to
address the Security Council on the tragic situation
in Aleppo. Since late November, we have seen Syrian
Government forces and their allies capture large
swathes of territory in eastern Aleppo. In the past
48 hours, we have seen an almost complete collapse of
the armed opposition’s front lines, leaving them with
only 5 per cent of their original territory in the city.
That came about after levels of bombardment that
many witnesses describe as unprecedented. Civilian
deaths and injuries continue at a brutal pace as the
United Nations receives credible reports of scores of
civilians being killed either by intense bombardment
or summary executions by pro-Government forces. We
have seen shocking videos of a body burning in the
street, ostensibly after aerial bombardment. The Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights has received reports of civilians, including
women and children, in four neighbourhoods being
rounded up and executed.
As front lines have shifted, civilians have fled
across dangerous routes, taking almost no belongings
with them. Many families have lost contact with their
families inside of eastern Aleppo, after they were
displaced or after they burned their SIM cards and
devices for fear of facing repercussions if detained.
There have been allegations of young men being rounded
up and detained, or sent to fight for Government forces.
Tens of thousands have already been recorded flooding
into western Aleppo, but it is likely that many more
thousands who are not recorded or registered have been
displaced; but we have no accurate data.
2/17

13/12/2016

Nor do we have accurate data about the number that
remain in the opposition-controlled pocket of eastern
Aleppo, because all of the health and governance
entities capable of counting the living and the dead
have effectively dissolved into the chaos. Moreover,
the Syrian authorities have systematically denied us
a presence on the ground to directly verify reports.
However, that does not mean that the reports that we
are receiving are not credible — we are confident that
civilians number in the thousands.
Meanwhile, yesterda the Russian Defence Ministry
reported that it had helped more than 100,000 civilians
leave eastern Aleppo neighbourhoods, including
40,484 children, and that it had supplied 78 tons of
humanitarian assistance to internally displaced persons.
It also reported that 2,215 militants had lain down
weapons and left eastern Aleppo, and that the Russian
military was continuing to demine eastern Aleppo
neighbourhoods and had completed the demining of
more than 31 hectares of urban structures, as well as 18
kilometres of roads.
The Russian Defence Ministry has also stated that
no opposition, humanitarian organizations or human
rights defenders are present in Aleppo and that eastern
Aleppo had been under the full control of terrorists.
It has also suggested that the estimate of 250,000
besieged civilians was overstated and has emphasized
that terrorists held over 100,000 civilians as human
shields in eastern Aleppo and left as soon as presented
with the opportunity to do so. The Russian Federation’s
Reconciliation Centre has also reportedly registered
allegations of torture and execution, as described by
residents fleeing eastern Aleppo.
We understand that there are ongoing negotiations
between the parties for an evacuation deal, facilitated
by Russia and Turkey. We support those efforts and
stand ready to help implement and oversee such an
agreement, which we understand may now be imminent.
We remind all parties of their obligations under
international humanitarian law to prioritize the safe
passage of civilians out of eastern Aleppo and to ensure
that those who have surrendered or have been captured
are treated humanely and in line with international law.
The Security Council and Member States have
repeatedly emphasized the importance of early
warning and prevention as critical to addressing
the challenges of international peace and security.
There was an abundance of early warning given to
16-43608

13/12/2016

The situation in the Middle East

the Council regarding the situation in Aleppo. Most
notably, my Special Envoy repeatedly warned over
the past several months that eastern Aleppo could be
destroyed by the end of the year if urgent action were
not taken. He proposed concrete measures to address
concerns regarding the Al-Nusra Front without risking
unnecessary loss of life or destruction of parts of one
of the oldest continually inhabited cities in the world.
In addition, the General Assembly has overwhelmingly
voted to urge preventive action by the Council on
Aleppo. But when presented with opportunities to do
so over the past three months, the Council failed to do
it. Since September, the Security Council has failed to
adopt three draft resolutions that could have enabled a
humanitarian truce, the evacuation of civilians and the
entry of lifesaving aid.
I have said before that we have collectively failed
the people of Syria. The Security Council has not
exercised its pre-eminent responsibility with regard to
the maintenance of international peace and security.
History will not easily absolve us, but that failure
compels us to do even more to offer the people of
Aleppo our solidarity at this moment.
The immediate task is to do all we can to stop the
carnage. As the battle for Aleppo concludes, I call
on the Syrian authorities and their allies, Russia and
Iran, to honour their obligations under international
humanitarian law to do the following: urgently allow
the remaining civilians to escape the area, and facilitate
access for all humanitarian actors and the delivery of
critically important assistance. The laws of war and
universal human rights must be respected.
In recent days and hours, we appear to be witnessing
nothing less an all-out effort by the Syrian Government
and its allies to end the country’s internal conflict
through a total, uncompromising military victory. I do
not accept recent statements by the Syrian Government
and the Russian Ministry of Defence that there were
no opposition groups or humanitarian organizations
present in eastern Aleppo.
That does not mean that I discount the importance of
fighting terrorism or the need to combat the confirmed
presence of the listed terrorist group the Al-Nusra
Front in eastern Aleppo. In fact, I support and agree
with that, but, as my Special Envoy has argued, should
the presence of fewer than a 1,000 fighters determine
the fate of tens, and possibly hundreds of thousands,
of civilians? Context also matters. No one disputes

S/PV.7834

that Al-Nusra Front fighters are indeed present in
Aleppo. But they are also present in larger numbers and
concentrations elsewhere in Syria. The Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) is not known to be present
in Aleppo, but it appears to have exploited the focus on
Aleppo by the Syrian Government and its allies to go
on the offensive in Palmyra.
The Syrian conflict will not end as a result of what
happens on the battlefield in the next days and weeks.
Military advances will not solve the refugee crisis,
nor will the defeat of ISIL and its poisonous ideology
be complete when Mosul and Raqqa are ultimately
liberated. That is wishful thinking.
Just this week, Colombian President and Nobel
Peace Laureate Juan Manuel Santos warned us that
a final victory through force, when non-violent
alternatives exist, is nothing other than the defeat of
humankind itself. In Syria the consequences of such a
de-humanizing approach could be to further accelerate
radicalization leading to the next iteration of Al-Qaida
and ISIL. It would also send a frightening signal to the
millions who have already fled the violence, rendering
the Syrian refugee population semi-permanent and
placing further pressure on the region and on Europe.
The Council has repeatedly affirmed that an
inclusive and Syrian-led political process that addresses
the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people is the
only way to find a sustainable solution to this wretched
conflict. It is past time for the Council to act — and to
force others to act — on that prescription. Aleppo should
represent the end of the quest for military victory, not
the start of a broader military campaign in a country
already ravaged beyond all recognition by five years
of war. The current battle needs to be followed by an
immediate end to violence by all sides and unfettered
humanitarian access through genuine engagement
without preconditions, around the political tools we
already possess, including resolution 2254 (2015).
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Spanish presidency for agreeing to convene today’s
urgent meeting at the request of France and the United
Kingdom. I also thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing and his commitment.

16-436083/17

S/PV.7834

The situation in the Middle East

As we speak, the worst-case scenario is occurring in
Aleppo. The massacre of civilians is taking place under
the eyes of the international community. According to
the information we have, summary executions have been
carried out in the streets of eastern Aleppo. Civilians
are being murdered, and at times burnt alive in their
homes. The dead bodies of civilians and children litter
the streets of Aleppo.
The worst is that that abomination was predictable,
as we have said here. We are all familiar with the
barbaric methods of the Bashar Al-Assad regime. We
are perfectly aware of the disregard he has shown for
the lives of civilians since the beginning of the Syrian
conflict. We all know very well of what could happen in
the next few hours to some 120,000 people who are still
trapped in eastern Aleppo, and who, if we do nothing,
could be subjected to the brutality of the Al-Assad
forces.
An immediate end to the massacre is absolutely
critical in order to allow the evacuation under
international protection of all civilians towards
the destination of their choice and to authorize the
immediate and unimpeded access of humanitarian
assistance. That is the message that France and its
partners conveyed during the meeting that the French
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Jean-Marc Ayrault,
held in Paris on 10 December. It is the message that
the General Assembly conveyed to the world through
resolution 71/130, adopted by an overwhelming majority
a few days ago. Once again, France forcefully calls
upon those who have the capacity to act, particularly
Russia, to put an immediate end to the bloodshed and
respond to the humanitarian emergency, which is, once
again, an absolute emergency.
Let us make no mistake: the tragedy of Aleppo is
not the painful path that we must go down to finally
achieve the stabilization of Syria — a so-called
expedient and rebuilt Syria. No, at the end of this
plunge into the abyss, of these children maimed by
bombs, disfigured by hunger, there is the promise of
an endless conflict from which terrorist groups will be
the primary beneficiaries. The tragedy of Aleppo — we
must repeat this and hammer it home — mechanically
fuels radicalization, and therefore terrorism. It is a
gift to the terrorists. Therefore, the comparison of
Aleppo today and Guernica during the Spanish civil
war appears more relevant than ever. Aleppo is both the
epicentre of the worst humanitarian tragedy of the early
twenty-first century and a black hole that sucks up and
4/17

13/12/2016

destroys all the values of the United Nations. Moreover,
it carries the promise of terrible tragedies to follow.
Finally, allow me to stress that the tragedy of Aleppo
did not happen by accident. We will need to dismantle
the processes that have made possible this plunge into
the abyss. This tragedy is the result of the savagery of
some people, of the active complicity and complete
cynicism of others, but also of a great deal of cowardice
and indifference and — we need to have the courage
to say it — of the powerlessness of the international
community and the United Nations. In order to avoid
this collective powerlessness that we find ourselves in,
which seriously calls into question the very credibility
of the Security Council, France has proposed, together
with Mexico, an initiative allowing for the suspension
of the resort to the veto by permanent member States in
cases of mass atrocities. That initiative, which France
will continue to promote, has already received the
support of approximately 100 countries.
I do not want to go on too long, but in these
terrible times for Aleppo — a city that has seen so
many brilliant civilizations and that is now delivered
up to barbarity — France again calls for action and
therefore for the necessary uniting around the common
goals founded on the minimum principle of humanity,
which the Secretary-General has just recalled. Tens
of thousands of lives are at stake. They have just
one glimmer of hope, and they depend on us. Let us
therefore act.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for agreeing to hold this emergency
meeting at the initiative of France and the
United Kingdom.
This is a dark day for the people of Aleppo,
surely the darkest of the past five years. Al-Assad’s
forces, propped up by Russia and Iran, have once
again redefined horror. They have gone from siege
to slaughter.
Today the United Nations has received reports that
pro-Government forces have been entering homes in
eastern Aleppo. They have been going door to door
executing people on the spot. Eighty-two people have
been murdered, 13 of whom are women and 11 children.
None were terrorists. We have heard reports of women
committing suicide in order not to be raped. We have
heard reports of people being burned alive. We have
heard reports that hundreds of men have disappeared
while fleeing Aleppo, taken by the regime.
16-43608

13/12/2016

The situation in the Middle East

All those reports evoke the darkest days of the
history of the United Nations. When it happened
before, we said “never again”. Well, it is happening
again, today.
There must be protection for civilians. Even wars
have rules. We urge the Al-Assad regime and Russia
and Iran to respect those rules, and indeed to respect the
will of the vast majority of Security Council members
and the vast majority of members of the General
Assembly. We urge those who chose to back Al-Assad
to think again.
As the Secretary-General has just told us, the
Security Council has failed. It has failed because
Russia has used and abused its veto time and again,
even to prevent a seven-day ceasefire. To those who
backed Al-Assad and blocked action in the Council
we ask: How can you side with such cruelty? How can
you abide such an abuse of the Charter of the United
Nations, words that we all claim to uphold? Therefore,
re-find your moral compass, re-find your believe in the
dignity and worth of the human person. Re-find these
things before it is too late, and help us bring an end to
the suffering.
We know what needs to happen. The attacks, the
killings must stop. The suffering of those left in Aleppo
has gone on for far too long. The United Nations
stands ready to help get aid in and get civilians out.
The opposition has agreed to the plan. But in order
for it to happen, the regime and its backers must put
humanity first and grant the United Nations the
permission needed.
We will have different arguments from Russia
this morning, but I sincerely hope that, despite the
differences, Russia and others on the Security Council
who opposed the ceasefire last week could at least agree
to these basic steps: first, to allow the United Nations
to access eastern Aleppo so that it can provide eyes on
the ground, get aid in to those who need it and protect
civilians; secondly, join my call today that we will hold
accountable anyone from any side who commits war
crimes; and, thirdly, help bring peace to Syria through
the only route possible, that is, a political solution.
With the eyes of the world watching, we should
be clear what will happen if this does not come to
pass. Aleppo will become a memory — a city only
known to the dead. In the coming days, hundreds, if
not thousands, of people will be killed or disappeared,
their fates unknown. But the fall of Aleppo will not

S/PV.7834

be a victory for Al-Assad. He will have sacrificed
his country and the lives of hundreds of thousands of
innocent civilians just to keep his grip on power. How
can he expect to lead a country that he has so callously
destroyed? How can he expect to unite a country that he
himself has wilfully divided?
A doctor from Aleppo illustrated this best earlier
this month. He said,
“Assad gave people in Aleppo only two choices:
either to go back to his control or to die by bombing.
We will not go back again to Assad’s control.”
The war will not end with the fall of Aleppo.
Al-Assad will never control the hearts or minds of
those crying out for freedom. He will only hold a third
of Syria, and he will be in debt to those foreign Powers
that would rather help him destroy his country than
help the Council save it.
The irony is that, as the as they carry out these
barbaric attacks in the name of defeating terrorism, it
is the real terrorists, the real threat, who are resurging
elsewhere in Syria. This week Palmyra fell again
to Da’esh. Palmyra is now in the hands of a group
whose bloodlust is rivaled onlyby that of the Al-Assad
regime. Instead of fighting them, Al-Assad has enabled
them. He has enabled them through obsessively,
systematically brutalizing his own people. He claims
that he is fighting terrorism. If it were not so tragic, so
horrific, those claims would be laughable.
The Council cannot turn a blind eye on this gravest
day of this most heinous conflict of the twenty-first
century. We cannot be distracted by false claims of
fighting terrorism. And we cannot, we must not, allow
there to be impunity for these war crimes. We owe it to
the people of Aleppo, the living and the dead, to ensure
that there is accountability for the horror perpetrated by
Al-Assad and his Russian and Iranian backers.
Ms. Power (United States of America): Here is
what is happening right now in eastern Aleppo. Syrians
trapped by the fighting are sending out their final appeals
for help, or they are saying their goodbyes. A doctor
named Mohammad Abu Rajab left a voice message:
“This is a final distress call to the world. Save the
lives of these children, women and old men. Save
them. Nobody is left. You might not hear our voice
after this.”

16-436085/17

S/PV.7834

The situation in the Middle East

A photographer named Amin Al-Halabi wrote on
Facebook,
“I am waiting to die or be captured by the Al-Assad
regime. Pray for me and always remember us.”
A teacher named Abdel Kafi Alhamdo said,
“I can tweet now, but I might not do it forever.
Please save my daughter’s life and others. This is a
call from a father.”
Another doctor told a journalist,
“Remember that there was a city called Aleppo that
the world erased from the map and history.”
This is what is happening in eastern Aleppo.
This is what is being done by States Members of the
United Nations that are sitting around this horseshoe
table today. This is what is being done to the people of
eastern Aleppo — to fathers, mothers, sons, daughters,
brothers and sisters, like each of us here.
It is extremely hard to get information, of course,
out of the small area still held by the opposition. We will
hear that as an alibi and a way of papering over what
video testimony, phone calls and others are bringing us
live. We will hear it invoked, that it is hard to verify.
It is deliberate. The Al-Assad regime and Russia,
backed by Iran, using militias on the ground, have
done everything that they can to cut off the city. The
Security Council will hear “Well, we do not really
know. Maybe it is made up.” But they are hiding what
is happening from the world. It would be easy for
independent investigators to get in, along with food,
health workers and others. Instead, the perpetrators are
hiding their brutal assault from the world wilfully. But
consider the many accounts that have made it out, so
many of them — those of first responders describing
children’s voices from beneath the rubble of collapsed
buildings. There are no first responders or equipment
left to dig them out, and no doctors left to treat them.
Bodies lie in the streets of eastern Aleppo, but nobody
dares collect them for fear of getting bombed or shot
to death in the process. As many as a 100 children are
reportedly trapped right now in a building under heavy
fire. Clearly, those young children must be terrorists,
because all those who are being executed, everybody
being barrel-bombed, everybody who has been attacked
with chlorine gas — Council members will be told they
are all terrorists, every last one, even the infants.
6/17

13/12/2016

The regime of Bashar Al-Assad, Russia, Iran and
their affiliated militias are the ones responsible for
what the United Nations calls a complete meltdown of
humanity. And they are showing no mercy, even now,
despite their territorial conquests. Just in the past 24
hours, pro-Al-Assad forces reportedly killed at least 82
civilians, including 11 women and 13 children. Those
forces are reportedly entering homes and executing
civilians on the spot, as we have heard. According to
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, foreign militias, such as the Iraqi
Harakat Al-Nujaba organization, are involved in those
killings. Where civilians are able to run the gauntlet
and make it across the front lines, Syrian intelligence
agencies are pulling people aside and sending them
away, perhaps to be gang-pressed to the front lines
or likely to the same prisons in which we know the
Al-Assad regime tortures and executes those in its
custody.
In the light of these reports, we join others — and
especially the Secretary-General in one of his final
appeals, in reiterating our call to the Al-Assad regime
and Russia to stop their assaults on Aleppo — to protect
civilians. We call on Russia and Al-Assad to allow
impartial international observers into the city to oversee
the safe evacuation of the people who wish to leave but
justifiably fear that if they try, they will be shot in the
street or carted off to one of Al-Assad’s gulags.
The Al-Assad regime and Russia appear dead set
on seizing every last square inch of Aleppo by force no
matter how many innocent bodies pile up in their wake.
But we keep insisting on answering the United Nations
call for access and safe and orderly evacuation, because
we are not willing to accept that innocent men, women
and children can be butchered simply because they
happen to live in a conflict area. Our shared humanity
and security demand that certain rules of war — the
most basic — hold. It is up to each and every one of us
here to defend those rules.
To the Al-Assad regime, Russia and Iran, three
Member States behind the conquest of and carnage in
Aleppo, I say that they bear responsibility for these
atrocities. By rejecting the evacuation efforts of the
United Nations and the International Committee of the
Red Cross they are signalling to those militias that are
massacring innocents to continue doing what they are
doing. Denying or obfuscating the facts, as they will do
today, by saying that up is down and black is white will
not absolve them.
16-43608

13/12/2016

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.7834

When one day there is a full accounting of the
horrors committed in this assault of Aleppo — and
that day will come sooner or later — those countries
will not be able to say that they did not know what was
happening and were not involved. We will all know
what was happening, and we will all know that they
were involved.

thousands of Syrians still in eastern Aleppo — between
30,000 and 60,000 people — and hundreds of thousands
more across the country who are besieged depend on it.

Aleppo will join the ranks of those events in world
history that define modern evil and stain or conscious
decades later: Halabja, Rwanda, Srebrenica and now
Aleppo. To the Al-Assad regime, Russia and Iran, I
say to them that their forces and proxies are carrying
out these crimes. Their barrel bombs, mortars and air
strikes have allowed the militias in Aleppo to encircle
tens of thousands of civilians in their ever-tightening
noose. It is their noose — three States Members of the
United Nations contributing to a noose around civilians.
It should shame them. Instead, by all appearances,
it is emboldening them; they are plotting their next
assault. Are they truly incapable of shame? Is there
literally nothing that can shame them? Is there no act of
barbarism against civilians, no execution of a child that
gets under their skin or just creeps them out a little bit?
Is there nothing that they will not lie about or justify?

The first is that propaganda, disinformation and
psychological warfare are not new concepts. A new
phenomenon, exacerbated by what we are seeing in
the Syrian conflict, is the spread of fake news. In such
fabrications, they stoop to using images of children. We
do not want the Secretariat of the United Nations to be
used as an instrument in such a cynical game.

To the members of the Council and all States
Members of the United Nations, I say that the ghastly
attacks that we are witnessing in Aleppo will not stop
if the city falls. The regime and its Russian allies will
only be emboldened to replicate their starve-andsurrender-and-slaughter tactics elsewhere. This will be
their model for attempting to retake cities and towns
across Syria. It will not end with Aleppo, and it will
not focus on terrorists. It never has, and there is no
evidence that it will.
No matter how small a country, no matter its view
of sovereignty, if it shares our view that terrorism is one
of the singular causes on Earth that is worth fighting, it
is essential that each of us shoulder our responsibility
to denounce these atrocities. We have just heard the
Secretary-General state it plainly. We have to tell those
responsible that they must stop. This is not the time for
more equivocation, for self-censoring, to avoid naming
names, for diplomatic niceties of the kind that are so
well-practiced here in the Council.
Say who is responsible. Appeal to Moscow, to
Damascus, to Tehran that they have to stop. Use every
public and private channel available and bank shot off
someone who knows someone. The lives of tens of

Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): My statement will be made up of four small
parts.

I do not want to remind the Western troika that
summoned today’s meeting, which has spoken so
grandiloquently of the role that they played in the
emergence of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) as a result of the American and British invasion
of Iraq, of the role that those three countries played in
exacerbating the Syrian crisis, which has led to such
dreadful consequences and the resurgence of terrorist
organizations in Syria and Iraq. What I find particularly
strange was the statement by the representative of
the United States, who delivered her statement as if
she were Mother Teresa. She should remember what
country she is representing and her own country’s
track record. Only then can she start opining from the
position of moral supremacy. Let us ask: Who is guilty
for what? Who is to blame? I think that ultimately God
will tell us.
The second part of my statement concerns
information. As of yesterday evening, Syrian
authorities had assumed full control of over 98 per cent
of Aleppo. The militant rebels hold only three square
kilometres. In the past 24 hours, the Syrian army has
freed another 11 neighbourhoods in eastern Aleppo. In
the past 24 hours, the regions of Aleppo that are still
under rebel control have decreased. With the help of the
Russian Centre for Reconciliation of Opposing Sides
in the Syrian Arab Republic, 7,796 civilians have been
evacuated, including 3,946 children. Some 375 rebels
have laid down their arms and crossed into the western
opart of the city. Since the start of the operation,
approximately 110,000 civilians — including 44,367
children — have been evacuated from the city, and
more than 7,000 have returned to their homes in the
liberated areas of the western part of Aleppo.

16-436087/17

S/PV.7834

The situation in the Middle East

Three humanitarian actions have taken place in
the past 24 hours, during which civilians in temporary
shelters in eastern Aleppo have received humanitarian
supplies. In the neighbourhoods of Al-Aziza and
Sheikh Maqsood, around one ton of supplies has been
delivered. In Al-Malihah, around 1.5 tons of supplies
have gotten through. For civilians leaving areas of
Aleppo under the control of illegal armed groups, hot
food and emergency supplies are being provided.
In the past 24 hours, a total of 16 hectares have
been demined and 48 buildings — including five
schools, a residential complex and a home for the
elderly — as well as a park and 2.5 kilometres of roads,
have been cleansed of improvised explosive devices. In
the past 24 hours, Russian sappers have deactivated and
disassembled 1,200 explosive devices in the liberated
parts of eastern Aleppo. Results of a survey of the
liberated areas of eastern Aleppo conducted by Russian
sappers of the International Mine Action Centre have
not yet revealed any hospital or school that the militants
used for its intended purpose. There are still numerous
armed mines in public buildings and schools that were
used by the rebels as storage centres for explosives or
headquarters for sharia courts or meeting places for
militants or factories for making homemade rockets.
I will move on to the third part of my statement,
using the latest information. Currently, the Syrian army
is concluding the liberation of Aleppo from radical
militant groups, including terrorists of the Al-Nusra
Front, who earlier refused to leave the city through the
secure routes. Moreover, not only did they continue
with their hostilities against Government forces, stating
that it was better to die than surrender, but they also
regulary shelled civilians neighbourhoods in Aleppo,
killing innocent women, children and elderly people.
More than that, they hampered any chance of civilians
leaving areas of militant control. They opened fire on
civilians who were trying to break out towards the
western part of the city. That fact has been confirmed
by numerous witness testimonies, including from
personnel of international humanitarian agencies.
With respect to mass arrests and disappearances
and bloody repraisals against civilian activists, we
have no information attesting to that. An hour ago, we
contacted our Embassy in Demascus, which is contact
with the Syrian authorities and the Commander of the
Russian Army in Syria. They categorically denied
that information. Naturally, the militants leaving the
encircled city were checked for possible involvement
8/17

13/12/2016

in the commission of crimes, including attacks on a
Russian field hospital. We believe that in this situation,
the measures taken have been justified, because we
are dealing with terrorist thugs from Al-Nusra, Nour
al-Din al-Zenki thugs and other such gangs.
However, I want to stress in particular that the
vast majority of former members of the illegal armed
groups that have handed themselves over to Syrian
authorities as a result of amnesty have returned to their
families, after concluding with the proper procedures.
The most important aspect of the conflict, the counterterrorist operation in Aleppo, will conclude in the
next few hours. All militants, together with members
of their families and the injured, are currently going
through agreed corridors towards destinations that
they have voluntarily chosen, including towards Idlib.
At checkpoints, officers from the Russian Centre for
Reconciliation of Opposing Sides are working.
As to arbitrary arrests or other violations of the
agreement reached with the illegal armed groups, the
Russian military has not reported any such violations.
Moreover, such information can be confirmed by
representatives of International Committee of the Red
Cross currently in Aleppo, as well as by all United
Nations humanitarian agencies based in Aleppo, headed
by the Resident Coordinator.
Finally, we are responding to all communiqués sent
to us, including from the United States delegation, with
regard to alleged reports of certain abuses or violations
of international humanitarian law. I will read out the
text of a response of our military representative in
Geneva to a message he received from Jan Egeland,
who is, as the Council knows, Steffan de Mistura’s
Senior Special Adviser on Humanitarian Affairs. The
response reads as follows:
“Having received a signal that in eastern Aleppo
cases of ill treatment by Government forces
against civilians, the Russian Reconciliation
Centre has begun an immediate investigation into
such accusations”.
Yesterday and today, Russian officers visited all
liberated regions. They spoke with commanders and
civilians. Not a single report of ill treatment or violations
of international humanitarian law against civilians of
eastern Aleppo was discovered. The endless incidents
listed just now are not credible. At the same time, facts
have come to light concerning crimes committed by
terrorists. In the Al-Rashidin neighbourhood were found
16-43608

13/12/2016

The situation in the Middle East

the bodies of people who had been executed trying to
leave the city. In the area of Al-Ansari Mashad, boobytrapped schools and hospitals were discovered. In the
Insari Sark neighbourhood, the documents of a sharia
court were discovered, containing death sentences
delivered against civilians. All opposition headquarters
and armaments have been located in schools, mosques
and hospitals. Thousands of witness testimonies have
been collected, describing the torture, summary
execution and brutalization of civilians by insurgents.
We hope that our interlocutors will have the courage
and objectivity to report on that.
We hope that the Secretariat has the courage and
objectivity to state and report all of this and to not try
to one-sidedly blame the Syrian Government and, as
has been said here, those who support them, including
Russia. Those who say that are protecting the terrorists.
For a long time, we have said that it was unacceptable
when Secretariat officials have spoken about terrorists
as being no more than a detail of the conflicts in Syria
and Iraq. They are not just a detail. They are a primary
fact, which is so interpreted in Security Council
resolutions.
As for the Security Council not fulfilling its role, I
beg to disagree. The Council adopted the fundamental
resolution 2254 (2015) in December last year. It is not
our fault that certain States continue to seek satisfaction
on the battlefield while maintaining the illusion of the
possible change of regimes in Damascus by force. Let
us return to proper work and properly implementing
Security Council resolutions that might actually lead to
a settlement of the crisis in Syria.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): Twenty-three
years ago, I sat behind my Ambassador as the Security
Council discussed Rwanda. It was the most horrible
experience. As I prepared to come here on my posting
this time, I was often asked by my colleagues: What
will be your Rwanda moment? I think it has probably
arrived. Then, as now, there were credible reports
coming in of atrocities being committed. Then, as now,
there was someone at the table, a party to the conflict,
that had their own view. But in the end the truth came
through.
I choose to believe the Secretary-General when
he comes to the Council and tells us there are credible
reports of atrocities being committed. I choose to
believe the Secretary-General and the people working

S/PV.7834

for him when they say the issue is not terrorism, but it
is barbarism.
This was a scenario we had desperately hoped to
avoid when we worked with Egypt and Spain to try to
adopt a Council draft resolution to stop the violence
and provide orderly access for the United Nations
and other humanitarian partners to support the needs
of the beleaguered city. We made the same plea in
consultations last week when we sort of came to some
rough agreement about what we might say to the media,
except that the one important point we asked for — that
the United Nations must be involved in the access and
in the evacuation arrangements — was not allowed to
us by Russia. That is the problem we have today. The
United Nations is not on the ground. The United Nations
is not able to verify. So it is no good coming back and
telling us that you have done all of these reports and
investigations, because no one is there to check on you.
The tactics being used in eastern Aleppo go against
basic humanity. Such short-term tactics do nothing to
counter terrorism. They fuel radicalization and, rather
than hastening the end of the war, they make peace
more distant.
We share the criticisms of the Secretary-General
of the Council’s failure to act. We have called attention
to those failures repeatedly over the past months. We
have tried to remedy that failure by putting forward
draft resolutions to address the issue. And we have
failed. We have failed. In one sense it is a collective
failure of the entire Council. But in another sense, it is a
specific failure because a permanent member has used
a veto to prevent Council action to address a serious
humanitarian crisis. That veto, in our view, is against
the deep spirit of Article 27, paragraph 3, of the Charter
of the United Nations, under which we all operate. And
it is a cynical attempt to use a provision to advance
military aims of one of the participants to the conflict.
The Secretary-General has come to us in this
urgent meeting and said that we need to act, we need
to do something to address the situation. We urge
Russia, we urge Iran, we urge Syria to work with us.
We can only focus on the immediate right now. But
saving lives must be our focus of attention. We need to
get the United Nations on the ground. We need to get
the United Nations able to help people — those who
want to leave be allowed to leave and those who need
humanitarian assistance to get it when they can.

16-436089/17

S/PV.7834

The situation in the Middle East

Of course we know that peace and stability will be
restored ultimately only through a return to dialogue,
reconciliation and meaningful political change. But
those things seem very far away right now. Let us,
right now, concentrate on what has to be done in the
immediate hours.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Ukraine is appalled by
the reports of mass atrocities and manhunt campaigns
launched by the Syrian regime and its partners in crime.
Just listen to those Syrians trapped in Aleppo who cry
out,
“We are all praying for rain. When it rains the
planes cannot fly and the bombardment stops for
a short while.”
Is that fake, according to the Russian Ambassador?.
People seeking refuge are flooding into the area that
is still outside of the regime’s control. Thousands are
cramming onto a piece of land of about six square
kilometres. People arrive with three or four children in
tow, fleeing the looming carnage.

13/12/2016

Besides the unimaginable suffering of the people
fleeing the ongoing onslought in Aleppo, we also must
keep in mind disturbing developments around Palmyra,
where the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
is again trying to reassert its presence. An ugly picture
emerges. While opposition forces are being persistently
and mercilessly pounded by the full military might
assembled by Bashar Al-Assad, with the help of his
allies, Da’esh meets close to no opposition on its way
to retake Palmyra.
That raises the question: What are the real priorities
of Damascus and its allies? When will the same amount
of dedication go into fighting against ISIL’s forces as is
expended against the opposition forces? It is clear now
that both the Syrian regime and Russia have chosen
to resolve the Syrian conflict militarily. I cannot
remember how many times my delegation has repeated
that. Instead of a cessation of hostilities in Aleppo,
Russia and the Syrian regime are using a Groznystyle scorched-earth policy. They have to face justice
for their crimes, and for what will come afterwards in
terms of the grave consequences of such brutality.

The Syrian regime says that it has opened a corridor
for the people towards so-called safety. But local
civilians prefer to face bombs and harsh conditions
rather than the welcoming hands of the Government.
The fact that the Syrian army has already killed half
a million of its own people is indeed a big deterrent.
Things could not possibly look uglier. The worst part is
that it is not as if no one had seen this coming, or could
not have stopped it. It was crystal clear from the very
beginning what the Syrian regime forces and militias
would do to the residents of Aleppo once they captured
the city. It was crystal clear from the very beginning
that sectarian violence and slaughter would take place.

Words do not suffice to describe the magnitude of
the crimes committed in Aleppo. History will be the
judge. I am sure that the day will come when the Syrian
regime and its accomplices will be sitting in a different
chamber under different circumstances, facing a trial
on all that they have done.

That is why in the past two months members of the
Security Council twice attempted to avert such a course
of events. But all of those efforts were shattered by the
irresponsible position of one of the permanent members
of the Council, namely, the Russian Federation. We find
that the words of Jan Egeland go straight to the point:

Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.

“Syrian and Russian Governments must be held
responsible for the atrocities committed by militias
loyal to President Bashar Al-Assad in Aleppo”.
Is that fake too, simply because it has not been
confirmed by the Russian military — who are of course
the most trusted people in the world?
10/17

We call once again — I hope in a voice of unity — for
imposing a sustainable ceasefire in Aleppo to allow
the safe evacuation of the vulnerable and the wounded
from the rubble of Aleppo. We underline yet again
the obligation of all parties on the ground to protect
civilians and abide by international humanitarian law
and human rights law.

Unfortunately, despite the intensified rate of
meetings in the Security Council, and more recently
in the General Assembly, on the situation in Syria, we
continue to see — week after week, day after day and
even hour by hour — a macabre, seemingly endless
spiral. The most recent United Nations reports on the
situation in Aleppo are horrendous. First we learned
of the possibility that hundreds of men, women and
children in eastern Aleppo may have disappeared after
being evacuated. And today we are being told that
summary executions are taking place in that same part
16-43608

13/12/2016

The situation in the Middle East

of the city and that snipers are murdering dozens of
civilians, including women and children, in the streets
and even in their homes.
It all seems to show that we are facing the end
of the battle for control of Aleppo. But the question
must be asked: At what price? How many innocent
civilians have paid with their lives in the fight against
terrorism? How many corpses are under the rubble of
the intense bombings? Perhaps we will never know.
What we do know is that the vast majority of children,
mothers, workers and the elderly who are dead were
not terrorists. We have urged the parties to the conflict
to refrain from continuing to commit these atrocities.
Everything points to the fact that responsibility for the
lastest episodes belongs to the Syrian forces and their
allies. Let us be clear: Syria has been destroyed, and the
crisis cannot be solved militarily. Negotiations among
all the parties are the only way out. All the parties to
the conflict should be held accountable for their crimes.
Impunity will only encourage them to go on with such
bestial acts.
Today’s meeting focuses on Aleppo, but Uruguay
is seriously concerned about the progress that terrorist
groups have made in the past week, particularly in
Palmyra, where Da’esh fighters have retaken control
and dozens of civilians have been killed. The terrorists
are still very strong in Syria. We reiterate that at
the moment the only possible solution depends on
the imposition of an unconditional and immediate
ceasefire in Aleppo and throughout the rest of Syria,
which will enable hundreds of thousands of Syrians to
get immediate access to humanitarian aid and make
it possible to hold negotiations, as provided for in
resolution 2254 (2015), which is just about to mark its
first anniversary. We must ensure that arrogance and
triumphalism based on ephemeral military victories do
not prevail. We must listen to the members and to the
Special Envoy, and we must negotiate.

S/PV.7834

the opposition have a difficult task ahead of them that
will require a great deal of dialogue and coordination
if the civilians trapped between their forces are to be
spared death and suffering. That is the only way that
the carnage in Aleppo can be stopped and a move
begun towards a political solution. We strongly urge the
parties to choose the path of dialogue rather than that of
violence, including the detention, torture and killing of
combatants as well as civilians.
Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): We would like to thank
the Secretary-General for his briefing, which told us
that the annihilation of eastern Aleppo is not merely a
threat but a reality, carried out with complete disregard
for innocent life.
Only last week the Council was informed that
aerial attacks would be halted unilaterally and military
operations on the ground in eastern Aleppo would
pause to enable medical evacuations and the separation
of armed opposition fighters from terrorist groups. But
the brutal onslaught began again before any significant
relief could be delivered. We are compelled to ask what
the purpose or intention of the announced pause was.
We are deeply disturbed by United Nations
reports of extrajudicial killings of civilians, including
women and children, during the attacks on the ground,
which reached 82 yesterday alone. What crime
could those children possibly have committed to be
summarily executed by pro-Government militias in
their own homes? In addition to those who have been
mercilessly executed, more than 100 children who were
unaccompanied or separated from their families have
been reported by UNICEF to be trapped in buildings in
eastern Aleppo under heavy attack. The attacks must
stop. The children must be saved and protected.

Mr. Martins (Angola): We would first like to thank
the Secretary-General for his briefing, and to express
our solidarity with his efforts to stop any atrocities
being committed in the city of Aleppo against civilians,
including women and children.

With eastern Aleppo on the brink of total
destruction, those with leverage must use their influence
on the parties to the conflict to end the summary
execution of civilians there. More than 100,000 people
are still trapped there, and we strongly support the
United Nations request for the urgent imposition of a
ceasefire in order to enable them to evacuate. The fate
of the innocent civilians is the responsibility of the
advancing forces.

It is our collective responsibility to ensure that
all parties to the conflict avoid targeting civilians and
that they abide by international humanitarian law and
human rights law. Aleppo, and especially its civilian
population, has suffered enough. The Government and

In view of the Syrian Government forces’
impending takeover of eastern Aleppo, we expect that
the Government will take immediate steps to implement
the following measures. First, it must demand that
its forces exercise maximum restraint, respect the

16-4360811/17

S/PV.7834

The situation in the Middle East

principles of distinction and proportionality and
refrain from any targeting or extrajudicial or summary
executions, particularly of civilians and especially
women and children. Secondly, it must facilitate
immediate and unfettered access for humanitarian aid
and personnel to all areas under its effective control,
and engage in an inclusive political dialogue, with a
focus on achieving national reconciliation. We believe
that those are the minimum steps needed to restore calm
and stability, which the Government itself has cited as
one of its primary aims.
As the Secretary-General said, the legitimate
aspirations and grievances of the parties opposed to
Damascus must be addressed in a peaceful manner
through constructive dialogue and engagement, and not
by launching another phase of military operations.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.
China remains deeply concerned about the situation
in various parts of Syria, including Aleppo, and would
like to express its profound sympathy for the Syrian
people, who have suffered dire misery as a result of the
conflict there.
The way that the situation in Syria has evolved
so far is the result of the interplay of a host of factors
operating in many dimensions. The international
community should think deeply about the underlying
causes of the situation and take concerted measures
aimed at reaching a comprehensive, fair and appropriate
solution. The complexity and sensitivity of the current
circumstances make it even more important to ensure
that the international community does not diverge from
a path that can lead to our overarching goal, which is
to seek a political settlement. We should work together
to move the Syrian crisis back on to a path of dialogue
and consultation, with a view to reaching a lasting
solution to the war and chaos as soon as possible. Any
efforts on the part of the international community
should encourage efforts on all four of the relevant
tracks — restoring the ceasefire, resuming the political
talks, re-establishing joint counter-terrorism efforts
and providing humanitarian aid. The role of the United
Nations as the chief provider of good offices should be
upheld, and the Geneva talks resumed without delay.
Fighting terrorism is part and parcel of a solution to
the Syrian issue. The Islamic State terrorist organization
has recently been launching repeated attacks, and the
risk that terrorist forces may become more powerful
12/17

13/12/2016

and spread is growing. The international community
should give priority to combating terrorist forces on
Syrian soil, strengthening its coordination of counterterrorism efforts, adhering to uniform standards and
standing firm against the Islamic State and every
other group designated as terrorist by the Security
Council. China is ready to work with the international
community to urge for a political solution to the Syrian
crisis as soon as possible.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): Japan fully shares the
international community’s serious concerns about
the worsening humanitarian situation in Aleppo and
believes that it requires an urgent response. With the
extremely cold and rainy weather, more than 80,000
internally displaced persons are reported to be in very
dire circumstances. It is very important that the Council
has convened today on this matter. We must take action
to help civilian Syrians. The Secretary-General has
made a very clear statement today; the United Nations
underlines the obligation to protect civilians and abide
by international humanitarian law and human rights
law. That is especially the responsibility of the Syrian
Government, and its allies, as it continues with its
military action in Aleppo.
On 8 December, the Council shared its views on
two things: humanity first, and that we must advance
a political process based on resolution 2254 (2015).
It was meaningful that the Council could at least
share that view on Syria for the first time in a long
time. The core message was that there is no military
solution to the Syrian crisis. This long-lasting conflict
has deeply scarred the Syrian people, physically and
psychologically. And hatred provides grounds for
extremism, benefiting no one.
Today the Council must think of the Syrian people
above all. A prompt cessation of hostilities is needed,
together with humanitarian aid and the advancement
of the political process. We must demonstrate, not
with words but with action, that the international
community will not abandon the people of Syria even
in this dark hour.
Mr. Moustafa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): We have
held repeated meetings in the Security Council and the
General Assembly regarding the Syrian crisis during
the past few months to no avail, but rather generating
draft resolutions and statements and engaging in
endless arguments while the Syrian people continue
to suffer at the hands of such an inhumane and bloody
16-43608

13/12/2016

The situation in the Middle East

conflict. That conflict persists, although we all see that
it is possible to reach a solution, provided there are good
intentions. Time is being wasted and lives are being lost
in vain, despite a conclusive decision has been within
the reach of parties both directly and indirectly involved
in that merciless war, and despite the terms of reference
of the Council being clear regarding putting an end to
the bloodshed, especially through the implementation
of resolutions 2254 (2015) and 2268 (2016).
There were moments when we believed that the
contending parties would realize that the conflict was
futile and that it was time to face the facts. But, time
and again, we are confronted by the fact that the highly
political and military positions continued to exceed the
desire to achieve a settlement of the conflict and to ignore
the worst humanitarian situation in modern history,
overlooking the fact that Syrian territories had become
a breeding ground for terrorists and mercenaries, and
the fact that it was being torn apart by non-State actors,
on the one hand, and foreign intervention, on the
other. The existence of political rivalries continues to
delay embarking upon serious negotiations among the
Syrian parties. Divergent views on the history and an
evaluation of the reasons behing the Syrian crisis and
the factors fuelling it must not remain an obstacle for
the international community. We now have before us a
clear conflict, which is tantamount to a fully fledged
war, and it will not cease without a political solution.
In that regard, allow me to reiterate the elements
that we tried, during the past period, to reflect in
Egypt’s initiatives, whether through our communication
with the parties to the crisis, including the Syrian
opposition, or through our endeavours in the Security
Council, which we hoped would guide all the parties
with influence.
First, during the past six years, the Syrian people,
including children, mothers, the elderly and men, have
borne witness to something no human being should
ever have to, namely, displacement, murder and the
destruction of their future. Hence, taking into account
the humanitarian condition of all Syrians, regardless of
their affiliations, must remain the first priority for all
parties withuot exception, irrespective of the goals. The
achievement of democracy and liberty, on the one hand,
and fighting terrorism, on the other, are not pretexts to
tear apart a society, kill children or take vengeance on
certain sects through executions.

S/PV.7834

Secondly, the proliferation of terrorism in Syria is
not an illusion or an exaggeration, neither is it a subject
that can taken lightly in terms of its importance and its
impact on the events on the ground. Scores of thousands
of terrorists, mercenaries and extremist ideas are
proliferating with the support of outside forces. There
are groups and parties that have consciously chosen
to support extremism and terrorism politically and
operationally on the ground, including through direct
cooperation and political support to the Al-Nusra Front
and Fatah Al-Sham. It is high time that the Security
Council and its counter-terrorism bodies decisively
confront that phenomenon, especially through the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999), and the International Syria
Support Group.
Thirdly, the proxy war and foreign intervention
in Syria must cease. Syrians must regain their right
to shape their future and achieve their aspiration for
a united, stable and democratic country that observes
human rights and equality among various attitudes
and affiliations.
Fourthly, Syrian parties are still capable of
regaining control. I call upon all of them to assume
their responsibility vis-à-vis their people, who are being
killed and displaced daily, free of foreign intervention
or one party aspiring to gain control over the other.
There will be no winners or losers in Syria. Everybody
will lose.
Regardless of the level of the military solution on
the ground for one party or another, such a solution
will not be long-term and will not provide stability for
the Syrian people. The challenges facing it are greater
and more important than the battle results. Those
challenges include millions of internally displaced
people and refugees, hundreds of thousands of victims,
entire cities destroyed, an economic collapse and the
entrenchment of the long-term goals of foreign parties
that do not intersect with the interests of the Syrian
people. What is more grave than all of that is the fact
that the sectarian and ethnic conflict over the past few
years threatens any aspiration for coexistence.
I will therefore continue to repeat that the situation
in Syria will not be resolved through a military solution.
Facing such challenges requires a comprehensive and
balanced political process. I once again call upon
the Secretary-General, through his Special Envoy, to
start as quickly as possible to prepare for negotiations

16-4360813/17

S/PV.7834

The situation in the Middle East

between the Government and the broadest spectrum of
the opposition, without selectivity or accommodations
that jeopardize the independence of the Syrian solution,
and in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015) and on
the basis of the Geneva communiqué (see S/2012/522,
annex) in order to develop a transition on which
the Syrian parties can agree. I also call upon the
Secretary-General to resist any pressure that could
hamper the conduct of negotiations as soon as possible.
Furthermore, I call upon him to actually name any
party that is indeed impeding such negotiations. It is
high time for all parties to assume responsibility before
the Syrian people and before history.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would
like to join those who have taken the floor before me
in thanking the Secretary-General for his informative
briefing.
I would also like to reiterate the deep concern
of my delegation in the light of the proliferation and
intensification of military activity in eastern Aleppo,
which has cost the lives of many victims, including
numerous children, and has forced many people to flee.
My delegation calls for light to be shed on the atrocities
that have allegedly been committed, particularly the
death of 82 persons, as reported today.
We reiterate our condemnation of the ongoing
destruction of public infrastructure, such as markets,
schools and the water supply system, but also of medical
facilities, which is a flagrant violation of international
humanitarian law, international human rights law and
resolution 2286 (2016). That leads us to call once again
for a cessation of hostilities, namely, compliance with
the humanitarian pause, which would allow medical
and humanitarian personnel to assist those in need in
Aleppo. We also recall the responsibility incumbent
upon the warring parties, especially the Government,
in terms of respecting international humanitarian law
and human rights law.
The humanitarian aspect of the crisis is symptomatic
of the political crisis. We renew our calls to the members
of the International Syria Support Group, particularly
the co-Chairs, to redouble their efforts so as to breathe
new life into the negotiation of a cessation of hostilities,
which is crucial for humanitarian assistance to be
provided and for the relaunching of the political process.
On its part, the Security Council must continue to
play its role as the guarantor of international peace and
security in accordance with the Charter of the United
14/17

13/12/2016

Nations. We must also live up to our responsibilities in
the light of the ongoing deterioration of the situation on
the ground. In that regard, our efforts must be focused
on ending violence, and in particular on ensuring a
resumption of the cessation of hostilities across Syria
by implementing resolution 2268 (2016).
In addition to contributing to building pragmatic
responses to the catastrophic humanitarian situation in
the city of Aleppo, we believe that a global approach
to the Syrian crisis is more necessary than ever, which
involves in particular addressing political and security
aspects as part of a broader discussion on terrorism,
radicalization and the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction.
Mr. Suárez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The conflict affecting
Syria goes far beyond its own borders and into the
arena of public opinion, which is one of its most active
battlegrounds, as we have seen in this Chamber. It has
been emphatically stated that the humanitarian crisis in
Syria is the greatest disaster of the twenty-first century.
Some have asked where the moral compass is of those
who defend the Syrian Government, and in that regard
call for there to be no impunity for what is happening
on the ground.
Unfortunately, the moral voices among us seem to
ignore what their actions led to in Iraq and Libya before
the conflict in Syria. We ask: What can the international
community do so that those who are responsible for
fuelling such conflicts are held accountable before
justice, in order to ensure that the interventionist
agendas that have caused such chaos, which merit
condemnation, are not repeated?
Our country is alarmed by the humanitarian
situation in Syria, as we have expressed on many
occasions. The Syrian people are victims of an armed
conflict that has been fuelled by foreign intervention
and specific geopolitical agendas, which have violated
the sovereignty of that country.
In that perverse dynamic, we should be conscious
of the fact that terrorism is the principle cause of the
conflict and its negative impacts. The Al-Nusra Front
has positioned itself in the east of the city, which has
caused true chaos, establishing links with the so-called
moderate opposition. That alliance, instead of looking
out for the security of civilians in eastern Aleppo, has
prevented them from leaving the area, even through the
16-43608

13/12/2016

The situation in the Middle East

use of force, as has been stated by many of the displaced
persons who have been able to leave the area.
If the 9 September agreement between the Russian
Federation and the United States had been implemented,
we would be facing a more encouraging scenario.
The lack of willingness from the relevant players to
distinguish the so-called moderate opposition from
the threat of the Al-Nusra Front and its other allies is
the real reason for the collapse of negotiations. That,
together with the deliberate bombing by the global
coalition against the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria
(ISIS) on locations held by Syrian forces, has ended
up destroying all attempts to bring peace and stability
to Syria.
Our country is convinced that Syria has the right to
defend its sovereignty and territorial integrity against
attacks perpetrated by terrorist organizations. It is
important to point out that the Government of Syria is
making a very significant effort to counter the scourge
of terrorism in its territory. The recovery of every area
held by ISIS and Al-Qaida is a guarantee of peace and
stability in the region. Examples of that are the cities
that are under the control of the country’s authorities.
We regret that humanitarian suffering is being used
to advance the specific agendas of other countries,
which in no way benefit the people of Syria. We reiterate
that this humanitarian crisis, caused by more than five
years of war and fuelled from abroad, must be analysed
in a balanced manner. We insist that the humanitarian
issue requires an approach that is balanced, objective
and impartial.
Recently, we have noted that more than 10,000
civilians have fled from areas controlled by terrorists
in search of housing, food and medicines, which they
were deprived of by the Al-Nusra Front and its allies.
We therefore believe that the United Nations should
provide humanitarian assistance to those areas that
have been liberated from the terrorists, so as to provide
more support to the Syrian population. We also agree
with the idea that both humanitarian groups and the
International Syria Support Group, which is working
on a cessation of hostilities, should continue their
work, since the participation of a larger number of
neighbouring countries, as well as the international
community, in finding a solution for the Syrian people
would be tremendously helpful.
In conclusion, we reiterate that a political and
peaceful solution is the only possible option to achieve

S/PV.7834

peace and stability in Syria. We therefore need to support
the diplomatic efforts under way by the Special Envoy
and his attempts to relaunch peace talks in Geneva.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity.
This particular Security Council will go down in
history. Many questions will have to be answered. Did
Aleppo have to fall in the way in which it has fallen?
Why could we not prevent the massacres? Why were we
not able to organize the evacuation of all the civilians
from eastern Aleppo after months of siege? This is an
emergency meeting of the Security Council, and as
such my statement will be straightforward.
I entirely endorse the call made by the SecretaryGeneral, and I call upon the Syrian Government and
on those that have acknowledged an influence over the
parties to the conflict to do all they can to facilitate
an agreement providing for the urgent evacuation of
civilians, the withdrawal of the few remaining fighters,
urgent access for humanitarian aid, as well as the
provision of medical assistance to the population.
Aleppo need not fall this way. It is not necessary
that another sombre page of history be written today.
Spain will continue to work closely with New Zealand
and with Egypt to avoid this.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to make a brief but important
clarification in response to the President’s appeal:
maybe I was not correctly interpreted, or maybe I did
not say clearly enough what I meant in my statement.
The fact is that the agreement you referred to, that
you called for — our removal of the fighters — was
achieved a few hours ago, and it is being implemented.
The fighters, together with families and the wounded,
are leaving in the directions of their choosing, including
towards Idlib.
Over the past hour we have received information that
the military activities in eastern Aleppo have stopped.
There is no question about the cessation of hostilities or
humanitarian operations: the Syrian Government has
established control over eastern Aleppo and now the
time has come for practical humanitarian intitiatives.

16-4360815/17

S/PV.7834

The situation in the Middle East

The population that remains there should not need to
leave, although some civilians may indeed wish to leave
that destroyed city. But military actions have stopped.
This very difficult chapter relating to the situation in
eastern Aleppo has now ended. Let us hope that this will
indeed be a precondition for establishing the political
efforts to relaunch negotiations, as Mr. De Mistura
said recently. There should be large-scale humanitarian
support to eastern Aleppo, to those people who left the
city and those who remain there. Preconditions should
be established so that those who left the city will be
able to return to their homes as soon as possible.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): There is a quote by the Russian author Tolstoy
that applies to some people present in this Chamber:
“When judging other people’s shortcomings, remember
your own.” As to Plato, he had this beautiful quote too:
”The bigger the lie, the easier it is to believe.”
I understood from my American representative
colleague that it was the Syrian Government that
committed massacres and crimes of genocide against
humanity on behalf of her country’s successive
Governments, in Viet Nam, Korea, Palestine, Iraq,
Libya, Nicaragua, Rwanda, the Great Lakes region,
Grenada, Cuba and Yugoslavia. Therefore, I start my
statement by declaring my Government guiltless of
these massacres. Perhaps we will publish a White Book
to clarify our position on these accusations.
Certain members of the Security Council have,
since the beginning of the terrorist war imposed on
Syria, continually sponsored draft resolutions and
called for emergency meetings, as is the case today, on
the basis of fabricated information, false reports and
false testimony. Such briefings are called every time
the Syrian Army and its allies make headway against
the armed terrorist groups that are supported by the
very Governments of these States. These are terrorist
groups and not civilians.
The situation remains the same today. The highest
official of the Organization, the Secretary-General,
who has only two and a half weeks left before the end
of his mandate, rushed in to make a statement on the
situation in the city of Aleppo on the basis of unverified
information, as noted in his own statement: “The United
Nations is unable to independently verify these reports.”
16/17

13/12/2016

If the Secretary-General is unable to verify these
reports, why then has he published them in an official
statement in order to denigrate the Syrian Government
and its allies in their fight against terrorism?
I think we have every right to also ask how the
United Nations, which is supposedly a source of
credible information, can publish statements and make
judgments on the basis of dubious sources. It can do so
only if the goal of some parties in the Organization is to
serve the agendas of certain States by militating against
the Syrian Government and its allies and providing
political and media coverage to the terrorist groups
working under their orders.
I would like to reiterate once again to the President,
the Security Council members and those States that
still uphold and respect international law, the Charter
of the United Nations and the relevant Security Council
resolutions on combating terrorism, that the actions of
the Syrian Government and its allies in Aleppo and other
Syrian cities are the expression of the constitutional
and legal obligation of every Government to protect
its citizens against terrorism. I deny categorically all
fabricated reports used by the representatives of the
United States, France and Britain, as well as their
partners, to claim that the Syrian Government is
targeting its citizens in Aleppo. I reiterate that all the
actions of the Syrian Government since the start of
operations in Aleppo, whether in opening safe crossing
points — including for armed people — securing shelter
centres, issuing amnesty decisions and providing all
forms of medical assistance and food, have had the
overarching goal of protecting civilians and saving
their lives.
Allow me at this stage to show the Council some
photos. This is what the Syrian army is doing in
Aleppo. Here is a picture of a Syrian soldier turning
his body into a bridge to help a woman get out of the
car that took her out of eastern Aleppo. This is what the
Syrian army does. Here is another soldier carrying on
his shoulders a civilian woman who was trying to flee
from eastern Aleppo, where the terrorists hold sway.
Here are Syrian soldiers arranging the distribution of
humanitarian assistance to civilians emerging from
eastern Aleppo. I have many photos, but I know that
time is short.
It is astounding that all of the reports of the
Security Council have referred to the presence of tens
of thousands of mercenary foreign terrorists in Syria
16-43608

13/12/2016

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.7834

from more than 100 States, as I thank my colleague
the Permanent Representative of Egypt for mentioning.
However, some, in their effort to protect their terrorists,
typically deny the Syrian Government’s obligation to
verify the identity of certain people accompanying
civilians as they leave certain Aleppo neighbourhoods
that had been controlled by terrorists, with a view to
preventing them from sneaking into and resuming their
terrorist acts in Syrian territories and maybe thereafter
the territories of any country represented here. I have
dozens of photos showing these terrorists who chopped
off heads and ate human livers as they sought to flee
eastern Aleppo alongside civilians, dressed as women.
These heroes were wearing women’s clothes to flee with
civilians from eastern Aleppo, but they were arrested
by the Syrian army.

civilians, the Syrian army and infrastructure — had not
they been continuously supplied with various types of
weapons and protection by the sponsors of terrorism,
some of whom are from States inside the Council? That
is the question.

It is the height of hypocrisy to pursue allegations
against the Syrian Government based on the reports
and testimony approved only by the representatives of
those who convened this meeting and their intelligence
services, while at the same time they turn a deaf ear
and blind eye to accounts of our people in the city of
Aleppo who were liberated by the Syrian army and its
allies. Their testimony of their suffering at the hands
of armed terrorist groups, led by foreign terrorist who
do not speak Arabic, has been broadcast not only by
Syrian but also by foreign news agencies. It is also
the height of hypocrisy for the representatives of
these States to insist, based on the same reports, that
the Syrian Government is besieging its people and
obstructing their access to food and medicine, whereas
those same States continue to deny the fact that dozens
of warehouses that were under the control of armed
terrorist groups in Aleppo were full of all kinds of
medical and food supplies prohibited to civilians.

Finally, I was surprised to hear my colleague, the
British Ambassador, say that he does not believe that the
Syrian Government is resisting terrorism in Aleppo. He
is the same Permanent Representative who, alongside
his colleagues, has participated in the adoption of
16 resolutions on Syria, 8 of them on counter-terrorism.
All of those resolutions were adopted because of the
Syrian crisis., and all of them provide for the right of
the Syrian Government and the participation of other
Member States to fight terrorism in Syria and Iraq. So
how can he then deny the presence of terrorism in Syria
while there are eight resolutions on counter-terrorism
that his own country voted in favour of?

Is it reasonable for any reasonable person to believe
for a moment that dozens of thousands of terrorist
fighting the Syrian army in Aleppo could, for more
than four years, maintain their terror — targeting

I strongly and totally reject any fabricated lies,
allegations and hallucinations put forward by certain
Council members in their statements concerning acts
of revenge, summary executions and terror against
civilians. As to pursuing and targeting terrorists, that
lies at the very heart of the constitutional prerogatives
of the Syrian Government and of those Governments
that have acted likewise in the streets of Nice, Paris,
London, Boston, Oklahoma, North Carolina, Cairo,
Sinai, Tunis, Bombay, Nigeria, Kenya and Tanzania.

To conclude, if I may make a correction, the
question has been raised to as whether we should have
waited for the fall of Aleppo. Allow me to make a simple
correction. Aleppo did not fall. It is a Syrian city that
has been liberated from terrorism and its sponsors, who
toyed with safety and security of its population. Aleppo
has returned to the bosom of the State and the bosom of
the homeland. It did not fall.
The meeting rose at 1.55 p.m.

16-4360817/17
