S/2017/871

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
17 October 2017
English
Original: French

Letter dated 16 October 2017 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General
Further to the letter dated 15 September 2017 from the Permanent
Representative of Ethiopia, I have the honour to inform you that the members of the
Security Council have agreed to send a mission to the Sahel region from 19 to
22 October 2017. They also agreed on the terms of reference of the mission (see
annex).
I will be leading the mission together with Ambassador Tekeda Alemu
(Ethiopia) and Ambassador Sebastiano Cardi (Italy).
Following consultations with Council members, it has been agreed that the
composition of the mission will be as follows:
Ambassador Sacha Sergio Llorentty Soliz (Bolivia)
Mr. Zhang Dianbin (China)
Mr. Seif Alla Youssef Kandeel (Egypt)
Ambassador Tekeda Alemu (Ethiopia)
Ambassador François Delattre (France)
Ambassador Sebastiano Cardi (Italy)
Ambassador Yasuhisa Kawamura (Japan)
Mr. Didar Temenov (Kazakhstan)
Mr. Petr Iliichev (Russian Federation)
Mr. Abdoulaye Barro (Senegal)
Ambassador Olof Skoog (Sweden)
Mr. Eduard Fesko (Ukraine)
Ambassador Jonathan Guy Allen (United Kingdom)
Ms. Amy Noel Tachco (United States)
Ambassador Luis Bermúdez (Uruguay)
I should be grateful if you could have this letter and its annex circulated as a
document of the Security Council.
(Signed) François Delattre
President of the Security Council

17-18316 (E)

181017

*1718316*

181017

S/2017/871

Annex
Terms of reference of the Security Council mission to the Sahel region
1.
The Security Council will carry out a mission to the Sahel region through
visits to Mali, Mauritania and Burkina Faso.
2.
The mission will be carried out within the framework of Security Council
resolutions 2359 (2017), 2364 (2017) and 2374 (2017) and in accordance with
information given in the Press Statement issued as SC/12955 (2017).
3.

The mission will be co-led by France, Ethiopia and Italy.

4.

The objectives of the mission are as follows:

Group of Five Sahel States
(a) To assess the situation in the Group of Five Sahel States, including
regarding the level and the nature of the threat posed by terrorism and transnational
organized crime (including arms and drug trafficking, the smuggling of migrants,
trafficking in persons), and explore means to provide support in confronting these
threats on national, sub-regional and regional levels;
(b) To recognize the determination and ownership of the Governments of the
G5 Sahel States to address the impact of terrorism and transnational organized
crime, including through the conduct of cross-border joint military counter-terrorist
operations, to welcome the deployment of the G5 Sahel Joint Force (FC -G5S)
throughout the territories of its contributing countries, with a view t o restoring
peace and security in the Sahel region, and to assess its level of operationalization.
(c) To underline the need for the rapid and effective implementation of
regional strategies encompassing security, governance, development, human rights
and humanitarian issues, such as the United Nations integrated strategy for the
Sahel.
(d) To underline the need for the operations of the FC -G5S to be conducted
in full compliance with international law, including international humanitarian law,
human rights law and refugee law, as applicable, and for the FC -G5S to take active
steps to minimize the risk of harm to civilians in all areas of operation, and to
further underline that a gender perspective should be taken into account in
implementing all aspects of the strategic concept of operations of the FC-G5S.
(e) To assess the observations and recommendations contained in the written
report of the Secretary General requested by resolution 2359, and to discuss them
with the various interlocutors of the Security Council.
(f) To prepare for the meeting of the Security Council aimed at reviewing
the deployment of the FC-G5S four months after the adoption of resolution 2359
(2017).
In this connection, the Security Council will suggest to hold a meeting with
representatives of the Group of Five Sahel States, which will constitute an
opportunity to exchange views with all those States, including those which are not
to be visited during this mission.
Implementation of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali
(g) To underline that lasting peace and security in the Sahel region will not
be achieved without a full, effective and inclusive implementation of the
Agreement.
2/3

17-18316

S/2017/871

(h) To urge the parties to accelerate the implementation of the Agreement,
more than two years after its signing.
(i)

To underline the establishment of a new sanctions regime concerning

Mali.
(j) To call on the members of the Agreement Monitoring Committee and
other relevant international partners to sustain their support to the implementation
of the Agreement.
5.
The mission will seek to achieve these objectives through meetings with,
among others:
Mali
– The Government of Mali
– The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
(MINUSMA)
– Representatives from international security presences in Mali (including the
Group of Five Sahel Joint Force (FC-G5S), European Union missions and
French forces)
– Representatives from actors involved in the implementation of the peace and
reconciliation agreement in Mali, including the parties and members of the
international mediation
Mauritania
– The Government of Mauritania
– The permanent secretary of the Group of Five Sahel States
Burkina Faso
– The Government of Burkina Faso
6.
The mission will also seek to achieve its objectives through: (a) a visit to the
FC-G5S headquarters in Sévaré, Mali, which will include a briefing from the
command of the joint force on its activities; (b) interaction wit h members of civil
society and non-governmental organizations, including women’s organizations and
youth organizations.
7.
The mission will also hold a commemoration of the terrorist attack which took
place in Ouagadougou on the night of 13 August 2017 and pay tribute to the
peacekeepers that lost their lives while serving under MINUSMA mandate.
8.
The mission will seek to implement lessons learned from previous Security
Council missions, including regarding modalities of association of a representative
from the African Union.

17-18316

3/3
