United Nations

A/RES/62/37

General Assembly

Distr.: General
10 January 2008

Sixty-second session
Agenda item 98

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 5 December 2007
[on the report of the First Committee (A/62/391)]

62/37. Renewed determination towards the total elimination of
nuclear weapons
The General Assembly,
Recalling the need for all States to take further practical steps and effective
measures towards the total elimination of nuclear weapons, with a view to achieving
a peaceful and safe world free of nuclear weapons, and renewing the determination
to do so,
Noting that the ultimate objective of the efforts of States in the disarmament
process is general and complete disarmament under strict and effective international
control,
Recalling its resolution 61/74 of 6 December 2006,
Convinced that every effort should be made to avoid nuclear war and nuclear
terrorism,
Reaffirming the crucial importance of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons 1 as the cornerstone of the international nuclear disarmament and
non-proliferation regime, and expressing regret over the lack of agreement on
substantive issues at the Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, as well as over the elimination of references
to nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation in the World Summit Outcome in
2005, 2 the year of the sixtieth anniversary of the atomic bombings in Hiroshima and
Nagasaki, Japan,
Recalling the decisions and the resolution of the 1995 Review and Extension
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons 3 and the Final Document of the 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to
the Treaty, 4
_______________
1

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.
See resolution 60/1.
3
See 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, Part I (NPT/CONF.1995/32 (Part I) and Corr.2), annex.
4
2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final
Document, vols. I–III (NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Parts I–IV)).
2

07-46599

A/RES/62/37

Recognizing that the enhancement of international peace and security and the
promotion of nuclear disarmament are mutually reinforcing,
Reaffirming that further advancement in nuclear disarmament will contribute
to consolidating the international regime for nuclear non-proliferation and thereby
ensuring international peace and security,
Expressing deep concern regarding the growing dangers posed by the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, inter alia, nuclear weapons, including
that caused by proliferation networks,
Recognizing the importance of implementing Security Council resolution
1718 (2006) of 14 October 2006 with regard to the nuclear test proclaimed by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea on 9 October 2006, while welcoming the
recent progress achieved by the Six-Party Talks,
Reaffirms the importance of all States parties to the Treaty on the
1.
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons1 complying with their obligations under all
the articles of the Treaty;
2.
Stresses the importance of an effective Treaty review process, welcoming
a successful start of the 2010 review process with the first session of the Preparatory
Committee in 2007, and calls upon all States parties to the Treaty to work together
to ensure that the second session of the Preparatory Committee, in 2008, is held
constructively, in order to facilitate the successful outcome of the 2010 Review
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons;
Reaffirms the importance of the universality of the Treaty, and calls upon
3.
States not parties to the Treaty to accede to it as non-nuclear-weapon States without
delay and without conditions, and pending their accession to refrain from acts that
would defeat the objective and purpose of the Treaty as well as to take practical
steps in support of the Treaty;
Encourages further steps leading to nuclear disarmament, to which all
4.
States parties to the Treaty are committed under article VI of the Treaty, including
deeper reductions in all types of nuclear weapons, and emphasizes the importance of
applying irreversibility and verifiability, as well as increased transparency in a way
that promotes international stability and undiminished security for all, in the process
of working towards the elimination of nuclear weapons;
Encourages the Russian Federation and the United States of America to
5.
implement fully the Treaty on Strategic Offensive Reductions, 5 which should serve
as a step for further nuclear disarmament, and to undertake nuclear arms reductions
beyond those provided for by the Treaty, while welcoming the progress made by
nuclear-weapon States, including the Russian Federation and the United States of
America, on nuclear arms reductions;
Encourages States to continue to pursue efforts, within the framework of
6.
international cooperation, contributing to the reduction of nuclear-weapons-related
materials;

_______________
5

2

See CD/1674.

A/RES/62/37

7.
Calls for the nuclear-weapon States to further reduce the operational
status of nuclear weapons systems in ways that promote international stability and
security;
Stresses the necessity of a diminishing role for nuclear weapons in
8.
security policies to minimize the risk that these weapons will ever be used and to
facilitate the process of their total elimination, in a way that promotes international
stability and based on the principle of undiminished security for all;
Urges all States that have not yet done so to sign and ratify the
9.
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty 6 at the earliest opportunity with a view to
its early entry into force, stresses the importance of maintaining existing
moratoriums on nuclear-weapon test explosions pending the entry into force of the
Treaty, and reaffirms the importance of the continued development of the Treaty
verification regime, including the international monitoring system, which will be
required to provide assurance of compliance with the Treaty;
10. Calls upon the Conference on Disarmament to immediately resume its
substantive work to its fullest, considering the developments of this year in the
Conference;
11. Emphasizes the importance of the immediate commencement of
negotiations on a fissile material cut-off treaty and its early conclusion, and calls
upon all nuclear-weapon States and States not parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons to declare moratoriums on the production of
fissile material for any nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices pending
the entry into force of the Treaty;
12. Calls upon all States to redouble their efforts to prevent and curb the
proliferation of nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction and their means of
delivery;
13. Stresses the importance of further efforts for non-proliferation, including
the universalization of the International Atomic Energy Agency comprehensive
safeguards agreements and Model Protocol Additional to the Agreement(s) between
State(s) and the International Atomic Energy Agency for the Application of
Safeguards approved by the Board of Governors of the International Atomic Energy
Agency on 15 May 1997 7 and the full implementation of relevant Security Council
resolutions including resolution 1540 (2004) of 28 April 2004;
14. Encourages all States to undertake concrete activities to implement, as
appropriate, the recommendations contained in the report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations study on disarmament and non-proliferation education,
submitted to the General Assembly at its fifty-seventh session, 8 and to voluntarily
share information on efforts they have been undertaking to that end;
15. Encourages the constructive role played by civil society in promoting
nuclear non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament.
61st plenary meeting
5 December 2007

_______________
6

See resolution 50/245.
International Atomic Energy Agency, INFCIRC/540 (Corrected).
8
A/57/124.
7

3
