A /77/PV.54

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-seventh session

54th plenary meeting

Thursday, 15 December 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kőrösi  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Hungary)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Wallace
(Jamaica), Vice-President, took the Chair.

I am happy to report that on the last day of the
work of the Third Committee, the Chair rewarded all
representatives with chocolate for good behaviour.

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.

The reports, contained in documents A/77/455
to A/77/468, include the texts of draft proposals
recommended to the General Assembly for adoption.
For the convenience of delegations, the Secretariat
has issued document A/C.3/77/INF/1, which contains
a checklist of actions taken on the draft proposals
contained in the reports before the Assembly.

Reports of the Third Committee
The Acting President: The General Assembly will
consider the reports of the Third Committee on agenda
items 25, 26, 57, 63 to 68, 109 to 111, 124 and 139.
I now request the Rapporteur of the Committee,
Ms. Shalini Gungaram of Mauritius, to introduce the
reports of the Committee in one intervention.
Ms. Gungaram (Mauritius), Rapporteur of the
Third Committee: It is an honour for me to introduce
today to the General Assembly the reports of the Third
Committee on the agenda items allocated to it by the
Assembly at its seventy-seventh session, items 25, 26,
57, 63 to 68, 109 to 111, 124 and 139.
During the main part of the seventy-seventh session
of the General Assembly, the Third Committee held 55
plenary meetings and heard introductory statements
from 71 special procedures mandate-holders, chairs of
treaty bodies and other experts and 13 senior United
Nations officials, as well as convening interactive
dialogues and general discussions on the agenda items.
A total of 217 informal consultations took place in rooms
allocated by the Secretariat for the negotiations of draft
proposals. The Committee adopted 51 draft resolutions,
16 of them by recorded vote, and one draft decision.

Under agenda item 25, “Social development”, and its
sub-items (a) to (c), the Third Committee recommends,
in paragraph 32 of document A/77/455, the adoption of
five draft resolutions.
Under agenda item 26, “Advancement of women”,
the Third Committee recommends, in paragraph
61 of document A/77/456, the adoption of four
draft resolutions.
Under agenda item 57, “Report of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, questions
relating to refugees, returnees and displaced persons
and humanitarian questions”, the Third Committee
recommends, in paragraph 20 of document A/77/457,
the adoption of three draft resolutions.
Under agenda item 63, “Report of the Human
Rights Council”, the Third Committee recommends,
in paragraph 12 of document A/77/458, the adoption of
one draft resolution.
Under agenda item 64, “Promotion and protection
of the rights of children”, and its sub-items (a) and

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-75309 (E)

*2275309*

A/77/PV.54

(b), the Third Committee recommends, in paragraph
23 of document A/77/459, the adoption of two
draft resolutions.
Under agenda item 65, “Rights of indigenous
peoples”, and its sub-items (a) and (b), the Third
Committee recommends, in paragraph 10 of document
A/77/460, the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under agenda item 66, “Elimination of racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance”, and its sub-items (a) and (b), the Third
Committee recommends, in paragraph 31 of document
A/77/461, the adoption of two draft resolutions.
Under agenda item 67, “Right of peoples to selfdetermination”, the Third Committee recommends, in
paragraph 35 of document A/77/462, the adoption of
three draft resolutions.
Under the chapeau of agenda item 68, “Promotion
and protection of human rights”, the Third Committee
wishes to advise the Assembly that no action was
required under the item.
Under sub-item (a) of agenda item 68,
“Implementation of human rights instruments”, the
Third Committee recommends, in paragraph 14
of document A/77/463/Add.1, the adoption of two
draft resolutions.
Under sub-item (b) of agenda item 68, “Human
rights questions, including alternative approaches for
improving the effective enjoyment of human rights
and fundamental freedoms”, the Third Committee
recommends, in paragraph 87 of document A/77/463/
Add.2, the adoption of 15 draft resolutions.
Under sub-item (c) of agenda item 68, “Human
rights situations and reports of special rapporteurs and
representatives”, the Third Committee recommends, in
paragraph 29 of document A/77/463/Add.3, the adoption
of five draft resolutions.

15/12/2022

Under agenda item 110, “Countering the use of
information and communications technologies for
criminal purposes”, the Third Committee wishes to
advise the Assembly that no action was required under
the item.
Under agenda item 111, “International drug
control”, the Third Committee recommends, in
paragraph 12 of document A/77/466, the adoption of
one draft resolution.
Under agenda item 124, “Revitalization of the
work of the General Assembly”, the Third Committee
recommends, in paragraph 8 of document A/77/467, the
adoption of one draft decision.
Finally, under agenda item 139, “Programme
planning”, the Third Committee wishes to advise the
Assembly that no action was required under the item.
I would like to take this opportunity to
acknowledge the commendable leadership of our
Chair, His Excellency Mr. José Alfonso Blanco Conde,
Permanent Representative of the Dominican Republic
to the United Nations. Ambassador Blanco ensured that
each member of the Bureau had an equal voice and tried
his best to make sure that each of us could make the
most of the opportunity that we were given to serve
on the Bureau. I remember the disappointment on his
face the first day we met, when he was told that the
Rapporteur would not chair any of the meetings of the
Committee, because that was not my role. But he would
not give up. He tried again to put forward the idea that
the Rapporteur could also chair one of the meetings.
And he was just as disappointed when he was told for
a second time that this was not the practice. He led
his Bureau with just the right dose of energy and zen
attitude and always made sure that he had time for us,
despite his very busy schedule.

Under sub-item (d) of agenda item 68,
“Comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to
the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action”, the
Third Committee wishes to advise the Assembly that
no action was required under the sub-item.

I wish to thank my fellow Bureau members,
the Vice-Chairs Ms. Almaha Mubarak Al-Thani of
Qatar, Ms. Marta Paulina Kaczmarska of Poland and
Mr. Stefano Venancio Guerra of Portugal for being
such exceptional team players. They represented their
respective groups with the utmost integrity while
ensuring that our discussions were always conducted
with mutual respect, compassion and composure.

Under agenda item 109, “Crime prevention and
criminal justice”, the Third Committee recommends,
in paragraph 31 of document A/77/464, the adoption of
seven draft resolutions.

I would also like to thank Ms. Luz del Carmen
Andújar, from the Permanent Mission of the Dominican
Republic, for all the hard work she put in the work
of the Bureau while she assisted the Chair. I would

2/31

22-75309

15/12/2022

further like to thank, on behalf of the Bureau, Mr. Ziad
Mahmassani, the Secretary of the Committee, Ms. Jori
Joergensen, Ms. Mina Nozawa, Ms. Catalina de Leon,
Mr. Tomas Casas and Mr. Paolo Dua for being with
us on a 24/7 basis throughout the past few months. I
am very grateful to Mr. Mahmassani’s able team from
the Department for General Assembly and Conference
Management for the support and guidance provided
to the Bureau and to delegations, as well as the other
offices in the Secretariat that supported the work of
the Committee.
The Acting President: I thank the Rapporteur of
the Committee.
The positions of delegations regarding the
recommendations of the Committee have been made
clear in the Committee and are reflected in the relevant
official records. If there is no proposal under rule 66 of
the rules of procedure, I shall therefore take it that the
General Assembly decides not to discuss the reports of
the Committee that are before the Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Statements will therefore
be limited to explanations of vote. I would like to
remind members that in accordance with General
Assembly decision 34/401, a delegation should, as far as
possible, explain its vote or position only once, that is,
either in the Committee or in plenary meeting, unless
that delegation’s vote in plenary meeting is different
from its vote in the Committee, and that explanations of
vote or position are limited to 10 minutes and should be
made by delegations from their seats. When there are
multiple proposals under an agenda item, statements in
explanation of vote before the vote on any or all of them
should be made in one intervention, followed by action
on all of them, one by one. After that, there will be an
opportunity for statements in explanation of vote after
the vote on any or all of them in one intervention.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the
Committee, I would like to advise representatives that
we will proceed to take decisions in the same manner
as was done in the Committee, unless the Secretariat is
notified otherwise in advance. That means that where
recorded votes were taken, we will do the same. I also
hope that we may proceed to adopt without a vote
those recommendations that were adopted without
a vote in the Committee. The results of the votes

A/77/PV.54

will be uploaded on the e-deleGATE portal, under
“Plenary Announcements”.
I would like to draw the attention of members to
a note by the Secretariat entitled “List of proposals
contained in the reports of the Third Committee for
consideration by the General Assembly”, which has
been issued as document A/C.3/77/INF/1. Members
are reminded that additional sponsors are no longer
accepted now that draft resolutions and decisions have
been adopted in the Committee. Any clarification
about sponsorship of the Committee reports should be
addressed to the Secretary of the Committee.
Furthermore, any corrections to the voting
intentions of delegations after the voting has concluded
on a proposal should be addressed directly to the
Secretariat after the meeting. I count on members’
cooperation in avoiding any interruptions to our
proceedings in that regard.
Agenda item 25
Social development
(a) Implementation of the outcome of the World
Summit for Social Development and of the
twenty-fourth special session of the General
Assembly
(b) Social development, including questions
relating to the world social situation and to
youth, ageing, persons with disabilities and the
family
(c) Literacy for life: shaping future agendas
Report of the Third Committee (A/77/455)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
five draft resolutions recommended by the Committee
in paragraph 32 of its report.
We will now take a decision on draft resolutions I
to V, one by one.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Implementation of the
outcome of the World Summit for Social Development
and of the twenty-fourth special session of the General
Assembly”. The Committee adopted draft resolution I
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 77/188).

22-753093/31

A/77/PV.54

The Acting President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Inclusive development for and with persons with
disabilities”. The Committee adopted draft resolution II
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 77/189).
The Acting President: Draft resolution III is
entitled “Follow-up to the Second World Assembly on
Ageing”. The Committee adopted draft resolution III
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution 77/190).
The Acting President: Draft resolution IV is
entitled “Preparations for and observance of the
thirtieth anniversary of the International Year of the
Family”. The Committee adopted draft resolution IV
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution 77/191).
The Acting President: Draft resolution V is
entitled “Literacy for life: shaping future agendas”. The
Committee adopted draft resolution V without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution V was adopted (resolution 77/192).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 25 and its sub-items (a)
to (c)?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 26
Advancement of women
Report of the Third Committee (A/77/456)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
four draft resolutions recommended by the Committee
in paragraph 61 of its report.
We will now take a decision on draft resolutions I
to IV, one by one.
We now turn to draft resolution I entitled
“Intensification of efforts to prevent and eliminate
all forms of violence against women and girls: gender
stereotypes and negative social norms”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
4/31

15/12/2022

A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Angola, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark,
Djibouti,
Dominica,
Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Türkiye, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Iran (Islamic Republic of)
22-75309

15/12/2022

A/77/PV.54

Abstaining:
Algeria, Belarus, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Gabon, Libya, Nicaragua, Russian
Federation, Syrian Arab Republic
Draft resolution I was adopted by 170 votes to 1,
with 8 abstentions (resolution 77/193).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Vanuatu informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour; the delegation of the Islamic Republic of
Iran informed the Secretariat that it had intended
to abstain.]
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Trafficking in women and girls”. The Committee
adopted draft resolution II without a vote. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 77/194).
The Acting President: Draft resolution III is
entitled “Intensifying global efforts for the elimination
of female genital mutilation”. The Committee adopted
draft resolution III without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution III
(resolution 77/195).

was

adopted

The Acting President: Draft resolution IV is
entitled “Intensification of efforts to end obstetric
fistula”. The Committee adopted draft resolution IV
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution 77/196).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 26?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 57
Report of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, questions relating to refugees,
returnees and displaced persons and humanitarian
questions
Report of the Third Committee (A/77/457)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
three draft resolutions recommended by the Committee
in paragraph 20 of its report.

We will now take a decision on draft resolutions I
to III, one by one.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Enlargement of the
Executive Committee of the Programme of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees”. The
Committee adopted draft resolution I without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 77/197).
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees”. The Committee adopted draft resolution II
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 77/198).
The Acting President: Draft resolution III
is entitled “Assistance to refugees, returnees and
displaced persons in Africa”. The Committee adopted
draft resolution III without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution III
(resolution 77/199).

was

adopted

The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 57?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 63
Report of the Human Rights Council
Report of the Third Committee (A/77/458)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Committee in
paragraph 12 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African

22-753095/31

A/77/PV.54

Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon,
Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kiribati,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Belarus, Israel, Nicaragua
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Hungary, Iceland, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lesotho,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
North Macedonia, Norway, Papua New Guinea,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic
of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, San
Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Türkiye, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America
The draft resolution was adopted by 115 votes to 3,
with 59 abstentions (resolution 77/200).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Vanuatu informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
6/31

15/12/2022

The Acting President: I shall now give the floor
to those delegations wishing to speak in explanation of
vote after the voting.
Mr. Poveda Britto (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Aware of the growing
importance of this body at the current juncture in the
context of the great global challenges, including postpandemic reconstruction, the increasing politicization
of human rights and the negative impact of unilateral
coercive measures on human rights for more than
a third of humankind, the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela thanks the African Group for introducing
the draft resolution on the 2022 report of the Human
Rights Council.
As a State member of the Human Rights Council
over the last three years, and aware of the multiple threats
and interests surrounding it, and based on the need for
this body to work in a balanced, truly democratic and
impartial manner in a spirit of cooperation and dialogue
with States, Venezuela has made a contribution that is
directed towards continuing to strengthen the Council’s
institutional framework, as well as that of the other
mechanisms of the universal system.
That is why Venezuela wishes to reiterate that it
disassociates itself from and rejects the imposition
of instruments and mechanisms established without
the consent of the Venezuelan State, such as the
one contained in document A/HRC/51/29, which
manipulates and politicizes human rights and gives
rise to inconsistencies without any methodological
rigour and even using tertiary sources, for the purposes
of building up an agenda of internal destabilization
that has been clearly and widely rejected by both the
Venezuelan people and the international community.
Finally, Venezuela reiterates its commitment to
the promotion and protection of human rights, and
reaffirms that it will continue to work towards a
progressive and strong United Nations system, without
distinction as to the generations, in line with the
principles of universality, objectivity, non-politicization
and non-selectivity, and based on transparent dialogue
and cooperation, as seen in the strengthening of the
relationship with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, and other bodies of
the system and as part of its efforts to continue raising
awareness about the principles and purposes of the
United Nations Charter as a guarantee of peace.
22-75309

15/12/2022

The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 63?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 64
Promotion and protection of the rights of children
(a) Promotion and protection of the rights of
children
(b) Follow-up to the outcome of the special session
on children
Report of the Third Committee (A/77/459)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
two draft resolutions recommended by the Committee
in paragraph 23 of its report.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution I and II, one by one.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Protecting children
from bullying”. The Committee adopted draft resolution
I without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 77/201).
The Acting President: Draft resolution II entitled
“Child, early and forced marriage”. The Committee
adopted draft resolution II without a vote. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 77/202).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-items (a) and (b) of agenda item 64
and of agenda item 64 as a whole?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 65
Rights of Indigenous Peoples
(a) Rights of indigenous peoples
(b) Follow-up to the outcome document of the highlevel plenary meeting of the General Assembly

A/77/PV.54

known as the World Conference on Indigenous
Peoples
Report of the Third Committee (A/77/460)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Committee in
paragraph 10 of its report.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution
(resolution 77/203).

was

adopted

The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 65 and its sub-items (a)
and (b)?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 66
Elimination of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance
(a) Elimination of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance
(b) Comprehensive implementation of and followup to the Durban Declaration and Programme
of Action
Report of the Third Committee (A/77/461)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
two draft resolutions recommended by the Committee
in paragraph 31 of its report.
I now give the floor to the representative of Cuba,
who wishes to speak in explanation of vote before
the voting.
Mr. González Behmaras (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation wishes to make an explanation of vote
before the voting in relation to the draft resolution I,
entitled “Combating glorification of Nazism, neoNazism and other practices that contribute to fuelling
contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance”.
Cuba is fully committed to the fight against all forms
and manifestations of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia, and related forms of intolerance. Nazism

22-753097/31

A/77/PV.54

and neo-Nazism are no exception. They are perhaps the
most extreme manifestations of supremacist theories
that are empirically false, morally reprehensible and
socially dangerous. They have already caused the loss
of millions of lives. We must ensure that these ideas
do not continue to spread, and we must delegitimize
the rhetoric of hate, intolerance and discrimination that
characterize such ideologies. In some countries we have
seen the spread of such ideas, including inside political
apparatuses and bodies, which is even more concerning.
The voice of Cuba will always be on the side of those
who defend the full equality of all human beings and
promote tolerance and respect for the cultural diversity
of our countries. Nothing justifies the promotion of
racist or xenophobic ideologies. That is why for many
years my delegation has been the main cosponsor of the
draft resolution entitled “Combating glorification of
Nazism, neo-Nazism and other practices that contribute
to fuelling contemporary forms of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance”,
and has championed it by voting for its adoption.
However, my delegation must announce that it
wishes to disassociate itself from the new paragraph
3, introduced in the Third Committee as a result of
an amendment that sparked division and weakens
consensus in the efforts against Nazism and neoNazism. The amendment seeks to focus on a specific
context, notwithstanding the more thematic nature of
the text. Awareness of Nazism and neo-Nazism could
be raised in other contexts, such as in the United
States, where hate acts have occurred against ethnic
and religious minorities, an expression of Nazism and
neo-Nazism that endures. My delegation therefore
does not consider paragraph 3 of the draft resolution
as agreed language and will not be bound by it or its
potential implications.
In conclusion, I reiterate Cuba’s commitment to the
eradication of all forms of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia, and related intolerance, using as a compass
the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action,
which remains in full force and effect.
The Acting President: We will now take a decision
on draft resolutions I and II, one by one.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Combating
glorification of Nazism, neo-Nazism and other
practices that contribute to fuelling contemporary
forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance”.
8/31

15/12/2022

A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Armenia,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Bhutan,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
India, Indonesia, Iraq, Israel, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan,
Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kiribati,
Latvia,
Liberia,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro,
Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia,
Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America
22-75309

15/12/2022

A/77/PV.54

Abstaining:
Afghanistan, Ecuador, Myanmar, Palau, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Republic of Korea, Samoa,
Switzerland, Türkiye

Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Türkiye,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe

Draft resolution I was adopted by 120 votes to 50,
with 10 abstentions (resolution 77/204).

Against:
Australia, Austria, Canada, Croatia, Czechia,
France, Germany, Hungary, Israel, Italy, Marshall
Islands, Nauru, Netherlands, Slovakia, Spain,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America

[Subsequently, the delegation of Vanuatu informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“A global call for concrete action for the elimination of
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance and the comprehensive implementation
of and follow-up to the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Dominica,
Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste,

Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cyprus, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, Georgia, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Japan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, New Zealand, North
Macedonia, Norway, Papua New Guinea, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovenia, Sweden,
Switzerland
Draft resolution II was adopted by 129 votes to 17,
with 36 abstentions (resolution 77/205).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Vanuatu informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The Acting President: I shall now give the floor to
those representatives who wish to speak in explanation
of vote after adoption.
Mr. Poveda Brito (Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish):
Venezuela thanks the Russian Federation for presenting
resolution 77/204, entitled “Combating glorification of
Nazism, neo-Nazism and other practices that contribute
to fuelling contemporary forms of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance”,
which my country considers timely. Venezuela therefore
supports the resolution a primary cosponsor, as it does
every year.
In that regard, it is our view that the amendment
presented in the Third Committee does not contribute
to the purpose of the resolution, but rather attempts to
undermine its spirit based on interests that do not help
combat the glorification of Nazism, neo-Nazism and
extremist ideologies, which seek to consolidate bygone
racial exceptionalism. Moreover, the amendment seeks
to politicize the content of the resolution.

22-753099/31

A/77/PV.54

Venezuela therefore disassociates itself from
paragraph 3, even as it reiterates its full support for the
rest of the resolution.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): First of all, I would like to sincerely thank all
delegations that voted in favour of resolution 77/204, on
combating neo-Nazism.
For Russia, this resolution is the blood and suffering
of every family. It is a tribute to the memory of the
heroism of our forebears. We are the last generation
that includes living veterans of that terrifying war,
and their number has dwindled to but a few throughout
the world.
The outcome of the vote this year is simply
shocking. For the first time in the history of the United
Nations, a document that condemns Nazism and upholds
the indelible outcome of the Second World War was
voted against by States that were former Axis Powers.
Those who voted against the resolution — mainly
Germany, Japan and Italy — have openly blasphemed
against the memory of the victims of German Nazism,
Italian fascism, and Japanese militarism. The position
of these and many other States that fought against the
countries of the anti-Hitler coalition during the Second
World War clearly demonstrate how premature it is to
discuss excluding from the text of the Charter of the
United Nations language on hostile States.
By voting against it, do they think that they have
thereby condemned Russia’s special military operation
in Ukraine? Of course not. They have in fact revealed
their true nature and the prevailing views of their ruling
elites. For them, the policies of rewriting and denying
history, tolerating racist and xenophobic rhetoric and
believing in arrogant superiority have become the
norm. The resolution is thematic, not country-specific.
It is aimed at promoting dialogue and cooperation,
not labelling. That is why we reject paragraph 4 of the
resolution, which has been voted into it and which notes
with alarm the conduct of the special military operation
in Ukraine, as it says “on the purported basis of
eliminating neo-Nazism”. The expressions of Nazism
in Ukraine that they are trying to ignore are obvious
and are supported at the State level. De-Nazification
is not a pretext. It is one of the goals of the special
operation, and we will see it through to the end.
Ms. Xu Daizhu (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China would like to explain its vote with regard to
resolution 77/204, on combating the glorification of
10/31

15/12/2022

Nazism. During the deliberations on the draft resolution
(A/C.3/77/L.5) in the Third Committee, China had
already made clear its firm opposition to attempts to
deny, distort or rewrite the history of the Second World
War; acts glorifying Nazism, fascism and militarism
and fuelling their resurgence; and all forms of racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and intolerance. We
reiterate that the resolution before us is a thematic one,
based on the principles of combating the glorification of
Nazism, neo-Nazism, racism and intolerance. Adding
country-specific content to thematic resolutions by
means of amendments is clearly inconsistent with the
established practice of the Third Committee. Among
the sponsors of the draft amendment there are certain
countries that seek to rewrite the history of the Second
World War by refusing to admit the commission of
war crimes such as sexual violence on a massive scale.
We are deeply concerned about the practice by a small
number of countries of creating division and politicizing
certain agenda items in the Third Committee. In view
of that, China dissociates itself from the consensus on
paragraph 4 of resolution 77/204.
Ms. Ochoa Espinales (Nicaragua) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank the delegation of the Russian
Federation for co-sponsoring resolution 77/205, which
encourages States to take appropriate measures to
address the new threats posed by the increase in
terrorist attacks incited by racism, xenophobia and
other forms of intolerance and supremacist beliefs. Our
delegation would like to reiterate that we dissociate
ourselves from paragraph 4, as amended in the Third
Committee, which is contained in resolution 77/204,
entitled “Combating glorification of Nazism, neoNazism and other practices that contribute to fuelling
contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance”.
Mr. Pilipenko (Belarus) (spoke in Russian):
Belarus has always paid close attention to the issue
of preserving historical memory and has always
openly opposed all manifestations of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and other forms of
intolerance. We have learned the lessons of history well
and will always remember how the Nazis and the allies
of fascist Germany, by unleashing the Second World
War, planned to drag all human civilization down a
path of horrific cruelty. Belarus paid with the lives
of millions of its own to eradicate that brown plague.
That is why Belarus has always sponsored and voted
in favour of the annual draft resolution, just adopted as
22-75309

15/12/2022

resolution 77/204, against the glorification of Nazism.
This year was no exception.
As we have repeatedly noted, Belarus opposes
attempts to politicize such an important topic, which is
why we dissociate ourselves from paragraph 4, which is
alien to the rest of the document, and which was inserted
through a politically motivated draft amendment
(A/C.3/77/L.52). We want to reiterate that we believe
it is the duty of every member of the United Nations,
which was founded as a result of the Second World
War, to take a responsible and thoughtful approach to
combating the glorification of Nazism and neo-Nazism.
The price that has already been paid because of them is
too high and too much depends on their eradication for
the sake of future generations.
Mr. Song Kim (Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea): My delegation would like to explain its vote
with regard to resolution 77/204, entitled “Combating
glorification of Nazism, neo-Nazism and other practices
that contribute to fuelling contemporary forms of
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance”. We welcome and support this important
resolution, which will help to combat Nazism and
eliminate all forms of racism and related intolerance
for the promotion and protection of human rights.
However, we are deeply concerned about the fact that
the amended content of the resolution has nothing to do
with the genuine value and goal of combating Nazism,
neo-Nazism and other harmful forms of racism but
rather takes a selective approach by politicizing the
issue and targeting an individual country. We continue
to oppose such politicization, selectivity and double
standards in addressing human rights issues, and in the
context we dissociate ourselves from paragraph 4 of
the resolution.
Mr. Weerasekara (Sri Lanka): My delegation is
of the considered view that the thematic substance of
resolution 77/204, entitled “Combating glorification of
Nazism, neo-Nazism and other practices that contribute
to fuelling contemporary forms of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance”, is
of great importance. In accordance with the vision of
the historic and forward-looking Durban Declaration
and Programme of Action, it is incumbent on all
Member States to give life to the letter and spirit of
the Declaration in all human activities, with a view
to achieving the total elimination of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance.
Considering that, we are of the view that paragraph 4

A/77/PV.54

politicizes the issue and thereby introduces a narrow
and restrictive country-specific approach within a
thematic resolution that should otherwise have a wider
scope. We call on all parties to adhere to the principles
of universality, impartiality, non-selectivity and
objectivity in the promotion and protection of human
rights. Accordingly, Sri Lanka dissociates itself from
paragraph 4, while voting in favour of the resolution as
a whole.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): Ukraine fought against
fascism and Nazism during the Second World War.
Millions of Ukrainians sacrificed their lives to stop
Nazism during that war. In response to the statement
by the representative of Russia, I would like to cite
Volker Türk, the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, who, in presenting his report in
Geneva today, said,
“Russian soldiers executed civilians in makeshift
places of detention. Others were summarily
executed on the spot following security checks — in
their houses, yards and doorways, even where the
victims had shown clearly that they were not a
threat, for example, by holding their hands in the
air. There are strong indications that the summary
executions documented in the report may constitute
the war crime of wilful killing”.
That is the fascism of today. That is what we have to
stop. That is the glorification of fascism and Nazism,
executed by the Russians.
Finally, paragraph 4 does not speak about the
special operation. It speaks about how the Russian
Federation has sought to justify its military invasion
and territorial aggression in Ukraine on the purported
basis of eliminating neo-Nazism. And that is why we do
not allow rapists to lecture us about how to fight rape.
Mrs. Aldorf (Czechia): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union.
For many European countries, the end of the
Second World War did not bring freedom but further
occupation and more repression, and in some cases
even crimes against humanity by other totalitarian
regimes. Indeed, the most devastating parts of Europe’s
history have been the result of totalitarian ideologies,
including Nazism. Today, under a false pretence of
fighting Nazism, Russia has brought the horrors of
war back to Europe, along with a reminder that peace
cannot be taken for granted. We strongly condemn the

22-7530911/31

A/77/PV.54

abuse of the argument of the fight against Nazism and
reject the inaccurate and inappropriate use of the term
“de-Nazification” by Russia to justify its inhumane,
cruel and illegal war of aggression against Ukraine, the
continued impacts of which are dire not only for the
people of Ukraine but for people around the world. Such
distortion erodes our understanding of the Holocaust
and disrespects its legacy, in addition to undermining
democratic principles.
With regard to resolution 77/204, which the General
Assembly has just adopted, the European Union has
pleaded for years for ensuring that the fight against
extremism and the condemnation of the despicable
ideology of Nazism are not misused or co-opted for
politically motivated purposes that seek to excuse new
violations and abuses of human rights. We would like to
stress again that the tragic legacy of the Second World
War should continue to serve as a moral and political
inspiration to face the challenges of today’s world. The
European Union is unequivocal in its commitment to
the global fight against racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia, antisemitism and related intolerance. Our
joint fight against contemporary forms of all extremist
and totalitarian ideologies, including neo-Nazism,
must be a collective priority for the whole international
community. For all of those reasons, the member
States of the European Union decided to vote against
the resolution.

15/12/2022

the glorification of Nazism. The Russian Federation’s
resolution is not a serious effort to combat Nazism,
anti-Semitism, racism or xenophobia, all of which are
abhorrent and unacceptable. Instead, it is a shameful
ploy. It is a thinly veiled effort to justify Russia’s war of
aggression in Ukraine, as we heard yet again today in
Russia’s statement.
The United States and 62 other countries fully
supported the draft amendment (A/C.3/77/L.52) that
was adopted and became part of the resolution that the
General Assembly has just adopted today. I also wanted
to counter some of the narratives saying that the draft
amendment, which is now part of the text, has turned
it into a country-specific resolution. It is not. It does in
fact bring in a paragraph from the Special Rapporteur’s
report that has been in the resolution time and time
again, and it is taken note of. It is merely bringing,
factually, a paragraph from that report. We therefore
categorically reject the notion that the resolution has
been turned into a country-specific resolution when the
report was in fact mandated by the resolution.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-items (a) and (b) of agenda item 66?
It was so decided.

Ms. Korac (United States of America): Before
I begin my explanation of vote, I do want to note
a process point. As you said at the beginning of this
meeting, Sir, explanations of vote are meant only for
those who change their votes. As I have heard today,
many delegations did not in fact change their votes but
utilized this platform yet again to relitigate issues that
we had in the Third Committee.

The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 66.

With that being said, the United States is proud
to have fought with our Second World War allies,
including the Soviet Union, and to have made decisive
contributions to the victory over Nazi Germany in
1945. We categorically condemn the glorification of
Nazism and all modern forms of violent extremism,
anti-Semitism, racism, xenophobia, discrimination and
related intolerance. Once again, as we did in November,
the United States expresses its concern about and
opposition to resolution 77/204, a document most
notable for its thinly veiled attempts to legitimize longstanding Russian disinformation narratives, smearing
neighbouring nations under the cynical guise of halting

The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it three draft resolutions recommended by the Third
Committee in paragraph 35 of its report. We will now
take a decision on draft resolutions I to III, one by one.

12/31

Agenda item 67
Right of peoples to self-determination
Report of the Third Committee (A/77/462)

We first turn to draft resolution I, entitled “Use of
mercenaries as a means of violating human rights and
impeding the exercise of the right of peoples to selfdetermination”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
22-75309

15/12/2022

In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan,
Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands,
New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Türkiye, Ukraine, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America

A/77/PV.54

Abstaining:
Liberia, Mexico, Palau, Switzerland
Draft resolution I was adopted by 130 votes to 52,
with 4 abstentions (resolution 77/206).
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is
entitled “Universal realization of the right of peoples to
self-determination”. The Third Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 77/207).
The Acting President: We now turn to draft
resolution III, entitled “The right of the Palestinian
people to self-determination”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh,
Barbados,
Belarus,
Belgium,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Canada,
Central African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia,
Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czechia, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Eswatini,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Mongolia,
Montenegro,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,

22-7530913/31

A/77/PV.54

Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Türkiye, Turkmenistan, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Chad, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Nauru, United States of
America
Abstaining:
Cameroon, Guatemala, Kiribati, Malawi, Palau,
Rwanda, Solomon Islands, Togo, Tuvalu
Draft resolution III was adopted by 167 votes to 6,
with 9 abstentions (resolution 77/208).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Costa Rica
informed the Secretariat that it had intended to
vote in favour; the delegation of Chad informed the
Secretariat that it had intended not to participate.]
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 67?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 68
Promotion and protection of human rights
Report of the Third Committee (A/77/463)
The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly wishes to take note of the report of
the Third Committee?
It was so decided (decision 77/541).
(a) Implementation of human rights instruments
Report of the Third Committee (A//77/463/
Add.1)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
two draft resolutions recommended by the Committee
in paragraph 14 of its report.
14/31

15/12/2022

We will now take a decision on draft resolutions I
and II, one by one.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment”.
The Third Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 77/209).
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is
entitled “Human rights treaty body system”. The Third
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 77/210).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (a) of agenda item 68?
It was so decided.
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms
Report of the Third Committee
(A/77/463/ Add.2)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
15 draft resolutions recommended by the Committee in
paragraph 87 of its report.
I shall now give the floor to those delegations
wishing to speak in explanation of vote or position
before action is taken on draft resolutions I to XV.
Mr. Zuhuree (Maldives): I am taking the floor to
explain our vote before the voting on draft resolution
A/C.3/77/L.44/Rev.1, entitled “Moratorium on the use
of the death penalty”.
While the death penalty is a form of punishment
that can be prescribed in limited circumstances under
the law of the Maldives, the Maldives has maintained an
informal moratorium on the death penalty for more than
half a century and will continue to do so. Article 10 of
the Constitution of the Republic of Maldives stipulates
that Islam shall be the basis for all laws in the country.
The penal code, enacted in 2014, prescribes the use of
the death penalty only in cases of premeditated murder
or deliberate manslaughter, stating that punishment
for crimes for which retribution or the restoration of
22-75309

15/12/2022

justice is required must be carried out according to the
principles of Islamic sharia. We fully maintain that
legal measures in Islamic sharia relating to the use of
that punishment must be rigorously and meticulously
examined within the wider judicial framework to
ensure that the enforcement of sentences is not arbitrary
and adheres to the Maldives’ commitments under
international law. The Government continues to take
substantial steps to implement positive and meaningful
changes to our judiciary and to align our domestic
legal instruments with our international obligations.
The Government understands that our criminal justice
system in its entirety must be reformed, strengthened
and institutionalized to create an independent and
impartial judiciary that commands the trust and
confidence of the general public.
The reality is that the death penalty remains on the
books. To favour its abolition would undermine our
Constitution and domestic law. It is therefore against
that backdrop that we must make our decision today.
While the Government is committed to maintaining the
moratorium for the legal reasons I have outlined, the
Maldives will maintain its position and vote against the
draft resolution entitled “Moratorium on the use of the
death penalty”.
Ms. Al Nabhani (Oman) (spoke in Arabic): It
is my honour to make this statement in explanation
of vote before the voting on the draft resolution
entitled “Moratorium on the use of the death penalty”
(A/C.3/77/L.44.Rev.1) on behalf of the delegations
of the Gulf Cooperation Council countries, that is,
Bahrain, Kuwait, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, the United Arab
Emirates and my own country, Oman.
Our countries stress the importance of respecting
the sovereignty of States, as stipulated in the Charter of
the United Nations. The death penalty constitutes part
of the national legislation and sovereign practices of our
countries aimed at maintaining our societies and their
stability and security. In that spirit, our countries have
sponsored and supported the amendment submitted by
the delegation of Singapore on the draft resolution of
the Third Committee in order to reinstate paragraph 1
of the resolution, on the sovereign right of all countries
to draft their own legislation, including by stating the
proper legal punishments as per their obligations under
international law. That paragraph has been adopted by
a majority a number of times in previous sessions. It has
the support of an unprecedented majority in the current

A/77/PV.54

session, and we thank the delegations of Australia and
Costa Rica for facilitating the negotiations on it.
We hope that the draft resolution on a moratorium
on the use of the death penalty will include paragraph
1 in future in order to ensure that it reflects the point
of view of most Member States and that constructive
negotiations can be held that take into account their
desire for a consensus-based text.
In conclusion, paragraph 1 of the resolution is a
cornerstone for any discussions about the death penalty.
We stress that all countries have the right to implement
their own domestic laws to ensure their security and
stability, and that right must be respected and preserved
by the States Members of the United Nations.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolutions I to XV, one by one.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled
“The right to privacy in the digital age”. The Third
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 77/211).
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is
entitled “The right to development”. A recorded vote
has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic,
Chad, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Eswatini,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mongolia, Morocco,

22-7530915/31

A/77/PV.54

15/12/2022

Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Türkiye, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia, Czechia,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany,
Hungary, Israel, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland,
Slovakia, Sweden, Switzerland, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Brazil, Canada,
Chile, Cyprus, Georgia, Greece, Iceland, Ireland,
Italy, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, North
Macedonia, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic
of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Slovenia,
Spain, Uruguay
Draft resolution II was adopted by 132 votes to 25,
with 28 abstentions (resolution 77/212).
The Acting President: Draft resolution III is
entitled “Enhancement of international cooperation
in the field of human rights”. The Third Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution 77/213).
The Acting President: Draft resolution IV
is entitled “Human rights and unilateral coercive
measures”. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria,
Barbuda, Argentina,
16/31

Angola, Antigua and
Armenia, Azerbaijan,

Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Eswatini,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan,
Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New
Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Palau, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, Türkiye, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
Abstaining:
Brazil
22-75309

15/12/2022

Draft resolution IV was adopted by 130 votes to 53,
with 1 abstention (resolution 77/214).
The Acting President: Draft resolution V is entitled
“Promotion of a democratic and equitable international
order”. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Chad, China, Congo,
Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Eswatini,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Philippines, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New

A/77/PV.54

Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Palau, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Türkiye, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining:
Armenia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Liberia, Mexico, Panama, Peru, Uruguay
Draft resolution V was adopted by 122 votes to 54,
with 10 abstentions (resolution 77/215).
The Acting President: Draft resolution VI is
entitled “Promotion of peace as a vital requirement
for the full enjoyment of all human rights by all”. A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Eswatini,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Palau,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan,

22-7530917/31

A/77/PV.54

Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands,
New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Türkiye, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining:
Brazil
Draft resolution VI was adopted by 131 votes to 53,
with 1 abstention (resolution 77/216).
The Acting President: Draft resolution VII is
entitled “The right to food”. The Third Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution VII was adopted (resolution 77/217).
The Acting President: Draft resolution VIII
is entitled “Extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary
executions”. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Angola, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Bahamas, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Canada,
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, Colombia,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Estonia, Eswatini, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
18/31

15/12/2022

Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kiribati, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, North Macedonia, Norway, Palau,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain,
Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, TimorLeste, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Türkiye,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, United States of America,
Uruguay, Vanuatu
Against:
None
Abstaining:
Algeria, Bahrain, Belarus, Botswana, Brunei
Darussalam, Cameroon, China, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Egypt,
Ethiopia, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Iraq, Israel, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Libya, Madagascar,
Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Mozambique, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Togo, United Arab Emirates, Uzbekistan, Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Draft resolution VIII was adopted by 133 votes to
none, with 44 abstentions (resolution 77/218).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Uganda informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to abstain.]
The Acting President: Draft resolution IX is
entitled “Human rights in the administration of justice”.
The Third Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution IX was adopted (resolution 77/219).
The Acting President: Draft resolution X is entitled
“Missing persons”. The Third Committee adopted it
22-75309

15/12/2022

without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
Draft resolution X was adopted (resolution 77/220).
The Acting President: Draft resolution XI is
entitled “Freedom of religion or belief”. The Third
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution XI was adopted (resolution 77/221).
The Acting President: Draft resolution XII is
entitled “Moratorium on the use of the death penalty”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belgium,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina
Faso, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Canada, Central
African Republic, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kiribati, Kyrgyzstan,
Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, North Macedonia, Norway,
Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Sierra Leone,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland,
Tajikistan, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tunisia, Türkiye,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan
Against:
Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, Botswana, Brunei

A/77/PV.54

Darussalam, China, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Dominica, Egypt, Ethiopia, Grenada, India,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Japan,
Kuwait, Libya, Maldives, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Singapore,
Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Tonga, Trinidad and
Tobago, United States of America, Yemen
Abstaining:
Belarus, Burundi, Cameroon, Cuba, Eswatini,
Gabon, Guyana, Indonesia, Kenya, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Mauritania,
Morocco, Niger, Nigeria, Papua New Guinea,
Thailand, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Viet Nam, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Draft resolution XII was adopted by 125 votes to
37, with 22 abstentions (resolution 77/222).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Vanuatu and
Zambia informed the Secretariat that they had
intended to vote in favour; the delegations of
Pakistan and Uganda informed the Secretariat that
they had intended to abstain.]
The Acting President: Draft resolution XIII is
entitled “Human rights and extreme poverty”. The
Third Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution XIII was adopted
(resolution 77/223).
The Acting President: Draft resolution XIV
is entitled “The role of Ombudsman and mediator
institutions in the promotion and protection of human
rights, good governance and the rule of law”. The Third
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution XIV was adopted
(resolution 77/224).
The Acting President: Draft resolution XV is
entitled “Combating intolerance, negative stereotyping,
stigmatization, discrimination, incitement to violence
and violence against persons, based on religion or
belief”. The Third Committee adopted it without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution XV was adopted (resolution 77/225).

22-7530919/31

A/77/PV.54

The Acting President: I shall now give the floor to
those representatives who wish to speak in explanation
of vote or position on the resolutions just adopted.
Ms. DeSuza (Saint Kitts and Nevis): Saint Kitts and
Nevis underscores the significance of a comprehensive
and just criminal system. We understand first-hand
the importance of sovereign decisions on various
legislative aspects, including determining appropriate
legal penalties to address worrisome levels of crime
and violence.
Saint Kitts and Nevis has maintained the death
penalty in its penal code, where it is applied only as
punishment for the most heinous crimes and only after
extensive due process of law has been completed, to
ensure against any possible miscarriage of justice. Our
national laws are therefore in line with international law
provisions. Furthermore, Saint Kitts and Nevis firmly
believes that the application of the death penalty remains
solely a criminal justice issue in our jurisdiction. We
would like to remind the Assembly that in situations
of abuse of the application of the death penalty, those
situations can be treated as a human rights issue in the
appropriate tribunals already established within the
international system, rather than being politicized in
the Third Committee. Furthermore, resolution 77/222,
which we just adopted a few minutes ago, already deals
with such situations.
Saint Kitts and Nevis engaged in discussions on the
resolution with the hope of clarifying and correcting
some of the inaccurate and misleading assertions that it
contains, most of which are not in line with our national
legal system. While we are pleased that the Third
Committee voted to include the resolution’s current
paragraph 1, which reaffirms the sovereign right of
States to develop their own legal systems, we remain
extremely concerned about some of the assertions that
remain within the resolution and voted against it for
that reason. We hope that in the coming years there
can be greater flexibility in addressing some of the
problematic issues that remain in the text.
Mr. Gafoor (Singapore): I take the floor to explain
Singapore’s vote on resolution 77/222, which was
just adopted under sub-item (b) of agenda item 68,
entitled “Moratorium on the use of the death penalty”.
Singapore voted against the moratorium resolution, and
I want to place the position of my delegation on record
in the General Assembly.
20/31

15/12/2022

First, the resolution is not consistent with the
provisions of international law. It is a well-known fact
that article 6 of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights expressly allows for the use of the death
penalty for the most serious crimes and in accordance
with due process of law. The moratorium resolution has
unfortunately not acknowledged that important and
relevant point. The letter and spirit of the moratorium
resolution is not only one-sided but is also not at all
consistent with the provisions of international law.
Secondly, the resolution makes no reference to
the rights of victims and their families. It ignores the
reality faced by many countries around the world in
dealing with rising rates of violent crimes, including
crimes related to gangs, gun violence, drug trafficking
and drug cartels. We regard the omission of the rights
of victims and the rights of their families to be a serious
flaw in the resolution.
Thirdly, the resolution seeks to impose the views
and values of one group of countries on the rest of the
world. To put it plainly, it seeks to export a particular
model of society to the rest of the world. It does not
acknowledge or respect the diversity of legal and
criminal justice systems around the world and takes
a one-size-fits-all approach by seeking to impose a
moratorium on the rest of the international community.
What is most unfortunate about the resolution is
that it betrays an attitude of arrogance and cultural
superiority. In the course of informal negotiations, the
proponents of the resolution adopted a take-it-or-leave-it
approach. It is not surprising that many countries
from different regions of the world voted against the
resolution today, which sent a clear and unmistakable
message that there is no international consensus on the
notion of a moratorium on the use of the death penalty.
I take this opportunity to place on record the
deep disappointment of many delegations with the
approach taken by the proponents in disregarding
and disrespecting the working methods of the United
Nations. For many years now, the proponents have
continued the approach of arbitrarily deleting the
paragraph on sovereignty from the draft resolution
submitted to the Third Committee, even though that
paragraph has been adopted by a majority of Member
States since 2016. This year, paragraph 1 was adopted
once again by the Third Committee with the highestever number of votes. The message to the proponents
was very clear: paragraph 1 has a clear place in the
22-75309

15/12/2022

moratorium resolution, and it is absolutely necessary to
reaffirm the sovereign right of all countries to determine
their own legal systems when one is advocating the
notion of a moratorium. That is a principle that must be
acknowledged and accepted by the proponents; it is not
something they should dismiss, deny or delete.
Given the history of disregard and disrespect that
the proponents have shown for the views of the majority,
the question legitimately arises: Will the proponents
once again delete paragraph 1, on sovereignty, when the
draft resolution on this topic is considered in 2024? Will
they once again disregard and dismiss the views of a
majority of Member States? We really do not understand
why the proponents insist on deleting a paragraph that
has been repeatedly adopted by a majority of Member
States. I must say that that approach shows no respect
at all for the multilateral rules-based system and the
working methods of the United Nations. I call on the
proponents of the resolution to reflect carefully on the
approach they adopted to its negotiation. I ask them
to abandon their attitude of arrogance and cultural
superiority. We are present in the General Assembly
Hall as representatives of sovereign equals. I ask them
to show respect for the principle of sovereignty, which
is the basis of everything that we do at the United
Nations. Most important, I ask the proponents to listen
carefully to the diversity of positions and views of
Member States on this issue, and I urge them not to
export their model and not to impose their views on the
rest of the international community.
In these challenging times, we should seek to
reinforce the multilateral system by working together
to strengthen the rule of international law and the
principle of sovereignty. We should promote dialogue,
not division; unity, not uniformity; respect, not
recrimination. The resolution misses the mark on
every one of those counts. That is why Singapore voted
against the legally flawed and misguided resolution.
But let me end with an expression of hope. It is my hope
that the proponents will change their approach to the
resolution. The ball is in their court.
Mrs. Fangco (Philippines): The Philippines takes
the floor to dissociate itself from the paragraphs referring
to the International Criminal Court in resolution
77/218, entitled “Extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary
executions”. In the interest of time, the Philippines
also takes this opportunity to dissociate itself from
all paragraphs referencing the International Criminal

A/77/PV.54

Court in all other draft resolutions under agenda item
68 on which action will be taken this afternoon.
The Philippines withdrew from the Rome Statute
in 2019 in keeping with its principled stand against
those who politicize human rights and disregard
its independent and well-functioning organs and
agencies. Notwithstanding that withdrawal, the
Philippines reaffirms its commitment to the promotion
and protection of human rights and the fight against
impunity for atrocity crimes.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote or position on the
resolutions just adopted. May I take it that it is the wish
of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration
of sub-item (b) of agenda item 68?
It was so decided.
(c) Human rights situations and reports of special
rapporteurs and representatives
Report of the Third Committee
(A/77/463/ Add.3)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it five draft resolutions recommended by the Third
Committee in paragraph 29 of its report.
I shall now give the floor to those delegations
wishing to speak in explanation of vote or position
before action is taken on draft resolutions I to V.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We will vote against draft resolution III, on the
situation of human rights in Iran, and draft resolution
V, on the situation of human rights in the Syrian Arab
Republic. We dissociate ourselves from the consensus
on draft resolution I, on the situation of human rights
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, and
draft resolution II, on the situation of human rights of
Rohingya Muslims and other minorities in Myanmar.
Country-specific resolutions have little to do with
the reality of the situation in the countries concerned.
Their purpose is to further a political agenda, exert
pressure and wage an information war. They are
characterized by unsubstantiated accusations, lies
and empty appeals. Negotiations were not held on
those draft resolutions, and their content has become
increasingly divorced from reality every year, all of
which simply discredits the United Nations human
rights system based on the principle of the sovereign
equality of States.

22-7530921/31

A/77/PV.54

With regard to draft resolution IV, on the situation of
human rights in the temporarily occupied Autonomous
Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol,
Ukraine, the resolution on that topic has over the past
few years been viewed by Kyiv as an endorsement and
encouragement of its hate-based policy against its own
Russian-speaking population. It has strengthened the
belief on the part of the Kyiv authorities that they have
a licence to do anything they want with impunity and
has given them free rein to commit the most brutal and
massive violations of human rights and fundamental
freedoms — torture, killings and propagation of
neo-Nazi traditions and order. It is clear that, under
the current circumstances, a vote in favour of draft
resolution IV does not mean supporting human rights
at all, but rather supporting armed escalation. The
adoption of yet another anti-Russian document would
only embolden those who seek to further fan the flames
of the Ukraine crisis. Russia will vote against draft
resolution IV — against the escalation of the crisis, the
impunity of the Kyiv regime and the continuation of
mass human rights violations in Ukraine — and we call
on other delegations to do the same.
Mrs. Arab Bafrani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
deliver this statement in relation to draft resolution III,
on the situation of human rights in the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
At the outset, my delegation reiterates its principled
position of categorically rejecting the draft resolution,
which is supported by those with a dark history of
weaponizing human rights and instrumentalizing
United Nations mechanisms. Adopting such a draft
resolution would serve as part of the attempts by some
countries to marginalize Iran through the manipulation
and exploitation of United Nations mechanisms. The
Iran-phobic scenario demonstrated yesterday by the
United States in the Economic and Social Council by
denying Iranian women the opportunity to exchange
views and collaborate in the Commission on the Status
of Women is based on fabricated allegations.
The draft resolution does not pertain to the
protection of human rights, just as yesterday’s fullfledged campaign did not. Among its key sponsors are
those who stand for racism, apartheid, colonialism,
foreign occupation, unilateralism, autocracy and the
genocide of indigenous peoples. The campaigns led
by Canada, the United States and Germany in the
Economic and Social Council and the Human Rights
Council in Geneva all aim to exert political pressure
22/31

15/12/2022

on Iran. If those countries conclude that human rights
tools can be easily manipulated to apply political
pressure, they will surely exploit them, surrendering
the Organization’s core value of multilateralism to
achieve their exclusivist and unilateralist aims. In doing
so, they force countries to march against each other.
The message they are sending to the United Nations is
“you are either with us or against us”. That message is
also conveyed in their imposition of illegal, unilateral
coercive measures against independent countries such
as mine.
Some may view Canada as a country free from
its troubled past, both remorseful and willing to make
amends. However, it cannot play the role of a saint with
regard to human rights while the indigenous people
within its borders are faced simultaneously with a
multitude of hardships and discrimination. Similarly,
Canada’s unwavering support for the Israeli regime,
which is also among the co-sponsors of its proposed
draft resolution, contradicts its stance on human
rights entirely. The Israeli regime has carried out and
continues the practice of forced evictions, arbitrary
detentions, torture, other ill treatment and violating
the human rights of Palestinian women and girls
with total impunity. When Israel labels Palestinian
civil society organizations as terrorist groups, it is
impossible to regard it among the so-called supporters
of human rights.
The draft resolution did not enjoy any transparency
in its negotiation process but was supported blindly by
specific European countries, which were dictated to be
among its supporters. Ironically, those countries intend
to lead us on what they deem to be the correct path
while failing to follow that path themselves. Throughout
the four months of the Third Committee’s session, we
were forced to repeatedly deal with their arbitrary
and domineering policies, accept non-consensual and
contentious language and adapt to their self-made
concepts of human rights, which vigorously ignore the
diversity of Member States in terms of laws, culture
and values. They advocated confrontation rather than
cooperation. Even today, countries are forced to take
sides under pressure, despite the clear and principled
position of independent countries to safeguard the
United Nations human rights machinery against
political biases and adhere to the fundamental principles
of universality, impartiality, objectivity and selectivity.
Finally, the Islamic Republic of Iran is genuinely
committed to the promotion and protection of human
22-75309

15/12/2022

rights and dignity. We continue to place the highest
value on our cooperative and interactive approach
in relation to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, as well as the
human rights non-discriminatory mechanisms of our
Organization, such as the Universal Periodic Review.
Taking into account everything I just said, the
Islamic Republic of Iran strongly opposes draft
resolution III and asks other Member States to do
the same. In that regard, it is our firm belief that the
continuation of the practice of the selective adoption
of country-specific mandates, particularly in the
Third Committee, as well as the exploitation of that
platform for political ends, contravenes the principles I
mentioned. My delegation therefore disassociates itself
from the consensus on draft resolution I, on the situation
of human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, and will vote against draft resolution V, on the
situation of human rights in the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Kim Song (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea): The delegation of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea condemns and rejects in the strongest
terms draft resolution I, on the situation of human
rights in the Democratic Republic of Korea, which was
submitted by the member countries of the European
Union, among others, as a grave politically motivated
provocation aimed at undermining our social system.
The draft resolution, which is a product of the hostile
policy of the United States and its followers against the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, has nothing to
do with the genuine promotion and protection of human
rights. As such, it is nothing but a means for realizing
an impure political attempt.
The so-called human rights violation mentioned
in the draft resolution cannot exist in our country, in
which the “people first” principle is fully embodied in
all social life in order to formally and systematically
guarantee the rights and interests of the people in legal
and political terms. The annual forcible adoption of the
draft resolution on this topic proves clearly that there is
no change in the impure scheme by hostile forces aimed
at tarnishing our image and putting down our social
system. The United States and its followers are mistaken
in expecting that they can overthrow our political and
social system with a reckless human rights campaign
against the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
All Member States should adhere to the key
principle of the rejection of politicization, selectivity

A/77/PV.54

and double standards, as well as the principle of ensuring
impartiality and objectivity in all activities for the
protection and promotion of human rights. But today
the United States and Western countries are abusing
human rights issues as a political tool for interfering
in the internal affairs of other countries, overthrowing
their systems and using United Nations as a stage for
realizing their ulterior objectives. It is our firm position
to make a positive contribution to global efforts for the
protection and promotion of human rights. However,
we will never tolerate the slightest attempt by any
forces to slander the socialist system that our people
value so much.
In conclusion, my delegation once again strongly
condemns and rejects draft resolution I as a grave
infringement on the sovereignty of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. We also reject and will
vote against the country-specific draft resolutions
on the situation of human rights in the Syrian Arab
Republic (draft resolution V), the Islamic Republic of
Iran (draft resolution III) and the temporarily occupied
Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of
Sevastopol, Ukraine (draft resolution IV), based on our
principled position against politicization, selectivity
and double standards in human rights.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote or position before action
is taken on the draft resolutions. We will now take a
decision on draft resolutions I to V, one by one.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Situation of human
rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea”.
The Committee adopted draft resolution I without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 77/226).
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Situation of human rights of Rohingya Muslims and
other minorities in Myanmar”. The Committee adopted
draft resolution II without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 77/227).
The Acting President: Draft resolution III is
entitled “Situation of human rights in the Islamic
Republic of Iran”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

22-7530923/31

A/77/PV.54

In favour:
Albania,
Andorra,
Argentina,
Australia,
Austria, Bahamas, Barbados, Belgium, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Botswana, Bulgaria, Cabo
Verde, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland,
France, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Kiribati, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Maldives, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco, Myanmar,
Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia,
Norway, Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, TimorLeste, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Uruguay, Yemen
Against:
Armenia,
Bangladesh,
Belarus,
Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Brunei Darussalam, China,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Eritrea, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Mali,
Nicaragua, Oman, Pakistan, Philippines, Russian
Federation, Sri Lanka, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam,
Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Azerbaijan,
Belize, Bhutan, Brazil, Burundi, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad,
Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Djibouti, Egypt, Equatorial
Guinea, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia,
Ghana, Grenada, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Libya, Madagascar,
Malaysia, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mongolia,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Niger,
Nigeria, Papua New Guinea, Qatar, Rwanda, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Senegal, Singapore, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, Sudan, Thailand, Togo, Tonga,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Zambia
24/31

15/12/2022

Draft resolution III was adopted by 80 votes to 29,
with 65 abstentions (resolution 77/228).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Vanuatu informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The Acting President: Draft resolution IV is
entitled “Situation of human rights in the temporarily
occupied Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city
of Sevastopol, Ukraine”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Bahamas, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Bhutan,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde,
Canada, Chad, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czechia, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Guyana, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kiribati,
Kuwait, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Myanmar, Netherlands, New Zealand,
North Macedonia, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa,
San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, Spain,
Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Timor-Leste,
Türkiye, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu
Against:
Belarus, China, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Kazakhstan, Mali, Nicaragua,
Russian Federation, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic,
Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Armenia,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African
Republic, Colombia, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire,
Djibouti, Egypt, El Salvador, Eswatini, Fiji, Gabon,
Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan,
22-75309

15/12/2022

Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Mongolia,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Niger, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, Tajikistan, Thailand,
Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia
Draft resolution IV was adopted by 82 votes to 14,
with 80 abstentions (resolution 77/229).
The Acting President: Draft resolution V is
entitled “Situation of human rights in the Syrian
Arab Republic”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Bahamas, Barbados, Belgium, Benin, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cabo
Verde, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kiribati, Kuwait, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco, Myanmar, Nauru,
Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia,
Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San
Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Türkiye, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Uruguay, Yemen
Against:
Algeria, Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
China, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Iran (Islamic Republic

A/77/PV.54

of), Nicaragua, Russian Federation, Syrian Arab
Republic, Uzbekistan, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Armenia,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belize, Bhutan,
Brunei Darussalam, Burundi, Cameroon, Central
African Republic, Chad, Congo, Djibouti, Egypt,
Equatorial Guinea, Eswatini, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia,
Ghana, Grenada, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Mali,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mongolia, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Paraguay, Philippines, Rwanda, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Tajikistan,
Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Viet Nam, Zambia
Draft resolution V was adopted by 92 votes to 14,
with 71 abstentions (resolution 77/230).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Vanuatu informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The Acting President: I shall now give the floor to
those representatives who wish to speak in explanation
of vote after adoption.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): Just five days ago, the
world commemorated the adoption of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights. More than 190 countries
have endorsed this important document. For almost
nine years, the criminal Moscow regime has committed
crimes of every nature against the Ukrainian people on
Ukrainian territory, in blatant disregard for the ideas
and values enshrined in the Declaration. Those crimes
include forcible deportation, “filtration” camps, illegal
detention, torture, executions and attacks on civilians
and civilian infrastructure with missiles and drones.
These are massive crimes against humanity committed
by the Russian Federation.
Thousands of Ukrainian prisoners of war and
civilians are being detained in the temporarily occupied
territories of Ukraine or in Russia and remain in terrible
conditions. The mass forced deportation of Ukrainian
children to Russia remains an extremely acute issue.

22-7530925/31

A/77/PV.54

Hundreds of orphans or children without parental
care were given to Russian families for adoption, in
violation of international humanitarian law. Those
war crimes will inevitably bring everyone, including
the top authorities of the Moscow regime, before an
international tribunal.
In occupied Crimea, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights has
received credible information for years concerning
alleged killings, arbitrary detentions, enforced
disappearances, as well as torture and ill-treatment.
Journalists, human rights defenders and defence lawyers
face interference and persecution. Russia continues the
illegal conscription of protected persons and uses them
in its hostilities against Ukraine.
As stated in resolution 77/229, the temporary
occupation of Crimea became a blueprint for a grave
human rights crisis in other territories of Ukraine under
the temporary military control of Russia. Crimea was
also used by Russia as a military base and a springboard
for its attack on other southern parts of Ukraine, in
particular the Kherson and Zaporizhzhya regions, as
reflected in the Secretary-General’s most recent report
(A/77/220).
Ukraine wants peace more than anyone else. Peace
means restoring respect for the Charter of the United
Nations. Peace means the liberation of our people from
the horrors of Russia’s terror machine. The only way
to do so is through the full restoration of Ukraine’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity. That is also the
only effective solution to guarantee European and
global security. That is why President Zelenskyy has
put forward his 10-point peace plan, and we invite the
membership to take a careful look at his proposal.
Crimea and all temporarily occupied territories of
Ukraine will be liberated. Respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms will be restored on those
territories the very day they are back under Ukrainian
control. In the meantime, human rights and fundamental
freedoms in the temporarily occupied territories of
Ukraine need our constant attention and protection.
The voice of the General Assembly in their support and
in condemnation of all the crimes committed by the
aggressor State must be louder and stronger than ever,
and we just witnessed it.
That is why this year’s resolution, just adopted,
entitled “Situation of human rights in the temporarily
occupied Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of
26/31

15/12/2022

Sevastopol, Ukraine”, was substantially updated on the
basis of the extensive findings and recommendations of
the Secretary-General in his two reports on the matter,
and that is why the resolution refers to the ongoing
Russian war of aggression against Ukraine.
Resolution 77/229 will remain a practical tool in
the hands of the United Nations, its Secretariat and the
United Nations Human Rights Monitoring Mission in
Ukraine in providing credible information about the
human rights violations and abuses in temporarily
occupied Crimea.
I would like to conclude by expressing my gratitude
to all Member States that supported the resolution.
Ms. Xu Daizhu (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
has always held the view that the Third Committee
should conduct its work in the field of human rights
on the basis of equality and mutual respect and
properly address differences through constructive
dialogue and cooperation. China is opposed to
politicization, selectivity, double standards, provoking
confrontation and exerting pressure on other countries
with the pretext of safeguarding human rights. China
objects to the establishment of country-specific
human rights mechanisms without the consent of the
countries concerned.
In keeping with China’s consistent position on the
issue of country-specific human rights resolutions,
China voted against the three country-specific human
rights resolutions that were put to the vote and adopted
just now. With regard to resolution 77/226, on the
situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, and resolution 77/227, on the
situation of human rights of the Rohingya Muslims
and other minorities in Myanmar, we did not join the
consensus on those two resolutions.
Ms. DeSuza (Saint Kitts and Nevis): Saint Kitts
and Nevis wishes to make a statement in explanation of
vote after the voting on all three resolutions — 77/228,
77/229 and 77/230 — adopted by a vote under sub-item
(c) of agenda item 68.
Saint Kitts and Nevis prioritizes the promotion of
universal human rights and fundamental freedoms.
However, in principle, we believe that the presentation
of the resolutions under this agenda item goes against
the principles of impartiality, objectivity, transparency,
non-selectivity and non-politicization, all of which we
underscore as States Members of the United Nations.
22-75309

15/12/2022

Having undergone three cycles, Saint Kitts and
Nevis maintains that the Universal Periodic Review
within the Human Rights Council is the best place
for the examination of human rights situations in all
jurisdictions. That presents the basis for all assessments
to be conducted in a manner that is fair and respectful
of the sovereign rights of all States.
For the reasons that I just mentioned, Saint Kitts
and Nevis abstained in the voting on the resolutions
adopted by a vote under this agenda item. However,
we wish to convey that our votes should not be
misconstrued as opposition to the substance contained
in those resolutions. We call on all countries to protect
all human rights for all at all times. We believe that,
with solidarity and effective international cooperation,
we can work together to promote and protect all human
rights for all people everywhere.
Mr. González Behmaras (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba does not support mandates or resolutions that are
the result of selective, discriminatory and politically
motivated practices that do not enjoy the support of
the countries concerned. My delegation therefore
disassociates itself from resolution 77/226, entitled
“Situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea”.
Such resolutions, which do nothing to improve
the human rights situation on the ground, but instead
promote confrontation and mistrust, are directed
only against developing countries on which unilateral
coercive measures are also imposed. In the case of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, the path of
punishment and sanctions has been chosen, thereby
undermining the very human rights that supposedly
justify that practice. In addition, the resolution
dangerously involves the Security Council in matters
that are not within its purview.
Cuba is unable to join the consensus for adopting
a resolution of that kind and will not be complicit
in an attempt to deny the people of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea their right to peace, selfdetermination and development. Only international
cooperation, respectful dialogue and strict adherence
to the principles of objectivity, impartiality and
non-selectivity will enable progress in the promotion
and effective protection of all human rights for all
people, an area in which no country is immune
to challenges. The Universal Periodic Review
mechanism should be used as a platform for fostering

A/77/PV.54

debate, without politicization, and for encouraging
respectful cooperation with the country concerned.
My delegation also wishes to point out that
opposition to that politicized and selective mandate
in no way makes a value judgement regarding other
outstanding matters mentioned in the twenty-third
preambular paragraph, which require a fair and
acceptable solution with the agreement of all the
relevant parties.
Mr. Morales Dávila (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish):
Our delegation reiterates its position with regard to the
reports and draft resolutions on the situation of human
rights in particular countries that are introduced in the
Third Committee every year. We reaffirm our rejection
of reports and resolutions that are based on selectivity
and are politicized, lack objectivity and do not have the
consent of the country concerned.
For Nicaragua, dialogue and cooperation are the
best solution to any situation and to demonstrating
solidarity and strengthening multilateralism. We
therefore disassociate ourselves from resolution 77/226,
entitled “Situation of human rights in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea”.
In conclusion, my delegation once again reaffirms
its commitment to the promotion and protection of all
human rights. As a principled position, we continue
to firmly oppose the politicization of the issue of
human rights.
Mr. Pilipenko (Belarus) (spoke in Russian):
Belarus advocates effective cooperation in the area of
human rights based on the principles of universality,
impartiality, objectivity, non-selectivity, constructive
international dialogue and cooperation. We consistently
opposes the selective consideration of country-specific
human rights issues at the United Nations. We believe
that the instrumentalization of human rights issues
through country-specific resolutions does not resolve
human rights issues in practice, but only heightens the
climate of confrontation among States Members of the
United Nations.
Guided by such approaches, the Republic of
Belarus voted against all country-specific resolutions.
We also disassociate ourselves from the consensus on
resolutions 77/226 and 77/227, on the human rights
situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
and in Myanmar, respectively.

22-7530927/31

A/77/PV.54

Ms. Nour Ali (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My country’s delegation takes the floor to
explain its vote after the voting on resolutions 77/226,
77/228, 77/229 and 77/230.
As a principled position, the delegation of the Syrian
Arab Republic rejects selectivity and politicization
in addressing human rights issues. We consider it
unacceptable to establish mandates, adopt reports and
submit resolutions on certain countries without their
consent or even without consulting and coordinating
with them. My delegation also rejects confrontation,
antagonization, making of accusations and isolation
attempts through explicit double standards that seek to
cover up the practices and crimes of certain States and
their human rights violations.
The fact is that the adoption of such resolutions
creates possibilities for confrontation that do not
lead to undertaking constructive dialogue and totally
run counter to the spirit of the Charter of the United
Nations, which emphasizes sovereign equality among
Member States. My delegation stresses that the adoption
of country-specific resolutions politicizes an otherwise
noble issue that promotes and protects human rights
and constitutes a flagrant violation of the principles of
universality, objectivity, neutrality and non-selectivity,
which should govern our relevant discussions
My country’s delegation therefore dissociates itself
from the consensus on adopting resolution 77/226 and
voted against resolutions 77/228, 77/229 and 77/230.
(spoke in English)
We will only acknowledge and accept the mandate
emanating from such resolutions once there are 193
similar resolutions, because that is our understanding
of equality among Member States. What applies to
others will apply to us, and what applies to us must also
apply to others.
Mr. Poveda Brito (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): With regard to the
reports submitted and resolutions 77/226, 77/227,
77/228 and 77/229, adopted under sub-item (c) of
agenda item 68, the purpose of which is to assess the
human rights situation in specific countries, Venezuela
would like to reaffirm its principled position rejecting
the adoption of any country-specific mechanism, report
or resolution without the consent of the country’s
Government, which amounts to dealing with human
rights in a selective and political manner. By failing
28/31

15/12/2022

to include all the parties concerned in dialogue, such
mechanisms tend to refer to secondary and even furtherremoved sources, and their reports are often used for
political purposes by other actors, thereby violating
the principles of impartiality, objectivity, transparency,
non-selectivity, non-politicization, non-confrontation,
equality, mutual respect and equal sovereignty among
States. In that regard, we must prioritize and promote the
Universal Periodic Review process as the best possible
mechanism for dealing with this issue, as it is based on
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. Therefore, Venezuela once again disassociates
itself from resolution 77/226, on the situation of human
rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote or position on the
resolutions just adopted.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (c)
of agenda item 68?
It was so decided.
(d) Comprehensive implementation of and followup to the Vienna Declaration and Programme
of Action
Report of the Third Committee
(A/77/463/ Add.4)
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to take note of the report of the
Third Committee?
It was so decided (decision 77/542).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (d) of agenda item 68?
It was so decided
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 68.
Agenda item 109
Crime prevention and criminal justice
Report of the Third Committee (A/77/464)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it seven draft resolutions recommended by the Third
22-75309

15/12/2022

Committee in paragraph 31 of its report. We will now
take decisions on draft resolutions I to VII, one by one.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Follow-up to the
Fourteenth United Nations Congress on Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice and preparations
for the Fifteenth United Nations Congress on Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice”. The Third Committee
adopted draft resolution I without a vote. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (77/231).
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is
entitled “Reducing reoffending through rehabilitation
and reintegration”. The Third Committee adopted
draft resolution II without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (77/232).
The Acting President: Draft resolution III is
entitled “Strengthening national and international
efforts, including with the private sector, to protect
children from sexual exploitation and abuse”. The Third
Committee adopted draft resolution III without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution III was adopted (77/233).
The Acting President: Draft resolution IV is
entitled “United Nations African Institute for the
Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders”.
The Third Committee adopted draft resolution IV
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (77/234).
The Acting President: Draft resolution V is entitled
“Preventing and combating corrupt practices and the
transfer of proceeds of corruption, facilitating asset
recovery and returning such assets to legitimate owners,
in particular to countries of origin, in accordance with
the United Nations Convention against Corruption”.
The Third Committee adopted draft resolution V
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution V was adopted (77/235).
The Acting President: Draft resolution VI is
entitled “Strengthening and promoting effective
measures and international cooperation on organ
donation and transplantation to prevent and combat
trafficking in persons for the purpose of organ removal

A/77/PV.54

and trafficking in human organs”. The Third Committee
adopted draft resolution VI without a vote. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution VI was adopted (77/236).
The Acting President: Draft resolution VII is
entitled “Strengthening the United Nations crime
prevention and criminal justice programme, in
particular its technical cooperation capacity”. The
Third Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution VII was adopted (77/237).
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 109.
Agenda item 110
Countering the use of information and
communications technologies for criminal purposes
Report of the Third Committee (A/77/465)
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to take note of the report of the
Third Committee?
It was so decided (decision 77/543).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 110.
It was so decided.
Agenda item 111
International drug control
Report of the Third Committee (A/77/466)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Third Committee
in paragraph 12 of its report. We will now take a
decision on the draft resolution, entitled “Addressing
and countering the world drug problem through a
comprehensive, integrated and balanced approach”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Angola, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,

22-7530929/31

A/77/PV.54

Austria, Bahamas, Barbados, Belgium, Belize,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Canada, Chad, Chile, Colombia,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czechia, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El
Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, Eswatini,
Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kiribati, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malawi, Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
North Macedonia, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Sierra
Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South
Africa, Spain, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Belarus, Cameroon, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Pakistan, Russian Federation,
Syrian Arab Republic, Türkiye
Abstaining:
Algeria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Central
African Republic, China, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Egypt,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Guinea-Bissau, India, Indonesia,
Iraq, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Libya, Madagascar,
Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Namibia,
Oman, Qatar, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Tajikistan,
Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uzbekistan, Viet
Nam, Yemen
30/31

15/12/2022

The draft resolution was adopted by 124 to 9, with
45 abstentions (resolution 77/238).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Vanuatu informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of the Russian Federation, who has
asked to speak in explanation of vote on the resolution
just adopted.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The results of the vote speak for themselves.
The text of previous iterations of the consensusbased omnibus annual resolution enjoyed unanimous
support, whereas resolution 77/238 has lost the support
of almost one third of all Member States, including
those that voted against the resolution or abstained
in the voting. The tone set by the coordinators in our
work has deliberately led us towards a non-consensual,
unbalanced and unacceptable text, despite the
constructive attitude of most delegations. The resolution
omits the most important element, namely, the fact that
the world drug problem is a complex phenomenon that,
in addition to its socioeconomic ramifications, poses
a serious threat to national security. Our delegation
will continue to believe in the importance of the
entire international community working together to
effectively fight narco-crime. We are not prepared to
overlook traditional aspects of specialized international
cooperation or continue the course toward reducing the
role of law enforcement in fighting narcotics threat.
We would like to underscore that today the
latest consensus document on fighting narcotics is
the relevant omnibus resolution of 2021 (resolution
76/188). This resolution is the one that reflects the
outcomes of many years of negotiations and efforts
aimed at harmonizing the positions of delegations in
New York. Therefore, if in future we want to return to
the practice of consensus-based adoption of specialized
anti-narcotics resolutions, then resolution 76/188 would
be the best starting point for our work.
The 2021 omnibus resolution is based on a crucial
principle: reaffirmation of agreements reached as part
of the activities of the United Nations Commission
on Narcotic Drugs, which sets policy on all aspects
of efforts to combat the global narcotics problem.
We strongly believe that any new initiatives are
to be discussed in Vienna. Attempts to introduce
22-75309

15/12/2022

revolutionary ideas in New York would only lead to a
breakdown of consensus.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 111?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 124 (continued)
Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
Report of the Third Committee (A/77/467)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft decision recommended by the Third Committee
in paragraph 8 of its report.
We will now take action on the draft decision entitled
“Draft programme of work of the Third Committee for
the seventy-eighth session of the General Assembly”.
The Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 77/544).
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 124.
Agenda item 139 (continued)
Programme planning
Report of the Third Committee (A/77/468)
The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly wishes to take note of the report of
the Third Committee contained in document A/77/468?

A/77/PV.54

It was so decided (decision 77/545).
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 139.
The General Assembly has thus concluded its
consideration of all the reports of the Third Committee
before it for this meeting.
I would like to thank Ambassador José Alfonso
Blanco Conde, Permanent Representative of the
Dominican Republic to the United Nations and Chair
of the Third Committee, the members of the Bureau,
the Secretariat of the Third Committee, and all
delegations from the Member States for the work they
have accomplished.
During this session, the Third Committee held
interactive dialogues with a record number — 71 — of
special procedure mandate holders and other experts
whose invaluable inputs are crucial for the deliberations
of the Committee. Progress was made on key issues,
including the rights of indigenous peoples; child, early
and forced marriage; refugees; protecting children
from bullying; safeguarding the rights of persons
with disabilities; and many other relevant topics. I
congratulate the Third Committee for delivering on the
strengthening of international human rights law, and I
commend the Committee for completing its work in a
timely and efficient manner.
The meeting rose at 5.15 p.m.

22-7530931/31
