United Nations

A/RES/68/152

General Assembly

Distr.: General
12 February 2014

Sixty-eighth session
Agenda item 68

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 18 December 2013
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/68/455)]

68/152. Use of mercenaries as a means of violating human
rights and impeding the exercise of the right of peoples
to self-determination
The General Assembly,
Recalling all of its previous resolutions on the subject, including resolution
67/159 of 20 December 2012, and Human Rights Council resolutions 15/12 of
30 September 2010, 1 15/26 of 1 October 2010, 2 18/4 of 29 September 2011, 3 21/8 of
27 September 2012 4 and 24/13 of 26 September 2013, 5 as well as all resolutions
adopted by the Commission on Human Rights in this regard,
Recalling also all of its relevant resolutions, in which, inter alia, it condemned
any State that permitted or tolerated the recruitment, financing, training, assembly,
transit or use of mercenaries with the objective of overthrowing the Governments of
States Members of the United Nations, especially those of developing countries, or
of fighting against national liberation movements, and recalling further the relevant
resolutions and international instruments adopted by the General Assembly, the
Security Council, the Economic and Social Council and the Organization of African
Unity, inter alia, the Organization of African Unity Convention for the elimination
of mercenarism in Africa, 6 as well as by the African Union,
Reaffirming the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations concerning the strict observance of the principles of sovereign equality,
political independence, the territorial integrity of States, the self-determination of
peoples, the non-use of force or of the threat of use of force in international
relations and non-interference in affairs within the domestic jurisdiction of States,
_______________
1
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/65/53/Add.1),
chap. II.
2
Ibid., chap. I.
3
Ibid., Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53A and corrigendum (A/66/53/Add.1 and Corr.1), chap. II.
4
Ibid., Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/67/53/Add.1), chap. III.
5
Ibid., Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/68/53/Add.1), chap. III.
6
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1490, No. 25573.

13-44857 (E)

*1344857*

Please recycle

Use of mercenaries as a means of violating human rights and impeding
the exercise of the right of peoples to self-determination

A/RES/68/152

Reaffirming also that, by virtue of the principle of self-determination, all
peoples have the right freely to determine their political status and to pursue their
economic, social and cultural development and that every State has the duty to
respect this right in accordance with the provisions of the Charter,
Reaffirming further the Declaration on Principles of International Law
concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations, 7
Welcoming the establishment of the open-ended intergovernmental working
group of the Human Rights Council with the mandate of considering the possibility
of elaborating an international regulatory framework, including the option of
elaborating a legally binding instrument on the regulation, monitoring and oversight
of the activities of private military and security companies,
Alarmed and concerned at the danger that the activities of mercenaries
constitute to peace and security in developing countries in various parts of the
world, in particular in areas of conflict,
Deeply concerned at the loss of life, the substantial damage to property and the
negative effects on the policy and economies of affected countries resulting from
international criminal mercenary activities,
Extremely alarmed and concerned about recent mercenary activities in some
developing countries in various parts of the world, including in areas of armed
conflict, and the threat they pose to the integrity of and respect for the constitutional
order of the affected countries,
Convinced that, notwithstanding the way in which mercenaries or mercenaryrelated activities are used or the form that they take to acquire some semblance of
legitimacy, they are a threat to peace, security and the self-determination of peoples
and an obstacle to the enjoyment of all human rights by peoples,
Acknowledges with appreciation the work and contributions of the
1.
Working Group on the use of mercenaries as a means of violating human rights and
impeding the exercise of the right of peoples to self-determination, including its
research activities, and takes note with appreciation of its latest report; 8
2.
Reaffirms that the use of mercenaries and their recruitment, financing,
protection and training are causes for grave concern to all States and violate the
purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations;
Recognizes that armed conflict, terrorism, arms trafficking and covert
3.
operations by third Powers encourage, inter alia, the demand for mercenaries on the
global market;
Urges once again all States to take the steps necessary and to exercise
4.
the utmost vigilance against the menace posed by the activities of mercenaries and
to take legislative measures to ensure that their territories and other territories under
their control, as well as their nationals, are not used for the recruitment, assembly,
financing, training, protection or transit of mercenaries for the planning of activities
designed to impede the right of peoples to self-determination, to destabilize or
overthrow the Government of any State or to dismember or impair, totally or in part,

_______________
7
8

2/4

Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.
A/68/339.

Use of mercenaries as a means of violating human rights and impeding
the exercise of the right of peoples to self-determination

A/RES/68/152

the territorial integrity or political unity of sovereign and independent States
conducting themselves in compliance with the right of peoples to self-determination;
5.
Requests all States to exercise the utmost vigilance against any kind of
recruitment, training, hiring or financing of mercenaries by private companies
offering international military consultancy and security services, as well as to
impose a specific ban on such companies intervening in armed conflicts or actions
to destabilize constitutional regimes;
Encourages States that import the military assistance, consultancy and
6.
security services provided by private companies to establish regulatory national
mechanisms for the registering and licensing of those companies in order to ensure
that imported services provided by those private companies neither impede the
enjoyment of human rights nor violate human rights in the recipient country;
Emphasizes its utmost concern about the impact of the activities of
7.
private military and security companies on the enjoyment of human rights, in
particular when operating in armed conflicts, and notes that private military and
security companies and their personnel are rarely held accountable for violations of
human rights;
Calls upon all States that have not yet done so to consider taking the
8.
action necessary to accede to or ratify the International Convention against the
Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training of Mercenaries; 9
9.
Welcomes the cooperation extended by those countries that received a
visit by the Working Group and the adoption by some States of national legislation
that restricts the recruitment, assembly, financing, training and transit of
mercenaries;
10. Condemns recent mercenary activities in developing countries in various
parts of the world, in particular in areas of conflict, and the threat they pose to the
integrity of and respect for the constitutional order of those countries and the
exercise of the right of their peoples to self-determination, and stresses the
importance for the Working Group of looking into sources and root causes, as well
as the political motivations of mercenaries and for mercenary-related activities;
11. Calls upon States to investigate the possibility of mercenary involvement
whenever and wherever criminal acts of a terrorist nature occur and to bring to trial
those found responsible or to consider their extradition, if so requested, in
accordance with national law and applicable bilateral or international treaties;
12. Condemns any form of impunity granted to perpetrators of mercenary
activities and to those responsible for the use, recruitment, financing and training of
mercenaries, and urges all States, in accordance with their obligations under
international law, to bring them, without distinction, to justice;
13. Calls upon Member States, in accordance with their obligations under
international law, to cooperate with and assist the judicial prosecution of those
accused of mercenary activities in transparent, open and fair trials;
14. Recalls the holding of the second session of the open-ended
intergovernmental working group to consider the possibility of elaborating an
international regulatory framework on the regulation, monitoring and oversight of
the activities of private military and security companies, expresses satisfaction at
_______________
9

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2163, No. 37789.

3/4

Use of mercenaries as a means of violating human rights and impeding
the exercise of the right of peoples to self-determination

A/RES/68/152

the participation of experts, including of the members of the Working Group on the
use of mercenaries, as resource persons at the above-mentioned session, and
requests the Working Group and other experts to continue their participation during
the third session of the open-ended intergovernmental working group, from 16 to
20 December 2013;
15. Requests the Working Group on the use of mercenaries to continue the
work already done by previous Special Rapporteurs on the use of mercenaries on the
strengthening of the international legal framework for the prevention and sanction
of the recruitment, use, financing and training of mercenaries, taking into account
the proposal for a new legal definition of a mercenary drafted by the Special
Rapporteur on the use of mercenaries as a means of violating human rights and
impeding the exercise of the right of peoples to self-determination in his report to
the Commission on Human Rights at its sixtieth session; 10
16. Requests the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, as a matter of priority, to publicize the adverse effects of the
activities of mercenaries on the right of peoples to self-determination and, when
requested and where necessary, to render advisory services to States that are
affected by those activities;
17. Recommends that all Member States, including those confronted with the
phenomenon of private military and security companies, as contracting States,
States of operations, home States or States whose nationals are employed to work
for a private military and security company, contribute to the work of the openended intergovernmental working group, taking into account the initial work done
by the Working Group on the use of mercenaries;
18. Urges all States to cooperate fully with the Working Group on the use of
mercenaries in the fulfilment of its mandate;
19. Requests the Secretary-General and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights to continue to provide the Working Group with all
the assistance and support necessary for the fulfilment of its mandate, both
professional and financial, including through the promotion of cooperation between
the Working Group and other components of the United Nations system that deal
with countering mercenary-related activities, in order to meet the demands of its
current and future activities;
20. Requests the Working Group to consult States and intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations in the implementation of the present resolution and
to report, with specific recommendations, to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth
session its findings on the use of mercenaries to undermine the enjoyment of all
human rights and to impede the exercise of the right of peoples to self-determination;
21. Decides to consider at its sixty-ninth session the question of the use of
mercenaries as a means of violating human rights and impeding the exercise of the
right of peoples to self-determination under the item entitled “Right of peoples to
self-determination”.
70th plenary meeting
18 December 2013

_______________
10

4/4

See E/CN.4/2004/15, para. 47.
