A/77/398

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
1 November 2022
Original: English

Seventy-seventh session
Agenda item 45

International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space
Report of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee)
Rapporteur: Ms. María Noel Beretta Tassano (Uruguay)

I. Introduction
1.
At its 3rd plenary meeting, on 16 September 2022, the General Assembly, on
the recommendation of the General Committee, decided to include in the agenda of
its seventy-seventh session the item entitled “International cooperation in the peaceful
uses of outer space” and to allocate it to the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee).
2.
The Fourth Committee considered the item at its 14th, 15th, 16th and 17th
meetings, on 26, 27, 28 and 31 October 2022, and took action on the item at its 17th
meeting. Statements and observations made in the course of the Committee’s
consideration of the item are reflected in the relevant summary records. 1
3.
For its consideration of the item, the Committee had before it the report of the
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space on its sixty-fifth session (A/77/20).
4.
At its 1st meeting, on 29 September, the Committee decided to establish a
Working Group of the Whole on international cooperation in the peaceful uses of
outer space, chaired by the United Arab Emirates, to prepare proposals to be
submitted under the item.
5.
At the 14th meeting, on 26 October, the representative of the United Arab
Emirates, in his capacity as Chair of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space, introduced the report of that Committee.
6.
At the 15th meeting, on 27 October, the Fourth Committee held a joint meeting
with the First Committee to address possible challenges to space security and
sustainability, pursuant to General Assembly resolution 76/55. Statements were made
by the Director and Deputy to the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, the
Acting Director of the Office for Outer Space Affairs, the Chair of the Committee on
__________________
1

22-24547 (E)

A/C.4/77/SR.14, A/C.4/77/SR.15, A/C.4/77/SR.16 and A/C.4/77/SR.17.

171122

*2224547*

A/77/398

the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, the Chair of the Open-ended working group on
reducing space threats through norms, rules and principles of responsible behaviours,
a professor from the Geneva Centre for Security Policy, a professor from the Beijing
Institute of Technology and a representative of the Satellite Industry Association.

II. Consideration of proposals
7.
At its 17th meeting, on 31 October, the Committee was informed that the draft
resolutions contained in documents A/C.4/77/L.6 and A/C.4/77/L.7 had no
programme budget implications.

A.

Draft resolution
8.
At the same meeting, the representative of the United Arab Emirates, in his
capacity as Chair of the Working Group of the Whole, introduced a draft resolution
entitled “Space and global health” (A/C.4/77/L.6).
9.
Also at the same meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution A/C.4/77/L.6,
without a vote (see para. 12).

B.

Draft resolution
10. Also at the 17th meeting, the representative of the United Arab Emirates, in his
capacity as Chair of the Working Group of the Whole, introduced a draft resolution
entitled “International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space” ( A/C.4/77/L.7)
and orally revised it. 2
11. At the same meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution A/C.4/77/L.7, as
orally revised, without a vote (see para. 12).

__________________
2

2/14

See A/C.4/77/SR.17.
22-24547

A/77/398

III. Recommendation of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee)
12. The Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of the following d raft resolutions:

Draft resolution I
Space and global health
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 51/122 of 13 December 1996, 54/68 of 6 December
1999, 59/2 of 20 October 2004, 66/71 of 9 December 2011, 69/85 of 5 December
2014, 70/1 of 25 September 2015, 71/90 of 6 December 2016, 73/91 of 7 December
2018 and 76/3 of 25 October 2021,
Recalling also the recommendations contained in the resolution entitled “The
Space Millennium: Vienna Declaration on Space and Human Development”, adopted
by the Third United Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space, 1 in which participating States called for action to improve public health
services by expanding and coordinating space-based services for telemedicine and for
controlling infectious diseases,
Recalling further the fiftieth anniversary of the first United Nations Conference
on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (UNISPACE+50) and its
thematic priority 5, on strengthened space cooperation for global health,
Acknowledging the importance of the contribution of space science and
technology and their applications to efforts towards the achievement of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, 2 in particular Sustainable Development Goal 3,
on ensuring healthy lives and promoting well-being for all at all ages, and conscious
that the work done in the space health sector can contribute to sustainable
development, especially with programmes aimed at enhancing the quality of life in
various ways, including improving human health,
Emphasizing that overarching objective 2 of the “Space2030” Agenda, 3 to
harness the potential of space to solve everyday challenges and leverage space-related
innovation to improve the quality of life, could be attained by strengthening space related cooperation in support of global health, by improving the use and application
of space medicine, science and technology, innovations in the global health domain,
cooperation and the sharing of information, while protecting the privacy of personal
data, and tools to improve research advancement and the timeliness and effectiveness
of public health and health-care interventions, and by enhancing capacity-building in
space medicine, science and technology,
Convinced of the importance, and recognizing the existing contributions, of
space science, space technology and space applications to enhance space life sciences

__________________

Report of the Third United Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space, Vienna, 19–30 July 1999 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.00.I.3), chap. I,
resolution 1.
2
Resolution 70/1.
3
Resolution 76/3.
1

22-24547

3/14

A/77/398

and digital health technologies, such as telehealth, telemedicine 4 and tele-epidemiology,
for the prevention and control of diseases and global health issues, the promotion of
human health, environmental health, animal health and food sourcing and supply, and
the advancement of medical research and health practices, including the provision of
health-care services to individuals and communities irrespective of geographical
location as a means of promoting equitable, affordable and universal access to health
for all,
Noting with concern that among the gaps in the areas of telemedicine and
telehealth are the limited uptake of digital technologies in public health systems and
health care, as well as the lack of harmonized data-sharing standards among the
various manufacturers of medical equipment,
Noting with satisfaction the work of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space, its subsidiary bodies and the Office for Outer Space Affairs of the
Secretariat in the area of space and global health, including in the framework of action
team 6, on public health, established to implement the recomm endations of the Third
United Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, as
well as the action team 6 follow-up initiative, the Expert Group on Space and Global
Health, UNISPACE+50 thematic priority 5, on strengthened space coo peration for
global health, and the Working Group on Space and Global Health of the Scientific
and Technical Subcommittee of the Committee, and welcoming its report on the work
conducted under its multi-year workplan, 5
Deeply concerned about the devastating global effects of emerging infectious
diseases and other emergencies with an impact on health, including the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic, to the detriment of human life, society and
development, and urging the international community to em brace a One Health
approach by strengthening the role of space-based solutions, in particular telehealth,
in monitoring, preparedness and response activities,
1.
Encourages United Nations entities, intergovernmental organizations,
Governments and the private sector to pursue effective coordination in all key space
activities relevant to global health;
2.
Encourages formalized cooperation between health authorities and space
authorities at the domestic level, and welcomes existing cross -sectoral networks that
foster the exchange of ideas between the space and health sectors;
3.
Encourages Member States to establish a policy-enabled environment and
governance mechanisms, with due consideration of legal and ethical issues, for
removing challenges to facilitating the effective use of space-based technologies in
support of global health, including telemedicine solutions and other emerging
technologies;
4.
Also encourages Member States to promote open data-sharing policies and
participatory approaches to developing and improving access to all geospatial
information relevant to global health, including remote sensing and Earth observation
data, whenever possible;
5.
Further encourages Member States to enable organizational and technical
interoperability and promote research and innovation activities to facilitate the
__________________

The term “telemedicine” is used broadly to refer to the use of telecommunications, satellite
communications and information technology to provide clinical health care from a distance and
includes many active and relevant subfields, such as tele-cardiology, tele-radiology,
tele-ophthalmology, tele-oncology, tele-pharmacy, tele-surgery, tele-dermatology and other
developing fields.
5
A/AC.105/C.1/121.
4

4/14

22-24547

A/77/398

development and implementation of space-based science and technology in the health
sector;
6.
Urges United Nations entities and intergovernmental organizations to
support the wider development of, equitable access to and application of space
solutions for global health, public health, including epidemics and pandemics,
emergencies that may have an impact on health, and the individual health needs of
Member States, and encourages the implementation of a broader range of space
solutions for sustainable development, including public -private partnerships;
7.
Encourages Member States and participating entities to advance their
efforts related to the geotagging of all assets relevant to health systems, inc luding
health information systems, and to make them available to further the attainment of
health goals;
8.
Encourages Member States to recognize the relevance of access to the
space environment and space analogues 6 for health and life sciences research and
development, especially in the area of astronaut health, for social and economic
benefits on Earth;
9.
Also encourages Member States to actively promote international
cooperation in the field of space medicine on the basis of equal opportunities for a ll
interested participants and in the interests of the further exploration of outer space by
humankind, and further scientific and technological development and applications in
the interests of global health;
10. Further encourages Member States to conduct appropriate drills and
exercises to benchmark their operational preparedness and response capacities and
capabilities for the appropriate use of space technologies in responding to global
health events;
11. Welcomes the establishment of a dedicated, cooperative, globally
accessible, multifaceted platform based in Geneva to promote effective collaboration
on space and global health issues among Member States, United Nations entities,
other international organizations and relevant actors;
12. Emphasizes that all key activities, reference documents and plans relevant
to space for global health carried out or prepared by United Nations entities should
be monitored and compiled on an annual basis, including those of the World Health
Organization, other international organizations and States members of the Committee
on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, as well as, to the extent possible,
non-governmental organizations and other non-governmental actors, and also
emphasizes that the resulting annual compilation o f activities should serve as a
reference to identify and discuss gaps and opportunities and should be shared broadly
in an effort to raise awareness and promote cooperation among relevant actors in this
domain;
13. Recognizes the importance of analysing and assessing the roles and
interests of current actors in the domain of space and global health, with the aim of
promoting synergy, complementarity, cooperation and coordination among all actors;
14. Emphasizes the need to enhance, in an equitable and sustainable manner,
intersectoral coordination and cooperation for effective international, regional,
national and subnational capacity-building activities relevant to the application of
space science and technology in the field of global health;
__________________
6

22-24547

Space analogues include parabolic flights, bed rest studies and expeditions to Antarctica and
other isolated, confined and extreme environments that simulate the space environment on Earth.
5/14

A/77/398

15. Encourages Member States to engage learning institutions and other
capacity-building mechanisms in motivating young health professionals, at an early
stage, to acquire space-related skills and abilities;
16. Agrees to promote capacity-building events, to be organized by United
Nations entities and other relevant actors, with the objective of further promoting
awareness of and engagement with regard to the important contribution of space
science and technology among actors applying One Health approaches, with a vi ew
to increasing the number of organizations and other actors in the health domain that
are actively engaged in using space science and technology;
17. Requests the Office for Outer Space Affairs to strengthen, within existing
resources, capacity-building and networking in Africa, Asia and the Pacific and Latin
America and the Caribbean, through regional technical cooperation projects, and to
support field projects for strengthening collaboration between the space and global
health sectors as an efficient strategy for making better use of space science and
technology for access to global health for beneficiary States and taking better
advantage of opportunities offered by bilateral or multilateral collaboration;
18. Encourages Member States to foster linkages between academia, national
experts, telecommunications regulatory authorities and science and technology
authorities with a view to improving access to and the use of digital technologies and
information systems in health.

6/14

22-24547

A/77/398

Draft resolution II
International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 51/122 of 13 December 1996, 54/68 of 6 December
1999, 59/2 of 20 October 2004, 61/110 and 61/111 of 14 December 2006, 62/101 of
17 December 2007, 62/217 of 22 December 2007, 65/97 of 10 December 2010, 65/271
of 7 April 2011, 66/71 of 9 December 2011, 67/113 of 18 December 2012, 68/50 of
5 December 2013, 68/74 and 68/75 of 11 December 2013, 69/85 of 5 December 2014,
70/1 of 25 September 2015, 70/82 of 9 December 2015, 70/230 of 23 December 2015,
71/90 of 6 December 2016, 72/77 and 72/78 of 7 December 2017, 73/6 of 26 October
2018, 73/91 of 7 December 2018, 74/82 of 13 December 2019, 75/92 of 10 December
2020 and 76/76 of 9 December 2021,
Emphasizing the significant progress in the development of space science and
technology and their applications that has enabled humans to explore the universe,
and the extraordinary achievements made in space exploration efforts, including
deepening the understanding of the planetary system and the Sun and the Earth itself,
in the use of space science and technology for the benefit of all humankind and in the
development of the international legal regime governing space activities,
Recognizing, in that regard, the unique platform at the global level for
international cooperation in space activities represented by the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space and its Scientific and Technical Subcommittee and
Legal Subcommittee and assisted by the Office for Outer Space Affairs of the
Secretariat,
Deeply convinced of the common interest of all humankind in promoting and
expanding the exploration and use of outer space, as the province of all humankind,
for peaceful purposes and in continuing efforts to extend to all Member States the
benefits derived therefrom, and also of the importance of international cooperation in
this field, for which the United Nations should continue to provide a focal point,
Reaffirming the importance of international cooperation in developing the rule
of international law, including the relevant norms of international space law and their
important role in international cooperation for the exploration and use of outer space
for peaceful purposes, and of the widest possible adherence to international treaties
that promote the peaceful uses of outer space in order to meet emerging new
challenges, especially for developing countries,
Seriously concerned about the possibility of an arms race in outer space, and
bearing in mind the importance of article IV of the Treaty on Principles Governing
the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon
and Other Celestial Bodies, 1
Recognizing that all Member States, in particular those with major space
capabilities, should contribute actively to the prevention of an arms race in outer
space with a view to promoting and strengthening international cooperation in the
exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes,
Deeply concerned about the fragility of the space environment and the
challenges to the long-term sustainability of outer space activities, in particular the
impact of space debris, which is an issue of concern to all nations,
Noting the progress achieved in the development of peaceful space exploration
and applications as well as in various national and cooperative space projects, and the
__________________
1

22-24547

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 610, No. 8843.
7/14

A/77/398

importance of further developing the legal framework to strengthen international
cooperation in space,
Convinced that space science and technology and their applications, including
satellite communications, Earth observation systems and satellite navigation
technologies, provide indispensable tools for viable long-term solutions for
sustainable development and can contribute more effectively t o efforts to promote the
development of all countries and regions of the world, and stressing in that regard the
need to harness the benefits of space technology towards implementing the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, 2
Seriously concerned about the devastating impact of disasters, 3 and desirous of
enhancing international coordination and cooperation at the global level in disaster
management and emergency response through greater access to and use of space based services and geospatial information for all countries and facilitating capacity building and institutional strengthening for disaster management, in particular in
developing countries,
Firmly convinced that the use of space science and technology and their
applications in areas such as telehealth, tele-education, disaster management,
environmental protection, natural resources management and ocean and climate
monitoring contribute to achieving the objectives of the global conferences of the
United Nations that address various aspects of economic, social and cultural
development, particularly poverty eradication,
Deeply concerned about the devastating effects of infectious diseases, including
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and Ebola virus disease, to the
detriment of human life, society and development, and urging the international
community to enhance the role of space-based solutions, in particular
tele-epidemiology, in monitoring, preparedness and response activities,
Recalling the fact that the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development, held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from 20 to 22 June 2012, recognized the
important role that space science and technology play in promoting sustainable
development, 4
Having considered the report of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space on the work of its sixty-fifth session, 5
1.
Endorses the report of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
on the work of its sixty-fifth session;
2.
Agrees that the Committee, at its sixty-sixth session, should consider the
substantive items recommended at its sixty-fifth session, 6 taking into account the
concerns of all countries, in particular those of developing countries;
3.
Notes that, at its sixty-first session, the Legal Subcommittee of the
Committee continued its work, 7 as mandated by the General Assembly in its
resolution 76/76;
4.
Agrees that the Legal Subcommittee, at its sixty-second session, should
consider the substantive items and reconvene the working groups recommended by
__________________

Resolution 70/1.
The term “disasters” refers to natural or technological disasters.
4
Resolution 66/288, annex, para. 274.
5
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-seventh Session, Supplement No. 20
(A/77/20).
6
Ibid., para. 428.
7
Ibid., chap. II, sect. C; see also A/AC.105/1260.
2
3

8/14

22-24547

A/77/398

the Committee, 8 including holding intersessional consultations as necessary, taking
into account the concerns of all countries, in particular those of developing countrie s;
5.
Urges Member States that have not yet become parties to the international
treaties governing the uses of outer space 9 to give consideration to ratifying or
acceding to those treaties in accordance with their national law, as well as
incorporating them into their national legislation;
6.
Notes with satisfaction that the space law curriculum developed by the
Office and published in all official languages of the United Nations could encourage
further studies within Member States in cooperation with relevant entities in support
of capacity-building efforts in space law and policy;
7.
Takes note of the report of the Working Group on the Review of
International Mechanisms for Cooperation in the Peaceful Exploration and Use of
Outer Space on the work conducted under its multi-year workplan, 10 as finalized at
the fifty-sixth session of the Legal Subcommittee, and notes that the report provides
an important source of information and useful guidance for further joint undertakings
by spacefaring nations and emerging space nations, as appropriate;
8.
Notes with satisfaction the establishment, under a five-year workplan, of
the Working Group on Legal Aspects of Space Resource Activities of the Legal
Subcommittee;
9.
Notes that, at its fifty-ninth session, the Scientific and Technical
Subcommittee continued its work, 11 as mandated by the General Assembly in its
resolution 76/76;
10. Agrees that the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee, at its sixtieth
session, should consider the substantive items and reconvene the working groups
recommended by the Committee, 12 including holding intersessional consultations as
necessary, taking into account the concerns of all countries, in particular those of
developing countries;
11. Takes note of the report of the Working Group on Space and Global Health
on the work conducted under its multi-year workplan, 13 as finalized at the fifty-ninth
session of the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee, and notes that the report
provides an important source of information and useful guidance for advancing the
use of space science and technology for global health for spacefaring nations and
emerging space nations, as appropriate;
12. Notes with satisfaction the establishment of the Space and Global Health
Platform, based in Geneva, to promote effective collaboration on space and global
__________________

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-seventh Session, Supplement No. 20
(A/77/20), paras. 279–280.
9
Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer
Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 610,
No. 8843); Agreement on the Rescue of Astronauts, the Return of Astronauts and the Return of
Objects Launched into Outer Space (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 672, No. 9574);
Convention on International Liability for Damage Caused by Space Objects (United Nations,
Treaty Series, vol. 961, No. 13810); Convention on Registration of Objects Launche d into Outer
Space (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1023, No. 15020); and Agreement Governing the
Activities of States on the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies (United Nations, Treaty Series,
vol. 1363, No. 23002).
10
A/AC.105/C.2/112.
11
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-seventh Session, Supplement No. 20
(A/77/20), chap. II, sect. B; see also A/AC.105/1258.
12
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-seventh Session, Supplement No. 20
(A/77/20), paras. 189–190.
13
A/AC.105/C.1/121.
8

22-24547

9/14

A/77/398

health issues among Member States and United Nations system entities, in particular
the World Health Organization and the Office for Outer Space Affairs of the
Secretariat, as well as international organizations and relevant actors, and welcomes
the establishment of the Space and Global Health Network, whose work should be
facilitated by the Office for Outer Space Affairs within existing resources; 14
13. Recalls with appreciation that 10 October 2022 marked 55 years since the
entry into force of the Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the
Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies,
as the cornerstone of international space law;
14. Reiterates the importance of information-sharing in discovering,
monitoring and physically characterizing potentially hazardous near-Earth objects to
ensure that all countries, in particular developing countries with limited capacity for
predicting and mitigating a near-Earth object impact, are aware of potential threats,
emphasizes the need for capacity-building for effective emergency response and
disaster management in the event of a near-Earth object impact, and notes with
satisfaction the work carried out by the International Asteroid Warning Network and
the Space Mission Planning Advisory Group to strengthen international cooperation
to mitigate the potential threat posed by near-Earth objects, with the support of the
Office, serving as the permanent secretariat of the Advisory Group; 15
15. Notes with satisfaction the adoption by the Committee of the preamble and
21 Guidelines for the Long-term Sustainability of Outer Space Activities, as
contained in annex II to the report of the Committee on its sixty-second session, 16 and
the establishment, under a five-year workplan, of the Working Group on the Longterm Sustainability of Outer Space Activities of the Scientific and Technical
Subcommittee of the Committee, notes that the Committee encouraged States and
international intergovernmental organizations to voluntarily take measures to ensure
that the Guidelines were implemented to the greatest extent feasible and practicable,
and emphasizes that the Committee serves as the principal forum for continued
institutionalized dialogue on issues related to the implementation and review of the
Guidelines;
16. Notes with appreciation that some Member States are already
implementing space debris mitigation measures on a voluntary basis, through national
mechanisms and consistent with the Space Debris Mitigation Guidelines of the
Inter-Agency Space Debris Coordination Committee and with the Space Debris
Mitigation Guidelines of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, 17
endorsed by the General Assembly in its resolution 62/217, and invites other States
to implement, through relevant national mechanisms, the Space Debris Mitigation
Guidelines of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space;
17. Considers that it is essential that Member States pay more attention to the
problem of the gradually increasing probability of collisions of space objects,
especially those with nuclear power sources, with space debris, and other aspects of
space debris, calls for the continuation of national research on this question, for the
development of improved technology for the monitoring of space debris and for the
compilation and dissemination of data on space debris, considers that, to the extent
possible, information thereon should be provided to the Scientific and Technical
Subcommittee, and agrees that international cooperation is needed to expand
__________________

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-seventh Session, Supplement No. 20
(A/77/20), para. 167.
15
See A/AC.105/1138, paras. 205–210; see also A/AC.105/C.1/121.
16
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/74/20).
17
Ibid., Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/62/20), paras. 117–118, and annex.
14

10/14

22-24547

A/77/398

appropriate and affordable strategies to minimize the impact of space debris on future
space missions;
18. Urges all Member States, in particular those with major space capabilities,
to contribute actively to the goal of preventing an arms race in outer space as an
essential condition for the promotion of international cooperation in the exploration
and use of outer space for peaceful purposes;
19. Requests the Committee to continue to consider, as a matter of priority,
ways and means of maintaining outer space for peaceful purposes and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its seventy-eighth session, and agrees that the
Committee should continue to consider the broader perspective of space security and
associated matters that would be instrumental in ensuring the safe and responsible
conduct of space activities, including ways to promote international, regional and
interregional cooperation to that end;
20. Emphasizes the central role of the Office in promoting international
cooperation in the exploration and peaceful uses of outer space for economic, social
and scientific development, in particular for the benefit of developing countri es;
21. Notes with satisfaction the programme of work undertaken by the Office
in 2022 to strengthen international cooperation in the conduct of space activities for
peaceful purposes and the use of space science and technology and their applications
towards the achievement of the internationally agreed Sustainable Development
Goals, including the workshops and symposiums conducted to build capacity, the
assistance provided to developing countries, at their request, in the development of
national space policy and legislation in conformity with international space law, and
actions implemented to strengthen institutional capacity in space activities;
22. Welcomes, in that regard, the activities being carried out by the Office to
promote gender equality and the increased role of women in space activities,
including through targeted capacity-building and technical advisory activities, and
efforts to encourage enhanced involvement of women and girls in science,
technology, engineering and mathematics education, and invites Member States to
make voluntary contributions to those activities;
23. Requests the Office to continue to apprise the Committee and its Scientific
and Technical Subcommittee and Legal Subcommittee, at their respective sessions in
2023, of the status of its capacity-building activities;
24. Recognizes the capacity-building activities under the United Nations
Programme on Space Applications, which provide unique benefits for Member States,
in particular developing countries, participating in those activities; 18
25. Notes with satisfaction the activities carried out under the United Nations
Platform for Space-based Information for Disaster Management and Emergency
Response (UN-SPIDER), and recognizes the significant achievements made and the
advisory support provided to Member States within the framework of UN -SPIDER
since its establishment in 2006 19 with the valuable contributions of its network of
regional support offices, and encourages Member States, on a voluntary basis, to
provide the programme with the additional resources necessary to address the
increasing demand for support successfully and in a timely manner;
26. Reiterates the importance of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk
Reduction 2015–2030, 20 in which the value of space-based technology and Earth
__________________

See A/AC.105/1240, sect. II.
See resolution 61/110.
20
Resolution 69/283, annex II.
18
19

22-24547

11/14

A/77/398

observation for disaster management and emergency response is recognized, and
notes with satisfaction the efforts of the Office and its UN -SPIDER programme
towards promoting international cooperation as a way to enhance the use of spacebased technologies and related services at the national and local levels in contributing
to the implementation of the Sendai Framework and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development;
27. Notes with satisfaction the continuous progress made by the International
Committee on Global Navigation Satellite Systems with the support of the Office, in
its capacity as executive secretariat of the International Committee, towards achieving
compatibility and interoperability among global and regional space -based
positioning, navigation and timing systems and in the promotion of the use of global
navigation satellite systems and their integration into national infrastructure,
particularly in developing countries, and notes with appreciation that the Internationa l
Committee held its sixteenth meeting in the United Arab Emirates from 9 to
14 October 2022;
28. Notes with appreciation that the regional centres for space science and
technology education, affiliated to the United Nations, namely, the African regional
centres for space science and technology education in the French and English
languages, located in Morocco and Nigeria, respectively, the Regional Centre for
Space Science and Technology Education for Asia and the Pacific, located in China,
the Centre for Space Science and Technology Education in Asia and the Pacific,
located in India, the Regional Centre for Space Science and Technology Education
for Latin America and the Caribbean, with campuses located in Brazil and Mexico,
and the Regional Centre for Space Science and Technology Education for Western
Asia, located in Jordan, have continued their education programmes in 2022,
encourages the regional centres to continue to promote greater participation of women
in their education programmes, and agrees that the regional centres should continue
to report to the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space on their activities;
29. Notes the continued work of the Russian Federation in the establishment
of a centre for space science and technology education in the Eurasian region on the
basis of Roscosmos Corporate Academy;
30. Emphasizes that regional and interregional cooperation in the field of
space activities is essential to strengthen the peaceful uses of outer space, assist
Member States in the development of their space capabilities and contribute to the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, to that end requests
relevant regional organizations and their groups of experts to offer the assistance
necessary so that countries can carry out the recommendations of regional
conferences, and in that regard notes the importance of the equal participation of
women in all fields of science and technology;
31. Recognizes, in that regard, the important role played by such organizations
as the Asia-Pacific Space Cooperation Organization and the European Space Agency
and by conferences and other mechanisms, such as the African Leadership Conference
on Space Science and Technology for Sustainable Development, the Asia -Pacific
Regional Space Agency Forum and the Space Conference of the Americas, in
strengthening regional and international cooperation among States;
32. Recalls the adoption of the African Space Policy and Strategy by the
Assembly of the African Union at its twenty-sixth ordinary session, held in Addis
Ababa on 30 and 31 January 2016, notes that this achievement marks the first step
towards the realization of an African outer space programme within the framework of
the African Union Agenda 2063, and notes with satisfaction in tha t regard the
establishment of the African Space Agency, hosted by Egypt;

12/14

22-24547

A/77/398

33. Emphasizes the need to increase the benefits of space technology and its
applications and to contribute to an orderly growth of space activities favourable to
sustained economic growth and sustainable development in all countries, including
strengthening sustainable spatial data infrastructure at the regional and national levels
and building resilience to reduce the consequences of disasters, in particular in
developing countries;
34. Reiterates the need to promote the benefits of space technology and its
applications in the major United Nations conferences and summits for economic,
social and cultural development and related fields, and recognizes that the
fundamental significance of space science and technology and their applications for
global, regional, national and local sustainable development processes should be
promoted in the formulation of policies and programmes of action and their
implementation, including through efforts towards achieving the objectives of those
conferences and summits and in implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development;
35. Encourages Member States, to that end, to promote the inclusion in those
conferences, summits and processes of the relevance of space science and technology
applications and the use of space-derived geospatial data, and in general, space-based
data and infrastructures, with the involvement of the Office;
36. Encourages the Office to take active part in those conferences, summits
and processes and other activities in support of their objectives, as appropriate, and
to conduct capacity-building activities, hold lectures and participate in academic and
research activities to foster international cooperation in the peacef ul uses of outer
space;
37. Urges the Inter-Agency Meeting on Outer Space Activities (UN-Space),
under the leadership of the Office, to continue to examine how space science and
technology and their applications could contribute to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, and encourages entities of the United Nations system to participate, as
appropriate, in UN-Space coordination efforts;
38. Encourages the Office to continue to conduct capacity-building and
outreach activities associated with space security and transparency and confidencebuilding measures in outer space activities, as appropriate, and within the context of
the long-term sustainability of outer space activities;
39. Also encourages the Office to continue to explore existing avenues and
new opportunities to increase its capability to meet the growing demand for support
to strengthen the capacity of countries, in particular developing countries, in using
space science and technology and their applications and to inform the Committee of
those efforts;
40. Agrees that the Office should pursue greater engagement with industry and
private sector entities to further their support for and contributions to the overall work
of the Office; 21
41. Appeals to Governments, the relevant entities of the United Nations
system, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, institutions, industry
and private sector entities and individuals to make voluntary contributions to the trust
fund in support of the United Nations Programme on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
in order to support the efforts of the Office to secure additional resources to facilitate
the full implementation of its programme of work, including, where appropriate, the
__________________
21

22-24547

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-second Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/72/20),
para. 326.
13/14

A/77/398

financing of special projects, and otherwise to assist the Office in carrying out
technical cooperation and assistance activities, in particular for developing countries;
42. Urges the African States, the Asia-Pacific States, the Eastern European
States, the Latin American and Caribbean States and the Western European and other
States to nominate their candidates for the offices of Chair of the Committee, Second
Vice-Chair/Rapporteur of the Committee, Chair of the Scientific and Technical
Subcommittee, First Vice-Chair of the Committee and Chair of the Legal
Subcommittee, respectively, for the period 2024–2025, before the next session of the
Committee, to be held in 2023; 22
43. Decides that Guatemala and Uzbekistan shall become members of the
Committee; 23
44. Endorses the decision of the Committee to grant the status of observer to
the Association for the Development of the Atlantic International Research Centre,
the Access Space Alliance, the Hague Institute for Global Justice and the International
Peace Alliance (Space), in accordance with the procedures of the Committee; 24
45. Encourages the regional groups to promote active participation in the
work of the Committee and its subsidiary bodies by the States members of the
Committee that are also members of the respective regional groups.

__________________

Ibid., Seventy-seventh Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/77/20), para. 409.
Ibid., paras. 410–411.
24
Ibid., paras. 413–420.
22
23

14/14

22-24547
