United Nations

S/PV.6310

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6310th meeting
Tuesday, 11 May 2010, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Salam/Ms. Ziade . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Lebanon)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Dunlop
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Okuda
Mr. Heller
Mr. Onemola
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Rugunda
Mr. Parham
Ms. Rice

Agenda
Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-35734 (E)

*1035734*

S/PV.6310

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council
The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Argentina, Colombia, Cuba, India,
the Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel, Morocco, New
Zealand, Norway, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia
and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration of the item, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
His Excellency Mr. Pedro Serrano, in which he
requests to be invited, in his capacity as acting head of
the delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations, to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. If I hear no objection, I shall
take it that the Council agrees to extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
His Excellency Mr. Pedro Serrano.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Serrano to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
At this meeting, the Council will hear briefings
by His Excellency Mr. Claude Heller, Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
2

resolution 1540 (2004); His Excellency Mr. Thomas
Mayr-Harting, Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and
associated individuals and entities; and His Excellency
Mr. Ertuğrul Apakan, Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) concerning counter-terrorism.
At the outset, His Excellency Mr. Claude Heller
will make a joint statement on behalf of the
Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004), respectively.
Thereafter, the Council will hear briefings by the three
Chairs of those Committees.
I now give the floor to Mr. Heller.
Mr. Heller (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of the
Chairmen of the three subsidiary organs of the Security
Council established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004) concerning
counter-terrorism, I should like to update the Security
Council on ongoing cooperation among the
Committees and their groups of experts. Taking into
account the fact that the full statement of my briefing
has been distributed to members of the Council, I shall
deliver a summarized version.
During the past six months, the cooperation
among the Committees and their respective groups of
experts has grown, pursuant to the requests made by
the Security Council in recent resolutions, in particular
resolutions 1805 (2008), 1810 (2008) and 1904 (2009).
The three Committees attach great importance to
coordination and cooperation among their groups of
experts, namely, the Monitoring Team, the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED)
and the experts of the 1540 Committee. In that context,
I also wish to recall that cooperation and coordination
have been facilitated through the joint use of facilities
by the experts in the framework of the Capital Master
Plan, as requested by the Security Council in resolution
1904 (2009).
The three expert groups have continued to
implement the common strategy on dealing with non- or
late-reporting States through exchanges of information
and joint visits, when appropriate, and in assisting
Member States in submitting their responses to the three
Committees on their implementation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions. Since the most recent
briefing, the three expert groups have invited one
10-35734

S/PV.6310

another to relevant workshops. Those workshops
continue to provide an excellent opportunity for the
three expert groups to assist Member States in
understanding the differing but complementary roles
and mandates of the three Committees. They also enable
the expert groups to exchange information on a regular
basis with national counter-terrorism contacts and
coordinators.
CTED has made its list of national coordinators
available to the other two expert groups. Furthermore,
CTED and the 1267 Monitoring Team have made a
reciprocal arrangement for access to their electronic
databases and are preparing an extension arrangement
to the 1540 experts group. The Monitoring Team has
already provided access to its database to the 1540
experts. In addition, the 1540 legislative databases and
the information from matrices are already available on
the official website. CTED has also begun sharing the
monthly reports of its Executive Director with the
other two expert groups.
With respect to new themes for a common
strategy among the three groups, they have prepared a
common paper focusing on the enhancement of
cooperation
with
selected
intergovernmental
organizations. Consultations are ongoing to finalize the
modalities of a common approach towards relevant
international, regional and subregional organizations. In
the meanwhile, the three expert groups have continued
their cooperation with the Pacific Islands Forum, which
is one of the four organizations mentioned in the
common paper. Meetings between the expert groups
and the permanent missions of the Forum have
continued to deepen the mutual understanding and
cooperation between the States members of the Forum
and the experts of the three Committees.
The expert groups continue to coordinate their
visits to Member States, explore whether these could
be conducted jointly, and coordinate their participation
at relevant conferences. When an expert group does not
participate in a visit, information on the Member State
that is to be visited is exchanged. In addition, the three
expert groups also share their reports on their visits
whenever possible. Since the last joint briefing,
Monitoring Team members have participated in two
Counter-Terrorism Committee visits, for a total of 17
joint trips.
The three expert groups also continue to
coordinate their work within the framework of the

10-35734

Counter-Terrorism
Implementation
Task
Force
(CTITF). The expert groups contribute to the work of
several CTITF working groups, and the Monitoring
Team and CTED have assumed leading functions. In
this regard, a joint meeting was held between the three
expert groups and the CTITF on 7 April to discuss
common issues and to identify other areas that could be
benefit from their respective areas of expertise and
capacity within the United Nations system as partners
in a joint effort to assist Member States to better
implement the respective resolutions pertaining to their
work. It was also agreed that the CTITF could provide
a further link to relevant international, regional and
subregional organizations.
In addition to the aforementioned activities,
regular meetings are held between the expert groups in
New York. Moreover, Counter-Terrorism Committee
regularly invites the Monitoring Team, the 1540
Committee experts, CTITF and the relevant United
Nations offices to its thematic briefings in the
framework of its official meetings. Recently, the
coordinator of the 1540 working group on cooperation
with international organizations, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and the 1267 Committee also invited the
Monitoring Team, the CTED and the CTITF to attend a
briefing by the International Atomic Energy Agency
during the informal consultations of the working
group.
An updated comparative table was issued at
previous briefings to highlight the main aspects of the
respective mandates and areas of competence of the
three Committees and their expert groups. The table
has proved to be a useful tool for Member States by
helping them to better understand the specificities and
complementarities of our work. The comparative table
has been further updated and posted on our respective
websites and will be distributed today.
Terrorism and the participation of non-State
actors in the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction continue to threaten international peace and
security. Cooperation is a crucial element in the efforts
to counter the threat of terrorism, including that from
nuclear, chemical and biological weapons.
The three subsidiary bodies of the Security
Council and their respective expert groups are
committed to continuing to cooperate and to coordinate
their work, within their respective mandates, in order
to contribute to an effective and efficient approach to

3

S/PV.6310

this issue in the wider United Nations framework and
as part of the broader efforts of the international
community. In this respect, the Committees look
forward to receiving further guidance from the Council
in order better to coordinate their counter-terrorism
efforts.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Mr. Heller for his briefing. I now give him the floor
once again to deliver a second statement in his capacity
as Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).
Mr. Heller (spoke in Spanish): In my capacity of
Chairman of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), I will highlight the main
developments in the work of the Committee in the six
months since the last joint briefing on 13 November
2009 (see S/PV.6217). I would like to update the
Security Council on the outcome of the recent
comprehensive review of the status of implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004), and to highlight the
Committee’s main activities in outreach and awarenessbuilding, as well as in assistance to and cooperation
with relevant intergovernmental organizations. I have
already commented on the growing cooperation between
the 1540 Committee and other United Nations bodies,
especially the Committee established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1373 (2001) and the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force (CTITF).
The comprehensive review was launched in
response to a decision of the Security Council
contained in resolution 1810 (2008). As part of this
review, the Committee held a three-day open meeting
from 30 September to 2 October 2009. My predecessor,
Ambassador Jorge Urbina of Costa Rica, has already
briefed the Council on that meeting, at which 41 States,
21 intergovernmental organizations and other entities
made statements and held interactive discussions on
specific issues.
I will highlight today the outcome of the review,
which was sent to the President of the Security Council
on 29 January 2010 in the form of a final document
containing
the
review’s
key
findings
and
recommendations (S/2010/52). The main points
included five major areas in which progress can be
made: first, the Committee’s capacity to gather
information on the status of implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004); secondly, its efficiency and
effective working practices; thirdly, means for

4

facilitating assistance; fourthly, cooperation with
international, regional, subregional and multilateral
institutions; and fifthly, outreach.
Without going into greater detail, I am pleased to
mention that the review confirmed that the adoption of
resolution 1540 (2004) has prompted significant steps
to be taken around the world to prevent non-State
actors from manufacturing, acquiring, possessing,
developing, transporting, transferring or using nuclear,
chemical or biological weapons or their means of
delivery, and has also facilitated the gathering of
comprehensive data on the measures taken by States in
this regard.
A great many States have submitted reports on
the measures taken in accordance with the resolution.
Since 2006, Member States have made tangible and
significant progress in addressing the threat of the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. Nearly
160 Member States have provided information on their
capacities and gaps in preventing the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. In addition, the number
of States that have reported having implemented
legislative measures to penalize the involvement of
non-State actors in the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction has grown considerably since the
adoption of resolution 1540 (2004).
The review also confirmed that, due to the wide
range of obligations arising under resolution 1540
(2004), some States still fall short in addressing all the
resolution’s requirements in their legislation, including
the adoption of preventive measures and penalties for
violations. In addition, the review identified some
areas in which States have adopted fewer measures,
such as biological weapons, means of delivery, national
control lists, access to related materials and the
financing of prohibited or illicit proliferation activities.
The review also identified some measures that the
Committee could take in order to advance the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). Likewise, it
was determined that the cooperative and transparent
approach adopted by the 1540 Committee has been a
key factor in increasing the level of participation of all
States.
States and many international entities welcomed
the openness of the comprehensive review process and
urged the 1540 Committee to pursue this approach and
to increase its useful efforts to enhance transparency
and openness.

10-35734

S/PV.6310

The Committee’s programme of work covering
the period from 1 February 2010 to 31 January 2011
follows the recommendations of the comprehensive
review by building on the programme of the past year
and by improving its methods of work by, for example,
facilitating the contribution of experts from capitals in
the Committee’s work; by encouraging contributions
by non-permanent members of the Council who are no
longer members of the Committee; and by making its
matrix and assistance template more user-friendly.
In the wake of the comprehensive review, the
former Chairman of the Committee visited the
headquarters
of
several
intergovernmental
organizations: the World Customs Organization in
Brussels, the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons in The Hague, and the International
Atomic Energy Agency and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe in Vienna. In
December, he followed up on those visits by sending
letters recording the understandings reached on
practical ways to strengthen cooperation with the
Committee.
In order to expand the scope of cooperation in
specific areas such as experience-sharing, coordinating
assistance requests and channelling legislative advice,
the Committee has begun sending expert missions to
the secretariats of these organizations. Two of our
experts participated in one such mission at the OPCW
headquarters in The Hague from 8 to 10 February. On
their first day, these consultations included a meeting
between the OPCW Director-General and myself. The
visit to The Hague was planned to coincide with my
participation as 1540 Chairman in the preparatory
meeting for the Nuclear Security Summit that took
place last month in Washington on the initiative of
President Obama, where I had the opportunity to
explain how the objectives of resolution 1540 (2004)
complement those of the Summit.
As Chairman, I also participated in the
non-proliferation meeting in Moscow, which examined,
from the perspectives of the past and the future, the
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) in the
framework of the preparations for the Review
Conference of the Parties to the NPT that is now under
way. I also took the opportunity to present the
requirements of resolution 1540 (2004) as a mechanism
for strengthening the non-proliferation regime. I was
accompanied by the coordinator of the Expert Group,
and we were able to hold a meeting with the relevant

10-35734

authorities of the Russian Federation. All the outreach
activities that the Committee participated in are listed
in the report; in the interests of brevity, I will not read
them out now.
On 14 April we held an unofficial meeting with
representatives of Member States that have not yet
submitted their first reports to the Committee, in order
to invite them to do so. I would like to continue to deal
with this issue and hold bilateral dialogue with them in
order to strengthen the resolution 1540 (2004) regime.
Finally, I would like to report that the Committee
has streamlined its work methods, aiming to hold
monthly meetings and as many meetings of its four
working groups as necessary, to guide and review the
work of the Expert Group. It is my intention to
continue that practice.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Mr. Heller for his briefing.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Thomas
Mayr-Harting, Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and
associated individuals and entities.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): Countries around
the world, especially in South Asia and in the wider
Middle East, continue to face the threat posed by
Al-Qaida and the Taliban. Today’s news reports
provide us with another stark reminder of that fact. We
must therefore ensure that the existing sanctions
regime against Al-Qaida and the Taliban remains a
relevant and effective tool in countering terrorism.
Security Council resolution 1822 (2008) and, in
particular, resolution 1904 (2009) are important steps
in the evolution of the Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions
regime. Those resolutions have improved the 1267
Committee’s procedures and provide effective
instruments to ensure that the Committee’s
consolidated list of individuals and entities associated
with Al-Qaida and the Taliban remains dynamic and
accurately reflects the current threat.
In today’s briefing I would like to focus on the
implementation aspects of resolutions 1822 (2008) and
1904 (2009). A more detailed version of this statement
will be distributed today and will be made available on
the Committee’s website (http://www.un.org/sc/
committees/1267/chairmanbriefings.shtml)
in
due
course.

5

S/PV.6310

As the Council is well aware, resolution 1822
(2008) directed the Committee to conduct, by 30 June
2010, a review of all 488 names on the consolidated
list at the date of adoption of that resolution. The
review process is one of the key priorities of the
Committee and, in view of the workload and the
approaching deadline, the main focus of its current
work.
I would like to give an overview of the current
status of the review process and the progress achieved
so far. The Committee finished the first phase of the
review by sending all 488 names to the respective
designating States and States of citizenship and/or
residence or States of incorporation/location for
review. The review letters were sent between
December 2008 and November 2009, and States were
given a period of three months to review the entries
and reply to the Committee. I would like to take this
opportunity to thank the many States that have
provided the Committee with their answers and
relevant information.
Unfortunately, although resolution 1904 (2009)
had requested States to respond to all outstanding
review letters no later than 1 March 2010, not all States
have been able to provide responses on time. While it
is possible for the Committee to review names even if
responses are not received by that date, we believe it is
essential that Committee members be aware of all
available information and of the positions of all States
concerned in order to have the full picture of each case
and to be able to take well-founded decisions.
The Committee is currently going through the
final phase of the review: each name is placed on the
agenda of a Committee meeting, introduced by the
Monitoring Team and discussed among Committee
members. The Committee evaluates all available
information and considers whether the listing remains
appropriate on the basis of the criteria for listing set
out in relevant resolutions. In this final phase, the
Committee has so far discussed a total of 154 entries.
In 95 cases, the listing was confirmed as remaining
appropriate, while 24 names, including well-known
cases such as Vinck and Sayadi, Nada and Barakaat
International, have been de-listed as a result of the
review.
Five deceased individuals have also been
removed from the consolidated list. When discussing
possible de-listings of deceased persons, the main

6

question is whether the death is officially confirmed
and whether it can be ensured that the remaining assets
will not fall into the hands of other listed persons. It is
therefore of the utmost importance that States provide
the Committee with the necessary information and
contribute to the Committee’s decision-making. For 35
names, the review in phase three is still pending, as the
Committee is of the view that further information is
necessary to conclude its consideration.
I am personally committed to ensuring that the
review process is conducted seriously and thoroughly.
The Committee will make its utmost effort to meet the
deadline and complete, or at a minimum initiate, the
final phase of review for all 488 names on the list by
30 June 2010. We therefore have intensive weeks
ahead of us, but I am confident that all Member States,
and in particular the members of the Committee, share
our commitment to finalizing this important task.
Resolution 1904 (2009), adopted by the Security
Council on 17 December 2009, substantially improves
the procedures under the Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions
regimes in terms of due process. On 1 February of this
year, I introduced the main new elements of resolution
1904 (2009) in an open briefing to all Member States.
Today I will therefore only highlight some of the key
aspects.
The establishment of the Office of the
Ombudsperson is the most significant innovation of the
resolution. For the first time ever, individuals and
entities subject to sanction measures will have the
opportunity to present their cases to an independent
body, which will be assisting the Committee when it
considers de-listing requests. The Ombudsperson shall
be an eminent individual of high moral character,
impartiality and integrity with high qualifications and
experience in relevant fields, such as the legal sphere,
human rights, counter-terrorism and sanctions. The
Ombudsperson shall perform his or her tasks in an
independent and impartial manner. The Ombudsperson
will replace the focal point established pursuant to
resolution 1730 (2006) for de-listing requests regarding
the consolidated list, while the focal point will
continue to receive de-listing requests for other
sanctions regimes.
I am happy to inform the Security Council that by
the end of April a number of excellent candidates had
applied for the position of Ombudsperson. Pursuant to
resolution 1904 (2009), the Ombudsperson shall be

10-35734

S/PV.6310

appointed by the Secretary-General in close
consultation with the Committee. The Committee is in
the process of finalizing its consultations and will
convey its views to the Secretary-General in the next
few days.
Resolution 1904 (2009) introduced several
provisions with a view to improving the quality of
listings and to increase transparency regarding
information relevant for States and listed individuals
and entities. One major achievement is that the
narrative summaries of reasons for listing will be made
available on the Committee’s website at the same time
that a new listing is published on the list.
To ensure that the consolidated list remains
dynamic and adequately reflects the current threat
posed by Al-Qaida and the Taliban, additional review
processes have been introduced. Every six months, a
review of deceased persons will be conducted. There
will also be an annual review of entries that lack
identifiers. Finally, there will be an annual review of
names on the consolidated list which have not been
reviewed in three or more years.
Committee members may place holds on matters
that are under consideration. So far, there has been no
clear procedure and no time limit for such holds.
Resolution 1904 (2009) introduces a new procedure for
pending issues: holds now have a time limit of six
months, and this period can only be extended on a
case-by-case basis and in extraordinary circumstances.
In addition, the Committee will have to review all
existing holds by 31 December of this year.
Resolution 1904 (2009) can only be effectively
implemented if the working methods of the Committee
are adapted to the new procedures. In recent months,
the Committee has worked intensively to adapt the
Committee’s guidelines so that they reflect the
provisions of the new resolution. I am pleased to
announce that the Committee is currently concluding
the revision of the guidelines, which we hope will be
adopted in the coming days. We are convinced that the
guidelines will be an important tool for conducting the
Committee’s work in a more effective, efficient, fair
and transparent manner.
Regarding the consolidated list and all relevant
data, I would like to refer to our written statement. I
would only like to inform the Council that on
12 January this year, the Committee made available on
its website new standard forms for listing to be used

10-35734

when proposing the inclusion of individuals and
entities on the consolidated list.
As far as outreach is concerned, on 1 February of
this year I held my latest informal open briefing for all
Member States in which I discussed the new provisions
of resolution 1904 (2009). I intend to hold the next
open briefing at the beginning of July and to use that
occasion to provide the membership with information
about the status and outcome of the review.
At the beginning of June, I plan to participate in a
meeting of special services, security agencies and law
enforcement organizations to be held in Yekaterinburg,
Russian Federation. I also have the intention to
intensify the dialogue between the Committee and the
authorities of Afghanistan, so as to raise issues relevant
for the 1267 Committee, in particular regarding the
review of the consolidated list.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
reiterate that the Committee welcomes the Security
Council’s encouragement set forth in paragraph 36 of
resolution 1904 (2009) for Member States to send
representatives to meet the Committee for more in-depth
discussion of relevant issues or for voluntary briefings
on their efforts to implement the sanctions measures.
The Committee is ready to listen to ideas and concerns
and looks forward to continuing its cooperation and
dialogue with all Member States.
Before concluding, I would like to use this
opportunity to thank the members of the Monitoring
Team and the Committee secretariat for their
invaluable contribution to the work of the Committee.
The important additional workload created by the
review process and the drafting of narrative summaries
poses a particular challenge to all colleagues involved,
and I would also like to thank them for their personal
commitment.
In my previous briefing I mentioned that the 1267
sanctions regime has encountered increasing criticism
by a number of States and individuals because of
procedural and human rights concerns. By resolution
1904 (2009), the Security Council addressed many of
those concerns and thus significantly contributed to
strengthening the fairness and effectiveness of the
regime. At the same time, the Committee continues to
be aware of remaining challenges and, as mentioned in
resolution 1904 (2009), is committed to continuing to
improve its procedures as required in order to
introduce further elements of fairness and transparency

7

S/PV.6310

for placing individuals, groups and entities on the
consolidated list and for removing them, as well as for
granting humanitarian exemptions.
After the review pursuant to resolution 1822
(2008), the Committee will continue to address the
weaknesses of the consolidated list. In order to fulfil
this task, the Committee depends on cooperation with
and contributions from Member States, which are
responsible for providing the Committee with relevant
information. I would therefore like to call on all
Member States to contribute to this collective effort.
The implementation of resolution 1822 (2008)
constituted an important stage in and a major
achievement of the Committee’s work, and the review
process has contributed and is contributing towards
both improving due process requirements and
strengthening the regime. The new resolution 1904
(2009) reflects the lessons learned during the review,
and I would once again like to thank Member States
involved for their support and contribution.
With the appointment of the Ombudsperson in the
near future, the Committee will move to the next stage
of its work. It is essential that this process be continued
by further improving the Committee’s procedures and
working methods while ensuring fair and clear
procedures, and thereby make the 1267 sanctions
regime a stronger and more effective tool.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Mr. Mayr-Harting for his briefing.
I now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Ertuğrul Apakan, Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) on counter-terrorism.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): Before starting my
briefing, I would like to recognize Ambassador Ranko
Vilović of Croatia, from whom I took over the
chairmanship of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) five months ago. I thank him once again for his
country’s excellent leadership of the Committee in
2008 and 2009.
The CTC continues to work actively to advance
the global fight against terrorism, and today it gives me
great pleasure to brief the Council on the work of the
Committee over the past six months.
Although nearly a decade has passed since the
adoption of resolution 1373 (2001), terrorism continues

8

to be a major threat to international peace and security,
compelling us to be ever-vigilant and steadfast in our
fight against this scourge. Hence, the provisions of
resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005) are as
relevant as ever, and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
plays a critical role in promoting and facilitating their
implementation.
Before addressing the substance of the issues
related to the work of the Committee, let me touch
briefly upon the changes that the Committee made
earlier this year regarding its working methods. As
indicated in the work programme of the Committee,
which covers the first half of 2010, the Committee
decided to adopt a more strategic and transparent
approach in its deliberations while raising the visibility
of its work within the wider United Nations and
counter-terrorism community.
Based on this understanding, the Committee, in
January, streamlined some of its working methods in
order to devote more time to substantive work.
Accordingly, the procedures for the adoption of
Preliminary Implementation Assessments and the
preparation of country visits have been significantly
amended in a way that reduced the time spent in the
Committee on those issues. That said, the Preliminary
Implementation Assessments remain one of the main
instruments available to the Committee for effectively
monitoring the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001).
The Committee is trying to improve and make
better use of the thematic discussions that it organizes
on the issues mentioned in Security Council resolutions
1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005). In the past six months,
the Committee has taken up issues such as border
control and security, the implementation and
assessment of resolution 1624 (2005), maritime
security/terrorist acts committed at sea, the
implementation of extradition requirements and law
enforcement. Those discussions have proved to be
highly useful in helping us to understand such issues in
greater depth and to consider any possible concrete
steps that the Committee could take. For instance,
based on our thematic discussions, the Committee is
now working on policy guidance on international legal
cooperation, which we expect to finalize soon.
In fact, that issue was also the subject of one of
the two thematic briefings open to all Member States,
held in February. The other was in April on maritime

10-35734

S/PV.6310

security/terrorist acts committed at sea. Those open
briefings set the stage for a lively exchange and many
useful views were expressed. The Chief of the
Terrorism Prevention Branch of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime also contributed to the
second briefing. I take this opportunity to thank
Member States for their attendance and contributions
to those discussions.
Apart from those thematic discussions, the
Committee has also decided to hold regional
discussions, at which the specific challenges of some
regions will be taken up in detail. Such issues have
already been indicated in the survey of the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1373
(2001) by Member States (S/2009/620, annex), and the
first such regional discussion will be held this month.
Another step taken by the Committee to provide
more transparency was to make public the technical
guide to the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).
That guide is now posted on the Committee’s website.
It is also being translated into all United Nations
languages and will be a very relevant tool for the
Committee to use on country visits. The Committee has
already started working to further improve its website,
with a view to making it more helpful and user-friendly
TO all. With the technical support of the Committee’s
Executive Directorate (CTED), we hope to finalize that
work soon.
Finally, as part of our efforts to render the
Committee more transparent, on 8 April 2010, the
Committee’s Executive Director, Mr. Mike Smith, and
I gave a briefing to United Nations Member States on
the Committee’s work in the first three months of this
year.
Now, let me briefly mention some of the
Committee’s core activities that are undertaken in
accordance with its mandate and work programme.
First, as regards Preliminary Implementation
Assessments, I am pleased to report to the Council and
to the wider membership that the Committee has
finalized the analysis and adoption of those documents
for all Member States. The ensuing stocktaking
exercise is now allowing the Committee to enhance its
regular dialogue with Member States and to further
identify areas where the implementation of resolution
1373 (2001) is still inadequate. The Committee has
already finalized 48 files within the framework of the
current stocktaking exercise. The Committee and

10-35734

CTED stand ready to assist Member States, wherever
possible, in the preparation and submission of their
responses, including further information on their
efforts to implement the resolution.
Secondly, the Committee has continued to
organize and conduct visits to Member States, with their
consent. Such country visits are a fundamental
component of the Committee’s efforts to monitor and
promote the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).
Acting on the Committee’s behalf, CTED conducts not
only comprehensive visits, but also shorter and more
targeted visits that focus on one or two specific aspects
of the resolution. CTED is also conducting regional
visits aimed at analysing examples of good practice or
addressing regional vulnerabilities. Over the past six
months, the Committee has concluded successful on-site
visits to Timor-Leste, Brunei Darussalam, Tunisia,
Greece and Yemen. I wish to take this opportunity to
thank the Governments of those Member States for their
exemplary cooperation before and during the visits.
Thirdly, the Committee and CTED have worked
to enhance their ongoing dialogue with Member States,
donors and beneficiaries on the facilitation of technical
assistance. In that context, the Committee continues to
look for opportunities to match current and potential
donors with recipients so as to enhance cooperation
between the donor community and recipient States.
Since capacity-building remains one of the main
challenges in our fight against terrorism, the
Committee will make an assessment on that issue in
June in order to explore ways of further facilitating the
provision of assistance to relevant Member States.
Finally, in its dialogue with Member States, the
Committee has continued to include discussion of their
efforts to implement resolution 1624 (2005). Thus far,
a total of 108 States have submitted reports to the
Committee on their implementation of the resolution.
The Committee will continue to encourage those States
that have not yet done so to submit the relevant
information to the Committee as soon as possible.
The Committee also continues to encourage
Member States to become parties to and to implement
the 16 international counter-terrorism instruments. In
its dialogue with Member States, the Committee has
continued to remind them that any measures taken to
combat terrorism must comply with all their obligations
under international law, in particular international
human rights, refugee and humanitarian law.

9

S/PV.6310

Now, I would like to give a few examples of the
Committee’s cooperative activities with its partners.
First, through CTED, the Committee continues to
participate actively in the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force, with a view to
implementing the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy. CTED co-chairs the Working
Group on Integrated Assistance for Countering
Terrorism and also participates in the work of the two
other Task Force working groups that deal with the
counter-financing of terrorism and with human rights
and counter-terrorism.
Secondly, the Committee and CTED continue to
engage actively with the other Security Council
subsidiary bodies and relevant entities working on
counter-terrorism issues, namely, the 1267 Committee
and its Monitoring Team, and the 1540 Committee and
its experts group. In that regard, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee invites the Monitoring Team, the group of
experts and the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force, the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights and the INTERPOL Liaison Office to its
thematic discussions.
Thirdly, in accordance with its work programme,
the Committee has placed particular emphasis on
maintaining and increasing its dialogue and
cooperation with other relevant international and
regional organizations. So far, I have visited two
regional organizations. During my visit to Addis
Ababa, I had a meeting with officials of the African
Union. Later, in Washington, D.C., I attended the InterAmerican Committee against Terrorism of the
Organization of American States. Both visits proved
useful in enhancing our dialogue and exploring new
areas of cooperation with those regional organizations.
In the past six months, the Committee has also
continued the practice of hearing briefings from
relevant international and regional organizations and
United Nations bodies.
Before concluding, allow me to mention three
important events that the Committee is planning to
hold in the upcoming period. The first one will be a
seminar on bringing terrorists to justice, to be held in
New York. The seminar will bring together a select
group of national counter-terrorism prosecutors who
have been involved in highly visible cases within their
national jurisdictions. We will make sure that the
participants represent different regions, levels of

10

development and legal systems. Apart from that
seminar, the Committee is also considering organizing
two special meetings, one with international, regional
and subregional organizations and the other to review
global efforts to implement resolution 1373 (2001).
As I mentioned at the beginning of my statement,
we will continue to work in the Committee with vigour
and determination. Our emphasis will be on raising
awareness and strengthening the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001). And we will try to do so in a
more strategic and transparent manner so that we can
more effectively contribute to the global counterterrorism efforts within our mandate. To this end,
Mr. Mike Smith and his team in CTED continue to
provide valuable assistance to the Committee. I would
like to express our sincere appreciation for their
excellent work. I also wish to thank the Secretariat for
its continuous support.
Last but not least, I would also like to take this
opportunity to report, in my capacity as Chairman of
the Working Group established pursuant to resolution
1566 (2004), that a meeting of the Working Group was
held in March 2010 after a four-year interval. At that
meeting, Mr. Jean-Paul Laborde, the head of the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force, gave a
briefing on assistance to victims of terrorism, which
was followed by a general discussion on both aspects
of the Working Group’s mandate.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Mr. Apakan for his briefing.
In accordance with the understanding among
Council members, I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than five minutes in
order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate the texts in writing and to
deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation thanks Ambassadors Mayr-Harting,
Apakan and Heller for their respective briefings on the
work of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and
1540 (2004), respectively. The Chinese delegation
appreciates the results achieved by the three
Committees and their respective teams.

10-35734

S/PV.6310

The primary task before the 1267 Committee is to
complete the review of the sanctions list before the end
of June. Achieving practical results from the review
requires the active collaboration of the broad
membership. We also hope that the Committee will
conduct its work with a prudent and objective attitude
so as to safeguard sanctions mechanisms and its
preventive and deterrent role vis-à-vis terrorist
activities. Pursuant to resolution 1904 (2009), the
Committee summarized its experience over the past
years, improved and updated its working guidelines and
instituted the post of ombudsperson. All of these moves
are conducive to improving the working methods,
transparency and efficiency of the Committee.
With the assistance of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED), the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) has improved its
working methods and stepped up its dialogue and
cooperation with international regional organizations.
China appreciates these measures. Over the past six
months, the CTC has carried out in-depth discussions
on important subjects covered by resolutions 1373
(2001) and 1624 (2005), and set forth proposals for
dealing with problems and challenges remaining in
various areas. This lays a good foundation for the
CTC’s implementation of the resolution. Meanwhile,
CTED has pushed ahead with the implementation of its
programme of work in a solid manner and has done
much effective work in reviewing the Preliminary
Implementation Assessments and conducting State
visits, as well as in rendering technical assistance.
China attaches great importance to the role of the
1540 Committee and has participated actively and
constructively in its work. Recently the 1540
Committee, with the assistance of the group of experts,
has taken a series of effective steps towards
international cooperation and assistance. We endorse
the efforts of the Committee to enhance dialogue and
cooperation with various Member States in
implementing resolution 1540 (2004), exchanging
experiences and learning from each other’s strengths.
We encourage those countries able to do so to provide
the necessary assistance to developing countries to ease
the latter’s difficulties in implementation.
We note some new ideas and proposals made by
the members of the Committee and the group of
experts, which we will study closely. China will
continue to actively support the work of the Committee
and to work for the comprehensive and balanced

10-35734

implementation of the programme of work of the 1540
Committee.
Violence and terror remain rampant throughout
the world. Terrorism still poses a potent threat to
international peace and security. The Security Council,
as the core of the international collective security
system, should continue to play an important role in
the international fight against terrorism. The Security
Council counter-terrorism mechanism, composed of the
three Committees, should continue to push for the
implementation of the relevant counter-terrorism
resolutions while heeding further the call of the broad
membership of the United Nations, and in particular
the developing countries, for the counter-terrorism
mechanism to better meet their needs. China
encourages the three Committees and their respective
bodies to continue to strengthen their coordination,
optimize resources and avoid duplication of work.
Later in the year, the General Assembly will carry out a
complete assessment of the implementation of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
China supports the participation of the three
Committees, within their respective mandates, in the
relevant
work
of
the
Counter-Terrorism
Implementation
Task
Force
and
urges
the
comprehensive and balanced development of the four
pillars of the counter-terrorism mechanism so that the
respective bodies will complement each other, act in
concert and continue to safeguard the United Nations
core role in the international fight against terrorism.
Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): We thank you, Madam
President, for organizing this open debate, which gives
an opportunity to States Members of the United
Nations to participate in the deliberations on the work
of the three counter-terrorism-related Committees.
I would like to thank the Chairman of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), Ambassador Heller, for the joint statement, as
well as Ambassador Apakan and Ambassador MayrHarting, the Chairmen of the two Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1373 (2001) and
1267 (1999), respectively, for the work of their
Committees and the respective expert groups.
The activities of the three Committees are
valuable to the work of the Security Council.
Coordination in counter-terrorism-related efforts is
important, and we therefore commend the Committees
for developing common strategies and organizing joint

11

S/PV.6310

workshops and country visits. These activities create a
synergy that is key to improving areas of
implementation of relevant Security Council
resolutions. We are encouraged that this coordination
and cooperation have provided Member States with
information, thus enabling a clear understanding of the
peculiar situations that Member States face.
Terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction to non-State actors are continuous
threats to international peace and security. The threat
from terrorism, including from nuclear, chemical,
biological and other weapons, is real. Al-Qaida, the
Taliban and other groups continue to pose a serious
threat. We believe that the recent events in New York
City in the United States of America attest to this. This
is a reminder of the need for a common strategic
approach to counter-terrorism.
The consolidated list remains a critical tool for
the United Nations as a counter-terrorism measure.
We commend the 1267 Al-Qaida Committee for
having concluded the first phase of its review of 488 of
the names on the consolidated list. We support efforts
to have the review of the other names conducted in
good time.
We welcome the new standard forms posted on
the website that provide procedures for the inclusion of
individuals and entities on the consolidated lists.
Uganda also welcomes the establishment of the
office of the ombudsperson. We believe that it will
offer individuals and entities subject to sanctions
measures an opportunity to present their cases to an
independent body.
We commend the 1540 Committee for the work
done
in
the
comprehensive
review.
The
recommendations on cooperation with international,
regional and multilateral institutions, and the capacity to
gather information on the status of implementation are
critical to the overall mandate of the 1540 Committee.
We commend the Committees and their
respective expert groups for their outreach activities.
These outreach activities are useful in promoting
dialogue with Member State and facilitating the
sharing of additional information with the Committees.
Uganda reiterates the importance of closer
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations in counter-terrorism activities. To this

12

end, we welcome the visit by the Chairman of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee to the African Union in
March. We are convinced that cooperation between the
United Nations and other international and regional
organizations is an essential and necessary approach to
developing more effective counter-terrorism measures.
We have noted with concern in recent times the
link between the illegal trade in drugs and terrorism. In
that respect, we salute the United Nations Office on
Drugs
and
Crime,
the
Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force and Interpol for their role
in reinforcing global counter-terrorism efforts.
One of the greatest challenges of our times is how
to successfully prosecute terrorism suspects. It is
imperative that Member States strengthen law
enforcement and domestic security in their
jurisdictions. There is a need to strengthen crosscutting regional criminal justice strategies and action
plans to cover such issues as witness protection,
extradition, capacity-building in forensic science and
suppression of terrorism financing.
We recognize that most Member States have
inadequate capacity to confront these terrorist
activities. These are gaps that need to be addressed
collectively. In this regard, we are encouraged by the
efforts of the expert groups and the Monitoring Team
in identifying and facilitating the delivery of necessary
technical assistance to Member States. The planned
seminar on bringing terrorists to justice, to be held in
mid-July in New York, is a welcome development. We
are encouraged that the seminar will target national
counter-terrorism prosecutors in regard to their
respective jurisdictions.
Finally, we commend the Committees and their
respective expert groups for their work on counterterrorism, which continues to contribute to efforts to
secure a peaceful and secure world.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): At the
outset, I should like to thank the Chairmen for their
briefings and for their dedicated leadership of the
Council’s three counter-terrorism-related Committees.
The importance of this work and of the broader
international efforts to combat terrorism has been
underscored tragically and repeatedly in recent weeks by
the attempted bombing of a flight bound for Detroit last
Christmas Day, by the March bombings in the Moscow
subway, by the very troubling events in Times Square

10-35734

S/PV.6310

just days ago, less than a mile from where we meet, and
by the deadly bombings in Iraq just yesterday.
These are stark reminders that terrorism remains
one of the most complicated threats to address.
Transnational terrorism is a truly global challenge.
Citizens of dozens of countries around the world, the
vast majority of whom are not from the United States,
have been victims of terrorism and violent extremism.
The United States recognizes that no single country can
address this threat alone. Therefore, the United States
will continue to reach out, on the basis of mutual interest
and mutual respect, to forge international coalitions.
The United States has set a clear and focused goal
to work with all members of this body to disrupt,
dismantle and defeat Al-Qaida and its extremist allies.
One critical element of this effort is strengthening our
counter-terrorism partnerships with the United Nations,
including the relevant Security Council subsidiary
bodies, the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force and its newly established Support Office.
The United States is committed to more sustained
and strategic counter-terrorism engagement with the
wider United Nations membership to further our
common objectives. To this end, the State Department
hosted a meeting on 9 April to strengthen cooperation
among United States and United Nations experts
involved in counter-terrorism capacity-building in the
Sahel. The meeting involved some 25 experts from
United States Government departments and United
Nations offices and agencies, including representatives
from the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC)
Executive Directorate (CTED) and the Monitoring
Team of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999). We look forward to continuing
such dialogue with the United Nations experts.
Before turning to the work of the three Council
Committees, I should like to highlight three core
principles that underpin our approach to United Nations
counter-terrorism work. The first is inclusiveness and
transparency. All of the Council’s counter-terrorismrelated Committees should remain mindful of the need
to make their work as transparent and as accessible as
possible to the wider United Nations community,
national actors, regional organizations and civil society.
We encourage further engagement by the three
Committees with the wider United Nations membership
on a broad range of issues to ensure that the
Committees’ work is well understood.

10-35734

The second is implementation. Let us not forget
that the Council’s counter-terrorism framework
obligates all of us to implement it. We recognize that
many countries require assistance to do so, and we are
committed to making capacity-building more innovative
and far-reaching. But both the Committees and the
Council itself further emphasize the importance of full
implementation of this framework by Member States.
The third is relevance. We must ensure that our
counter-terrorism work in the Council and the wider
United Nations system is connected to ongoing
national and regional efforts on the ground to deal with
the threat.
I should like to thank Ambassador Apakan for the
exceptional job he has done guiding the CounterTerrorism Committee during his first five months as its
Chair and helping to reinforce these core principles.
Ambassador Apakan has made the Committee more
efficient and has worked extremely well with CTED
Executive Director Mike Smith to keep the general
membership up to date on the work of the Committee
through open meetings on topics such as international
legal cooperation and maritime security.
It is imperative that the CTC and CTED continue
to focus on areas of strategic priority. We are therefore
pleased that CTED recently visited Yemen and has
provided us with its preliminary conclusions from that
visit. We also hope that partners will work with the
Yemeni authorities to build up the necessary counterterrorism capacities, which will also help them to deal
with other security threats within their own country.
Let me turn to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al
Qaeda and the Taliban. The 1267 sanctions regime
remains one of the most effective counter-terrorism
tools of the United Nations and a symbol of
international consensus against the threats of Al-Qaida
and the Taliban. The regime has evolved significantly
over the past 11 years, and the Council has devoted
great effort to ensuring that it is fair, effective and
relevant to the ever-changing terrorist threats. The
United States welcomes the significant enhancements
to the regime’s listing and de-listing process outlined
in resolutions 1822 (2008) and 1904 (2009). In
particular, we are confident that the establishment in
resolution 1904 (2009) of an Ombudsperson to
facilitate the Committee’s review of de-listing petitions
will help ensure that the de-listing procedures are as
fair and transparent as possible.
13

S/PV.6310

We are pleased by the Committee’s progress in
carrying out its work to implement the package of
reforms in resolution 1822 (2008), including the
Committee’s comprehensive review of nearly 500
individuals and entities on its consolidated list to
ensure that each entry is as up-to-date as possible and
to determine the ongoing aptness of the listings. We
also acknowledge the Committee’s efforts to develop
and post online narrative summaries of reasons for
listing each entry on the consolidated list. These
reforms will make Committee efforts more accessible
and understandable to the wider United Nations
membership, and they will bolster the ability of
Member States to implement the measures required.
I want to acknowledge and thank Ambassador
Mayr-Harting for the tremendous efforts devoted by
him and his team and all of the experts on the 1267
Committee. They have worked steadfastly to
implement these reforms. We all know how timeconsuming and resource-intensive this work has been,
and we greatly appreciate their oversight of this
process.
As the Council noted in resolution 1887 (2009),
the Nuclear Security Summit held in Washington, D.C.,
in April underscored that the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) is
critical to preventing the spread of weapons of mass
destruction to non-State actors. Let me again thank its
Chairman, Ambassador Heller, for his tremendous
work. We must continue to find ways to strengthen the
cooperation of the Council’s three counter-terrorism
Committees, despite their differing mandates.
We fully embrace the 1540 Committee’s current
work plan, including its emphasis on working groups.
Going forward, the Committee must focus on garnering
support for a more robust and sustainable funding
mechanism, such as that suggested by President
Obama: a voluntary fund to help States achieve full
implementation of the resolution’s mandate.
We also look forward to careful consideration of
renewal of the Committee’s mandate, with a timeline
looking out as far as a decade or more. In the near
term, we encourage integration of the Committee’s
2009 comprehensive review of resolution 1540 (2004)
outcomes. We underline the need for multilateral
cooperation. We stress the importance of additional
national reporting to the Committee, and we urge the
sharpening of national implementation plans. Again I

14

want to underscore our gratitude to Ambassador Heller
for his excellent leadership.
In conclusion, we are pleased with the direction
that these three Committees are following. We believe
that under the capable leadership of the Committees’
current Chairs, United Nations counter-terrorism
efforts will guide and reinforce actions of Member
States to deter terrorism, including the threats posed by
Al-Qaida and the Taliban, as well as proliferation
efforts by terrorist non-State actors.
Mr. Okuda (Japan): I would like to thank the
Chairs of the Council’s three counter-terrorism-related
Committees for their briefings on developments during
the past six months. I would also like to pay tribute to
the dedicated work of the Chairs and of the respective
expert groups.
Terrorism continues to constitute one of the most
serious threats to peace and security in the world.
Countering terrorism requires a comprehensive and
multifaceted approach, as well as enduring engagement
on the part of the international community. That is why
the United Nations is so important in leading and
coordinating the efforts to combat terrorism. The three
Committees play a central role in this endeavour,
pursuant to their respective mandates.
As we are all aware, the threat of terrorism posed
by Al-Qaida and the Taliban continues unabated. In
order for the regime under resolution 1267 (1999) to be
fully effective, the credibility of the consolidated list is
indispensable. In that regard, Japan welcomes the
adoption in December 2009 of resolution 1904 (2009),
which introduced a new mechanism to that end. We
welcome the establishment of the Office of the
Ombudsperson for de-listing procedures and hope that
the Secretary-General will soon appoint an eminent
individual to the post.
Resolution 1904 (2009) also introduced a new
process to keep the consolidated list updated, accurate
and transparent, as described by the Committee Chair.
Japan welcomes the three improvements and will
continue to take active part in the review process in the
latter half of this year.
The Committee has reached the final stage of the
review of the list pursuant to paragraph 25 of
resolution 1822 (2008). I would like to stress in this
regard that in order to carry out a meaningful review,
additional input from the relevant States, particularly

10-35734

S/PV.6310

from the designating States and the States of residence,
is indispensable. I therefore call upon relevant States to
cooperate actively with requests for updated
information.
Japan welcomes the progress made in
streamlining the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), including reducing the frequency of
CTC meetings by making good use of the silence
procedure. We recognize that we have had fruitful
discussion this year on substantive issues in the field of
counter-terrorism. It is our hope that we will have
further discussion on thematic issues and that the
discussion will facilitate the accumulation of best
practices in counter-terrorism. We also expect positive
outcomes from the regional discussions to consider
specific challenges of some regions and how to address
those challenges.
Japan attaches great importance to the role of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) in identifying specific needs in the area of
counter-terrorism technical assistance. In this regard,
we support a stock-taking exercise consisting of a
review of the implementation by all Member States of
resolution 1373 (2001). This exercise will contribute to
identifying the challenges that Member States face and
the technical assistance that they require in this area.
We would like to highlight as well the importance
of the country visits conducted by CTED. Country
visits are among the valuable tools for CTED to
ascertain the current situation of counter-terrorism
efforts in a given country and to assess actual needs for
technical assistance for capacity-building, through
direct contact with the relevant authorities of the
country concerned. In this regard, Japan expresses deep
appreciation to CTED for sharing information
regarding technical assistance needs with members of
the Counter-Terrorism Action Group (CTAG). Japan
continues to support the coordination mechanism
between CTED and CTAG.
Japan expresses its appreciation for the strenuous
efforts of the 1540 Committee to promote full
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and
welcomes the submission of the final document on the
2009 comprehensive review of the status of
implementation of Security Council resolution 1540
(2004) (see S/2010/52), with a view to taking forward
action on the key findings and recommendations in the
report. Japan remains committed to playing a leading

10-35734

role in strengthening the non-proliferation regime by
organizing seminars and capacity-building programmes
in fields related to resolution 1540 (2004). Such
activities could include export control, mainly for
Asian countries, with particular attention to a tailored
approach reflecting the specific needs of each
individual country.
Japan also welcomes the workplan of the Nuclear
Security Summit, in which the participating States
noted the need to fully implement resolution 1540
(2004) and to support the activities of the 1540
Committee.
Lastly, we appreciate the close cooperation
among the three subsidiary Committees to maximize
the functions mandated by the respective Security
Council resolutions. We also commend the contribution
made by of their work within the framework of the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force. We
trust that cooperation and coordination in this regard
will make the most of the limited capacities and
resources available by avoiding overlaps and
duplications.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Thank you, Madam President, for having
organized this regular briefing by the Chairs of
subsidiary bodies of the Security Council related to
counter-terrorism. Our gratitude goes also to the
Permanent Representatives of Turkey, Mexico and
Austria for their comprehensive briefings on the work
of the committees they chair during this reporting
period. The Russian Federation views the committees’
stepped up efforts as an important Security Council
contribution to countering the global threat of
terrorism.
The Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) has
made substantial efforts to make its work more
transparent. It has launched a more substantive
dialogue with a broad spectrum of Member States and
specialized entities of the United Nations, and it has
enhanced its contacts with international and regional
organizations. In our view, this will help bring about
fuller implementation by all Governments of the
provisions of the relevant resolutions.
With respect to the development of cooperation
with partner organizations, we attach particular
importance to regular meetings of the CTC with
international, regional and subregional organizations.
We support the Committee’s intention to focus on the

15

S/PV.6310

more topical aspects of resolutions 1373 (2001) and
1624 (2005) and to continue its practice of holding
meetings on specific priority themes and regions.
Among these themes is extradition and mutual legal
assistance with respect to terrorism, pursuant to the
provisions of resolution 1373 (2001). We believe that
the guiding principles under preparation and the
possible recommendations emerging from past and
future thematic and regional discussions will prove to
be balanced and carefully verified.
We attach great importance to the Committee’s
discussions on resolution 1624 (2005). We have all
seen the consequences of incitement to terrorism.
Suicide bombers continue to perpetrate bloody acts of
violence, of which the terrorist attacks in the Moscow
metro at the end of March were yet another horrific
example. Resolution 1624 (2005) has an important role
to play in countering the ideology of terrorism. The
work of the CTC in that area must be strengthened,
with the incorporation of issues related to that
resolution into the Committee’s programme of country
visits aimed at analysing and broadly disseminating
accumulated good practices.
We endorse the Committee’s intention to begin an
exercise of considering regional aspects, on the basis
of conclusions of the comprehensive review of the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001), which the
Security Council approved in late 2009.
In terms of improving the Committee’s working
methods, the Preliminary Implementation Assessments
regarding resolution 1373 (2001) continue to be of
fundamental importance; they serve as basic
documents for regular dialogue with States and as an
objective, non-discriminatory and systemic foundation
for monitoring the counter-terrorism efforts of States.
We highly appreciate the assistance that the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) provides to the CTC. We support the
Directorate’s participation in the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force as part of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. We expect
that, working within the framework of its existing
mandate and in line with the decisions of the CTC,
CTED will continue to place its rich expertise at the
disposal of the Task Force.
Turning an issue raised during today’s briefings,
it would be remiss of me not to recall the resumption of
the work of the Security Council Working Group

16

established pursuant to resolution 1566 (2004) on the
initiative of the Russian Federation. We support the
active endeavours of the Turkish chairmanship to
breathe new life into the Group’s work and to make use
of the potential offered by its mandate.
One of the Council’s effective counter-terrorism
mechanisms remains the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al
Qaeda and the Taliban and associated individuals and
entities. One cannot fail to be alarmed by the Taliban’s
increasing activity, both within and outside
Afghanistan. The existence of strong links and
cooperation between the Taliban and Al-Qaida cannot
be disputed. We view as dangerous attempts to
establish political contacts with extremist leaders,
especially in breach of the sanctions regime. We urge
all States to act unswervingly against individuals on
the sanctions list, pursuant to the relevant Security
Council resolutions and the guiding principles of the
1267 Committee’s work. We participate in the
Committee’s work to keep the list up to date and a
reflection of the true nature of today’s terrorist threat.
Here, we believe that de-listing should take place in
strict compliance with established procedures.
In our view, the steps taken to enhance the
transparency of the Committee’s procedures are timely.
That is the thrust of resolution 1904 (2009), which
established the position of a de-listing Ombudsperson,
whom we expect to operate in strict compliance with
his or her mandate. We urge States, pursuant to
resolution 1735 (2006), to submit requests for the
listing of individuals or organizations associated with
Al-Qaida and the Taliban, including those financing
their terrorist activities using proceeds derived from
illicit trafficking of narcotic drugs. We are convinced
that full, good-faith implementation by all States of
their commitments in that sphere is required for success
in our common effort to counter the very real threat to
international peace and security posed by Al-Qaida and
the Taliban.
The Russian Federation attaches great importance
to the work of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) and to the unswerving
implementation by all States of that resolution and the
follow-up resolutions 1673 (2006) and 1810 (2008).
The actions they prescribe to prevent weapons of mass
destruction, their means of delivery and related
materials from falling into the hands of non-State
actors, principally terrorists, remain timely. Many

10-35734

S/PV.6310

participants in last year’s comprehensive review of the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) spoke of the
gravity of the threat posed by terrorists acquiring
weapons of mass destruction.

unambiguous. It should also reflect a front of
international solidarity whose only goal is to contain
and ultimately eliminate the terrorist threat in the
world.

The 1540 Committee plays a key role in
strengthening and enhancing the effectiveness of
international efforts to suppress the black market in
weapons of mass destruction. We note that the
Committee and its Expert Group have done a great deal
of work during the reporting period. They worked hard
on the proposal voiced during the review meetings and
on analysing the outcome of the comprehensive review.
The programme of work for this year, based on that
document, sets out practical steps to further strengthen
the international community’s efforts to counter the
proliferation of risks and threats, with the 1540
Committee playing a coordinating role. We urge the
Committee to give priority to assisting States in
implementing resolution 1540 (2004) and to
coordinating broad international cooperation to that
end.

It should be acknowledged that, thanks to the
work of the three Committees, the Security Council has
made real tools available to States that make it possible
for them to more effectively combat international
terrorism. My delegation would like to say a few words
about the functioning of the three Committees, as well
as to make some proposals aimed at improving their
effectiveness.

We stand ready to back such measures, including
in the framework of our ongoing cooperation, along
with fellow members of the Commonwealth of
Independent States, on issues related to the mandate of
the 1540 Committee.
The Russian Federation will continue its focused
efforts to achieve the goals set in Security Council
resolutions 1540 (2004), 1673 (2006) and 1810 (2008)
and to establish, under United Nations auspices, a
dependable system for countering the illicit trade in
weapons of mass destruction.
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in
French): In response to your appeal, Madam President,
I shall try to summarize my statement; the complete
text has been made available in the Council Chamber.
My country is particularly grateful to the
Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004) not only for the
briefings that their Chairs regularly give the Security
Council on their activities, but also for the technical
assistance they provide our States in the subregional,
regional and international fight against terrorism.
Gabon firmly condemns terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations. Recent events right here in New
York confirm the persistence of the terrorist threat. Our
response to the scourge must be strong and

10-35734

With regard to the 1267 Committee, my
delegation welcomes the excellent work it has done in
identifying individuals and entities associated with
Al-Qaida and the Taliban. We also appreciate the
enormous expertise that the Committee provides to
States in combating terrorism, in particular in such
diverse areas as terrorism-financing networks,
international transactions by suspected entities and
individuals, border, export and drug trafficking
controls and port security. The initiatives of the
Council and the Committee are very useful to the
international community, insofar as Al-Qaida’s
activities are no longer limited to certain parts of the
world, but instead affect other countries and other
continents, including Africa.
With regard to the 1540 Committee, my
delegation duly appreciates its excellent work in the
area of nuclear non-proliferation. It seems that the
international community has made great progress in
deterring non-State actors from manufacturing,
acquiring, possessing, developing, transporting or
transferring nuclear, chemical and biological weapons.
In addition, thanks to the close cooperation it has
developed with numerous States, the 1540 Committee
has succeeded in gathering significant information on
the measures States have taken to that end. That has
been possible thanks to the frank and transparent
dialogue that the Committee has succeeded in
establishing with Member States. My delegation
encourages the Committee to continue that approach,
which facilitates greater participation by all actors
concerned on this issue, including non-governmental
organizations.
With regard to the 1373 Committee, my
delegation is pleased to note that, in January, the
Committee’s members succeeded in streamlining

17

S/PV.6310

certain aspects of the Committee’s working methods.
We welcome the idea of increasing the number of
thematic debates. That approach will make it possible
to consider important issues brought to the attention of
the Committee, and thereby address two objectives,
namely, heightening awareness among Member States
and increasing their participation in the consideration
of issues on the agenda. It is therefore the
responsibility of every Member State to ensure that
Security Council decisions enjoy all the necessary
support, to ensure that their impact is of a genuinely
transformative nature.
In that regard, strengthening the cooperation
between the 1540 Committee and regional and
subregional organizations is essential. For instance,
such cooperation could facilitate interaction between
regional and subregional organizations in the areas of
information exchange and harmonization of their
approaches and their needs in this area.
Beyond their specific nature, the tasks assigned to
these Committees are very closely linked. In that
regard, greater cooperation and exchanges of
information, both between them as well as with the
relevant United Nations entities, is absolutely
necessary to face the threats posed by international
terrorism. The three Committees should continually
carry out critical assessments of their respective efforts
in order to improve their effectiveness, thereby making
it possible for the Security Council to take more robust
measures in combating international terrorism.
For our part, Gabon will continue to support the
efforts of the Committees. We shall endeavour to
submit, in a timely manner, our reports on the
implementation of the Council’s relevant resolutions in
the area of counter-terrorism, and of the related
guidelines.
Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): I would like to thank you,
Madam President, for convening this open debate. I
also wish to thank the Chairmen of the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC) and of the Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1540 (2004) for their comprehensive briefings today.
We are grateful for their work.
Brazil has long been a supporter of international
efforts on counter-terrorism. Our Constitution
considers terrorism a heinous crime and establishes
cooperation
with
partners
and
international
organizations on this issue as a guiding principle of our

18

foreign policy. Accordingly, Brazil has duly submitted
all the reports requested by the resolutions in question.
In recent years, the Security Council has taken
important decisions to enhance the legitimacy of its
counter-terrorism measures. The most important of
them was the adoption of resolution 1904 (2009),
which aims at enhancing the work of the 1267
Committee. It will certainly strengthen due process and
give more transparency to the Committee’s decisions.
The forthcoming appointment of an Ombudsperson, as
well as the new procedures for de-listing, will make it
easier to reconcile the effectiveness of the fight against
terrorism with the protection of human rights.
Brazil also supports the two other important
initiatives under way aimed at improving the work of
the 1267 Committee, namely, the general review of the
consolidated list of sanctions and the preparation of
narrative summaries for each entry on the list. The
combination of those measures will certainly
strengthen the Committee. I take this opportunity to
thank the Monitoring Team for its continuous support
for the activities of the 1267 Committee.
The work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
has also undergone important changes. We welcome
the fact that the Committee has improved its dialogue
and cooperation with Member States and, when
requested, has facilitated technical assistance to allow
for better implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).
My delegation would also like to commend the
CTC for reaching out to regional and international
organizations. The Chair’s recent visit to the African
Union and to the Organization of American States will
certainly spur closer cooperation by those actors with
the Committee. A series of other events and meetings
currently being planned will bring together different
entities and national Governments. We support and
encourage the continuation of that positive trend.
Let me also highlight the practice adopted by the
CTC, of holding periodic open briefings on themes
relevant to the wider membership. We encourage the
continuation of that initiative. In that regard, my
delegation wishes to recognize the work carried out by
the
Counter-Terrorism
Committee
Executive
Directorate, especially the fruitful dialogue it maintains
with Member States during its visits and during the
process of developing and discussing Preliminary
Implementation Assessments.

10-35734

S/PV.6310

With regard to the 1540 Committee, important
strides have been made with the adoption of the final
document of the comprehensive review and the
programme of work for 2010. Those documents
highlight the Committee’s nature as a forum for
cooperation. By allowing Member States to discuss and
share information among themselves and with other
relevant organizations, it makes a very valuable, and at
the same time discreet, contribution to our common
goal of stemming the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction.
The Committee has participated in numerous
meetings in various forums, thus strengthening the
partnerships that are crucial to achieving the
Committee’s goals. We note in particular the
participation of a member of the Committee in a
meeting of the Organization of American States in
February to discuss cooperation in the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004).
My delegation is pleased with the efforts under
way to coordinate and enhance the dialogue among the
three Committees and between them and the United
Nations system in general. The Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force of the General Assembly
can greatly contribute to building bridges between the
different Security Council subsidiary bodies and other
agencies. This coordinated action will help us to better
cope with the threats posed by terrorism in all its
dimensions. My delegation reiterates its commitment
to this process.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I should like to express France’s gratitude to
the Chairs of the Committee established pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540
(2004) — Ambassadors Mayr-Harting, Apakan and
Heller, respectively. Their dynamism and ongoing
commitment enables the Security Council to play a
growing role in the fight against terrorism.
I also associate myself with the statement to be
made by the representative of the European Union.
Since our last meeting on this subject in
November (see S/PV.6217), new acts of terrorism have
demonstrated to all the extent to which the threat,
including to the United Nations itself, remains real. We
have just heard the briefings of the Chairs of the three
Committees highlighting not only the progress that has
been made, but also the challenges ahead. From our
perspective, the three Committees that we created

10-35734

between 1999 and 2004 are not only most important
politically, but also of operational utility. We must
continue to improve their functionality.
I should like to comment on each of the three
Committees in turn. With respect to the 1267
Committee, in 2006, at the initiative of France, we
created a focal point allowing individuals and entities
on the list to request to be removed therefrom. The
adoption of resolution 1904 (2009) went even further
by permitting them a facilitated exchange with the
Committee and full clarification by a high-ranking
official with regard to communications received. That
is a useful tool for the Committee in its decisionmaking process. We welcome the forthcoming
appointment of an ombudsman.
The Committee has also done a great deal of
work in revising the entire list in order to ensure that it
remains commensurate with the threat. Such highly
technical revision may seem fastidious. Why would
one bother looking for information on a terrorist if one
has lost track of him? However, there is no doubt that
many terrorists have been prevented from carrying out
plots because their financing has been cut off or they
have been unable to travel. In this way, many lives
have been saved. It is, unfortunately, easier to quantify
the victims of terrorist acts than the absence of victims
of acts that have not taken place. Our meticulous work
thus touches every Member State, and it is therefore
essential that all States affected by the revision assist
the Committee.
The Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) has
done essential work and demonstrated that we all have
responsibilities to live up to. Like all other States,
France is subject to the Committee’s consideration.
This is a way for all States Members of the United
Nations to ascertain that our national measures are as
optimal as possible. This is not only our common duty,
but also in everyone’s interest. We welcome the
Committee’s work under the leadership of Turkey. It
not only analyzes and gives accounts, but above all
makes recommendations to all Member States. The
CTC is called on to play a more strategic role within
the United Nations system by developing measures
already adopted by the international community to take
the terrorist threat better into account, in particular
through its regular focus on certain geographical areas,
while also ensuring respect for human rights. We
therefore believe it to be very useful to open the
thematic debates to all States Members of the United

19

S/PV.6310

Nations. In the most sensitive areas, we hope that the
Organization will be able to provide practical guidance
to all.
With respect to the 1540 Committee, nuclear,
biological and chemical terrorism remains a principal
threat. In that regard, we welcome the summit held in
Washington, D.C., and the commitments undertaken
there, as well as the possible convening of another such
summit in Korea. A great deal remains to be done.
More than 30 States have yet to report, and we thank
the Mexican presidency for its efforts. On thing is
clear — we must all feel involved in the
implementation of the resolution and respond to
requests for reports. There is no sanctuary and no one
is immune to nuclear, bacteriological and chemical
terrorism. One particular area susceptible to progress is
that of assistance.
There is another area in which States must help
the Committee to improve its own work. I appeal to all
those that offer or receive help in implementing
resolution 1540 (2004) to so inform the Committee.
Only thus will it be able to play its full role.
The
creation
of
the
Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force was an essential
contribution to the system. It brought together various
actors, including the three Committees, and helped us
to share best experiences. We should continue to
support the Task Force, and we have no doubt that the
review of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy to
take place in September will enable us to gauge the
usefulness of that tool.
In conclusion, I wish to express once again the
thanks of my delegation for the work accomplished by
Ambassadors Mayr-Harting, Apakan and Heller and
their teams, and by the groups of experts that assist
them. They have done sterling work. France will
continue to play an active role in the Committees and
do its utmost to ensure that the United Nations is
strengthened to fight terrorism in all its forms.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Madam President, and the Chairmen of the three
Committees for their very helpful briefings. In
particular, I should like to welcome Ambassador
Apakan and Ambassador Heller as they give their first
briefings to the Council in their new capacities.
With respect to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), we are pleased

20

with the progress achieved through the adoption of
resolution 1904 (2009). We have long championed
improving listing and de-listing procedures, so we
strongly welcome the latest reforms, which build on
the significant improvements that have been made in
recent years. Most significantly, the appointment of an
ombudsperson will provide assurance that the process
of deciding whether to de-list individuals and entities
is both fair and clear. The office of the ombudsperson
will improve the flow of information between the
designated individual and the Committee. It will also
enhance the transparency of the decision-making
process.
As Ambassador Mayr-Harting has said, the
Committee still has much work to do, especially in the
next months as the review of the consolidated list
comes to completion. We shall continue to play a
constructive role in this process and urge all Member
States to do the same. It is important that we all work
to ensure that the review is meaningful.
The Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions regime
remains a vital counter-terrorism tool that enables the
international community to disrupt terrorist activity on
a much greater scale than we could through domestic
measures alone. We must all work to ensure that the
regime remains credible as a tool to maintain
international peace and security. In that respect, the
United Kingdom is pleased that resolution 1904 (2009)
confirms that measures targeting the financing of
terrorism apply to the payment of ransoms to
individuals and entities on the consolidated list. We
must not allow kidnapping to become a major source of
revenue for terrorists. The United Kingdom’s policy
not to pay ransoms or make other substantive
concessions to hostage-takers is well known and clear.
With respect to the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC), we welcome the increasingly effective external
outreach work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED) under Mike Smith’s
leadership and the fact that this work is increasingly
aligned with threats and needs. It was helpful, for
example, that CTED was able to bring forward its visit
to Yemen last month. But the CTC itself could play an
even more effective role in the international counterterrorism architecture.
We therefore support the recent reforms to its
procedures, particularly on processing States’
Preliminary Implementation Assessments, and its

10-35734

S/PV.6310

organization of more frequent open briefings, which
have included action-oriented recommendations for the
membership and increased transparency. These are
important first steps, and we would welcome further
discussions and suggestions on how to make the CTC
yet more effective.
We welcome the outcome of the comprehensive
review of the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). The review usefully highlighted areas — such
as biological weapons, means of delivery, national
control lists, access to related materials and financing
of prohibited or illicit proliferation activities — in
which States have adopted fewer measures. We hope
that the adoption of the review’s recommendations will
lead to better working methods, the speedier and more
effective matching of implementation assistance
requests with donor funds and capabilities, and better
cooperation with other international groupings that
share the goal of preventing non-State actors from
gaining access to weapons of mass destruction and
their means of delivery.
We also welcome the international attention
brought to the threat posed by the nexus of nuclear
materials and non-state actors by last month’s Nuclear
Security Summit in Washington, D.C. We note that the
Summit’s recommendations on the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) and the assistance needed to
achieve it complement the recommendations of the
comprehensive review.
Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): I would like to thank the
Permanent Representatives of Mexico, Austria and
Turkey for their useful briefings on the activities
carried out by the Security Council Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1540 (2004), 1267
(1999) and 1373 (2001).
The 1540 Committee, under the dynamic
leadership of Ambassador Claude Heller, has made
significant progress in strengthening the global
non-proliferation regime. We welcome the efforts of
the Committee and its experts group to promote the full
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). We note
with satisfaction the various follow-up activities on the
outcome of the review process. We encourage the
Committee to further enhance its efforts to promote
outreach activities and raise greater awareness among
States of the obligations imposed by the resolution. It
is also important to improve the Committee’s activities
in the area of assistance to States in order to help them

10-35734

build their
resolution.

national

capacity

to

implement

the

We applaud Ambassador Thomas Mayr-Harting
and the 1267 Committee for their excellent work in
implementing the heavy programme of the Committee.
We pay tribute to the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team for its efforts in assisting the work of
the Committee. The review of the names on the
consolidated list is indeed an enormous task, which the
Committee undertakes painstakingly and efficiently in
spite of constraints. We attach great importance to the
work of the Committee and urge continuous
improvement of the sanctions regime to ensure a
reliable and transparent procedure.
In this context, we reiterate the importance of
consulting affected States during the listing and
de-listing of individuals and entities on the
consolidated list in order to enhance the credibility and
wider acceptance of its recommendations. It is in so
doing that the 1267 sanctions regime will comply and
be consistent with the international standards of due
process, international law and respect for human rights.
We welcome the remarkable progress made by
the Counter-Terrorism Committee under the dynamic
leadership of Ambassador Ertuğrul Apakan. He has
deployed considerable efforts in promoting interaction
and dialogue with Member States to make sure that
they understand their obligations pursuant to the
various resolutions. The briefings on the activities of
the Committee to the wider United Nations
membership have fostered greater visibility for the
Committee.
We commend the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED), under the leadership of
Mike Smith, for the activities carried out to implement
resolution 1373 (2001). The direct dialogue with
permanent missions, country visits, seminars and
workshops, thematic briefings and close collaboration
with regional and other international organizations
have helped to raise awareness and strengthen the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). We note
with satisfaction the completion of the analysis and
adoption
of
the
Preliminary
Implementation
Assessments of all Member States and the posting of
the technical guide on the implementation of resolution
1373 (2001) on the Committee’s website.
We support the efforts of CTED to build the
capacity of States to combat terrorism, as that will go a

21

S/PV.6310

long way towards solving the problem of partial or
non-compliance by some Member States with their
reporting obligations. In this context, we stress the
importance of regular consultation with the affected
States to promote compliance with their obligations
under resolution 1373 (2001).
We welcome the ongoing CTED dialogue with
Member States, donors and beneficiaries on the
facilitation of technical assistance. The need for CTED
to collaborate with relevant bodies within and outside
the United Nations, as well as regional organizations,
in carrying out its activities enjoys our support. Its
participation in the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force, with a view to implementing the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, should be
sustained.
Nigeria was one of the countries visited by CTED
in February 2010. The visit has generated closer
cooperation between CTED and our focal point on
counter-terrorism. It has also contributed to
strengthening our international counter-terrorism
measures.
We are pleased with the increased cooperation
between the three Security Council Committees and
with other organizations within and outside the United
Nations. We welcome their joint efforts to improve
information-sharing
and
to
coordinate
their
relationships with relevant international, regional and
subregional organizations and their participation in the
framework of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force. The effective utilization and coordination
of their respective capacities will enhance the
implementation of the respective resolutions pertaining
to their work. We urge continued transparency in their
work and accessibility to the wider United Nations
membership, regional organizations and States.
Given the capacity constraints in many countries,
it is imperative that they deploy more joint efforts to
raise awareness of the challenges facing us and, where
necessary, assist States with the tools to respond
appropriately.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I would
like to express our appreciation for the convening of
this debate. We consider it to be an excellent
opportunity to provide more information about the
Committees, adding to the transparency and better
understanding of their work.

22

At the outset, I would like to thank each of the
Chairmen for their detailed and informative briefings
in today’s meeting. We highly respect and appreciate
the tireless work, dedication and strong leadership of
Ambassador Mayr-Harting, Ambassador Apakan and
Ambassador Heller, which have cumulatively
contributed to the effectiveness of the respective
Committees.
The challenges posed to the modern world and
our societies by the different forms, methods and
manifestations of international terrorism necessitate a
sustained and comprehensive approach to the
prevention and combating of this phenomenon. In that
regard, we would like to emphasize the importance of
the Committees established pursuant to Security
Council resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and
1540 (2004) as effective tools in countering terrorism
in all its forms. Furthermore, and in order to enhance
the significant contribution of the Committees to the
strengthening of global security, we would encourage
continuous
improvement
in
cooperation
and
coordination among them.
The work of the 1267 Committee, under the able
chairmanship of Ambassador Mayr-Harting, remains
one of the most crucial instruments in fighting the
threat from Al-Qaida and the Taliban. In that regard,
Bosnia and Herzegovina shares the common belief that
the sanctions regime was further strengthened and
improved with the unanimous adoption of resolution
1904 (2009). We are convinced that it will greatly
assist Member States in more effectively implementing
the sanctions regime. Furthermore, we are particularly
looking forward to the appointment of the
ombudsperson in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the resolution, as it represents a very
important step towards making the Committee’s
procedures more clear and transparent.
Bosnia and Herzegovina also supports the efforts
of the Chairman to conclude the review process in a
timely manner, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of resolution 1822 (2008). We consider that
the review, if conducted thoroughly with the active and
valuable contribution of the Monitoring Team, will
result in a more precise and accurate consolidated list,
further strengthening the credibility of the Committee
as a very important instrument for combating terrorist
threats.

10-35734

S/PV.6310

With the strong commitment and enthusiasm of its
Chairman, Ambassador Apakan, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee continues its outstanding job, primarily in
monitoring the implementation of resolutions 1373
(2001) and 1624 (2005). Promoting greater visibility
and transparency in the work of the Committee, as well
as streamlining some of its working methods,
Ambassador Apakan has further underlined the
important role of the Committee in countering terrorism.
I also wish to commend the work and engagement of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
and its valuable contribution to the overall effort of
countering terrorism. The broad range of thematic and
regional discussions introduced into the Committee’s
programme of work helps to identify the challenges and
difficulties that countries face today in their efforts to
efficiently implement their obligations under the
relevant Security Council resolutions.
I wish to emphasize that Bosnia and Herzegovina
attaches great importance to strengthening cooperation
with the Counter-Terrorism Committee, in particular
with regard to the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001). Moreover, Bosnia and Herzegovina remains
fully committed to the effective prevention of and fight
against this global threat, and stands ready to provide
every assistance and support to international efforts in
that regard.
Bosnia and Herzegovina also attaches great
importance to the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) as one of the
fundamental instruments of United Nations counterterrorism and non-proliferation activities. We also offer
our full support to the Committee’s Chairman,
Ambassador Heller, in his efforts and excellent work.
The importance of the role of the 1540 Committee as
one of the fundamental instruments of United Nations
counter-terrorism and non-proliferation activities has
already been well stressed. In its brief history, the
Committee has proved that its work is crucial to
addressing the issue of terrorism and to extending the
necessary expertise and support to Member States in
establishing and further developing their capacity to
face the threat of terrorists’ acquiring weapons of mass
destruction.
Full cooperation with the Committee and a timely
and comprehensive response to the requirements of
resolution 1540 (2004) are critical to establishing a
strong, comprehensive response to the global threat. In
that context, we are pleased to see the positive effects

10-35734

of the adoption of the comprehensive review of the
resolution’s status of implementation, emphasizing the
more active engagement of States in its implementation
through continuing dialogue and participation in
numerous outreach events.
Finally, let me assure you once again, Madam,
that Bosnia and Herzegovina shares the determination
of all members of the Committee, as well as all
Members of the United Nations in general, to combat
terrorism in all its forms at the national and
international levels, and is firmly committed to
fulfilling its obligations under the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now
speak in my capacity as representative of Lebanon.
I would like to thank the Chairs of the three
Committees, the Ambassadors of Austria, Mexico and
Turkey, for their exhaustive briefings and for their
efforts alongside all the members of the Security
Council to promote international cooperation in the
fight against terrorism.
Lebanon welcomes the adoption of measures to
strengthen transparency and respect for human rights,
particularly the working methods of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999).
Lebanon calls for further reforms to prevent the
Committee from being exploited to achieve goals other
than those for which it was established. We support the
amendments to the Committee’s guidelines as outlined
in resolution 1904 (2009), and would insist on an
approach that takes nationality and State of residence
into account before listing or de-listing, particularly
since cooperation with the State in question is
necessary
either
to
obtaining
supplementary
information that they may be able to provide to the
Committee or with a view to applying or lifting the
intended sanctions. Lebanon feels that the revision of
the lists in accordance with resolution 1821 (2008)
should be a periodic process to ensure that they are free
of discrepancies, such as the names of deceased persons
or of people with no link to Al-Qaida or the Taliban.
Lebanon, like all Member States, hopes that an
ombudsperson will be appointed in the near future so
that this independent entity can contribute to ensuring
justice, transparency and dialogue between the
Committee and persons or entities requesting to be
de-listed from the list of those linked to Al-Qaida and
Taliban.

23

S/PV.6310

Lebanon also requests that we take a very close
look at the conflict between decisions passed down by
local or regional courts and the sanctions imposed by
the Committee. We note that, if sanctions are to be
legitimate, they must conform to international law, the
Charter of the United Nations and human rights treaties
and norms, even when the sanctions are of a preventive
nature.
With regard to the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1373 (2001), Lebanon welcomes the new
working methods it adopted early this year under the
chairmanship of Turkey with the aim of providing for
broader debate and scientific studies in the fight against
terrorism in a number of areas and States, and calls for
the participation of all Members of the United Nations,
given that the fight against terrorism is a collective
effort. Lebanon welcomes the efforts of the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate to fight
terrorism, and encourages it to continue working to
provide developing countries with technical assistance,
to pursue its dialogue with States in implementing the
provisions of resolution 1373 (2001), and to maintain its
coordination with regional organizations.
Concerning the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004), our meeting today coincides
with the 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
No one can deny that resolution 1540 (2004) does not
just address nuclear non-proliferation but also deals
with chemical and biological weapons. Lebanon is
paying close attention to all necessary cross-border
measures and inspections in order to prevent
trafficking in such materials in conformity with local
laws and rules and relevant international law. We call
for the full implementation of multilateral treaties
aimed at prohibiting the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, particularly in the Middle East, in
order to maintain international peace and security and
to contribute to international efforts in the fight against
terrorism.
My delegation affirms the importance of helping
countries to strengthen their adherence to resolution
1540 (2004). The Committee undertook praiseworthy
work during the reporting period, and Lebanon will
continue to actively to participate in and support the
work of the three Committees.
In conclusion, let me say that Lebanon, so
battered by terrorism in its many forms, would like to

24

remind everyone that it is important to distinguish
between legitimate resistance to occupation and
terrorism. Lebanon reiterates its commitment to
cooperating with international efforts to put an end to a
scourge that threatens peace and security.
Despite the numerous resolutions and measures
adopted by the United Nations, acts of terrorism
continue throughout the world, taking innocent lives
and sowing chaos and destruction. We are all the more
convinced that the fight against terrorism means that
we need to seek out its root causes and eliminate the
factors that feed it. We need to eliminate areas of
tension and put an end to double standards in the
implementation of international resolutions. We need to
put an end to foreign occupation, injustice and attacks
on human rights and human dignity.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of New
Zealand.
Ms. Graham (New Zealand): Despite some
significant successes in degrading the capabilities of
and defeating terrorist groups around the world, the
threat of terrorism unfortunately persists. We have seen
ongoing attacks both in countries on the front line of
the struggle against terrorism and elsewhere. The
recent trend line in South Asia has been particularly
worrying.
No region or country can be complacent in
confronting the threat of terrorism. In New Zealand,
our efforts remain guided by the need to take a
comprehensive, multifaceted and long-term approach.
Domestically, we are continuing work to
strengthen our national counter-terrorism framework in
three main areas. We have overhauled our anti-money
laundering/counter-terrorist financing regime to bring
it into compliance with the standards of the Financial
Action Task Force. New legislation was enacted last
October and is now being implemented across the
pubic and private sectors. Our Government is moving
forward with designations of terrorist entities not listed
by the United Nations pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999).
While the threat of terrorist activity in New
Zealand remains low, we wish to support the building
of a global bulwark that shuts down terrorist activities
wherever they might occur. In February, our Prime

10-35734

S/PV.6310

Minister announced four such national designations,
and work is under way on further cases. We are also
working to achieve full compliance with the
international counter-terrorism legal framework by
ratifying the four instruments to which New Zealand is
not yet party. We have legislation before our
Parliament to ratify the 2005 maritime terrorism
instruments, and legislation is being drafted to
implement fully the 2005 nuclear terrorism
instruments.
Within its region, New Zealand continues to
support its Pacific island neighbours in meeting the
challenges that they, like many other small developing
States, face in meeting their international counterterrorism obligations. New Zealand values the
continued efforts of United Nations counter-terrorism
agencies to engage with Pacific island States to
encourage and support compliance and to ensure that
United Nations initiatives and requests are carefully
coordinated to avoid duplication. We remain
committed to supporting these activities, including
through the provision of funding to the Terrorism
Prevention Branch of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime for its programme of assistance to the
Pacific. We also look forward to welcoming the United
Nations counter-terrorism committees to the next
Pacific Forum Working Group on Counter-Terrorism in
early June.
In South-East Asia, New Zealand is closely
engaged with key partners, both bilaterally and
regionally, on a range of counter-terrorism
interventions. Our police are helping to build capacity
amongst law enforcement counterparts in the region
through training and the provision of equipment. New
Zealand also supports a range of regional and
multilateral initiatives aimed at countering extremist
messages and recruitment into terrorism.
New Zealand strongly supports the Council’s
efforts to ensure that the measures it employs to
combat terrorism are effective, transparent and fair,
and that the lists of entities and individuals subject to
such measures remain accurate, relevant and
actionable.
We therefore commend the refinements to the
sanctions regime of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) agreed in resolution
1904 (2009) last December. Once fully implemented,
the increased rigour and transparency these measures

10-35734

will bring to the work of the Committee promise to
both enhance the Committee’s deliberations and to
ensure that its work enjoys the broad support necessary
to enable effective implementation.
In this regard, we would also stress the
importance of the Committee’s ongoing efforts to
complete its review of the names on its consolidated
list. While considerable progress has been made on this
task, the Committee requires the full cooperation and
support of Member States if the review is to be
completed by 30 June as mandated in resolution 1822
(2008). Full and timely responses to the Committee’s
requests for information will help ensure that this
ambitious deadline can be met.
The work of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) remains as important as ever,
as proliferators of weapons of mass destruction-related
materials continue their illicit activities around the
world. New Zealand was pleased to participate in the
comprehensive review of the 1540 Committee, and we
look forward to working with the Committee on
helping to implement the recommendations in our
region. I am pleased to announce that New Zealand
will be co-sponsoring a workshop in July for SouthEast Asian countries on the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) obligations.
Finally, New Zealand applauds the United States
initiative in hosting the Nuclear Security Summit last
month. The Summit focused political attention at the
highest levels of Government and industry on the
threat of nuclear and radiological materials getting into
terrorist hands. New Zealand is committed to helping
implement the outcomes of the Summit through
targeted bilateral and regional engagement in the AsiaPacific region and through broader international
initiatives.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): Madam
President, allow me at the outset to congratulate you on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council. I
would also like to thank the three Chairs of the
Committees established pursuant to Security Council
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004)
for their painstaking efforts in steering the work of
their respective Committees. This periodic stocktaking
is timely and critical. We are happy to participate in
today’s open debate.

25

S/PV.6310

Terrorism poses an extremely serious threat to all
States and all societies. It threatens democracy and
democratic values. It aims to destroy lives and reverse
development. The backdrop of the latest terrorismrelated incidents once again underscores the fact that
terrorism is a global threat and requires a coordinated
and concerted global response.
There are deep concerns about the potential nexus
between clandestine proliferation and terrorism and the
ever-present danger of such weapons or vulnerable
nuclear materials falling into the hands of non-State
actors. If the scourge of terrorism is to be effectively
combated, it must be resolutely opposed, resisted and
overcome through the undiluted commitment and effort
of the international community.
International solidarity and shared determination
are absolutely imperative to combat this scourge
effectively. It is important to bear in mind that the
successful
implementation of counter-terrorism
measures not only requires the fullest collective effort
of the entire membership, but also its fullest
participation in processes that affect the collective
security of all nations equally.
India has an abiding interest in expeditiously
concluding the long-pending comprehensive convention
on international terrorism. The early adoption of the
convention is in the interests of all Member States and
would provide impetus to multilateral and collective
action to countering international terrorism efforts.
Nearly all the elements of the proposed convention
have passed muster by legal experts. What is required
now is the necessary political will to ensure the early
adoption of the convention.
We support the anti-terrorism mechanisms
established by the United Nations, including resolution
1267 (1999), related to sanctions against Al-Qaida and
the Taliban; resolution 1373 (2001), which led to the
establishment of the Counter-Terrorism Committee;
and resolution 1540 (2004), which addressed the issue
of the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. We also support the subsequent resolutions
that renewed, strengthened or amended those three
original resolutions. India’s regulatory and legislative
framework is fully geared towards implementing the
obligations under those resolutions.
We look forward to greater efforts to bring
together interrelated aspects of the operational
mechanism of the 1267 Committee, the 1540

26

Committee and the Counter-Terrorism Committee and
their
dovetailing with
the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force. It is our earnest hope that
all such efforts within the United Nations will be
integrated more closely with the core tasks being taken
forward by specialized bodies, such as the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Interpol, the
International Civil Aviation Organization, the
International Maritime Organization and others.
We strongly affirm the importance of collective
effort, focusing on technical assistance to help a State
implement the mandates of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and the 1540 Committee and related
instruments. We are willing to extend assistance,
bilaterally as well as multilaterally, in the greater effort
to counter the threat of terrorism.
For
the
strengthening
and
effective
implementation of counter-terrorism measures, the
Security Council has focused on upgrading the existing
mandates to ensure effective compliance with its
resolutions. Such efforts need to be supplemented with
a more collaborative approach of extending assistance,
utilizing available regional expertise and appropriate
technologies.
The latest Security Council resolution, 1904
(2009), attempted to streamline the functioning of the
Al-Qaida and Taliban Sanctions Committee. We
support measures to strengthen the review process of
the listings in the consolidated list through the office of
the ombudsperson, with a view to increasing the
fairness and transparency of the sanctions regime.
At the same time, we are concerned that the
process of listing and de-listing in the consolidated list
continues to be subject to political will and pressure —
a scenario that we can ill afford in our united fight
against terrorism. We would encourage the Committee
to continue to work towards improving both the
content and the functionality of its website.
We fully support the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate’s efforts to play a more effective role in
countering terrorism. We welcome the Committee’s
effort to organize thematic briefings, streamline its
working methods and give more focus to substantive
and analytical work.
We have taken note of the latest progress made by
the 1540 Committee towards a comprehensive review

10-35734

S/PV.6310

of the status of implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). We support efforts to prepare guidelines for
handling assistance requests by countries and to find
the means to address the most commonly found gaps in
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). It is
important that such activities are performed at the
request of Member States, keeping in mind their
varying national capacities, procedures and systems.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that we will
continue to work closely with the counter-terrorism
mechanisms established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004). We welcome
efforts to use open dialogue as a means to build closer
cooperation within the international system. What we
need is the necessary political will, accompanied by
concerted and resolute action to effectively combat the
scourge of terrorism.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Pedro Serrano, acting head
of the delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations.
Mr. Serrano: Let me start, Madam President, by
thanking you for inviting the European Union (EU) to
participate in this debate on a topic that remains high
on its agenda.
The candidate countries of Turkey, Croatia and
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the
countries of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidates of Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Montenegro and Serbia, as well as the
Republic of Moldova, Armenia, Ukraine and Georgia,
align themselves with this declaration.
I also wish to thank the Chairs of the Committees
established under resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001)
and 1540 (2004) for their timely and informative
briefings and to commend them for their excellent
work, as well as for the work carried out by the
respective expert groups.
In the interest of time, allow me to summarize the
main points of the EU statement, the written version of
which is being circulated.
The failed terrorist attack in New York two weeks
ago is only the latest reminder of the fact that
international terrorism continues to be one of the most
serious threats of our time.

10-35734

The European Union is fully committed to
implementing and improving the multilateral counterterrorism framework. However, the effectiveness of our
measures depends on their credibility and perceived
legitimacy, and procedures need to be fair and clear. The
adoption of resolution 1904 (2009) was a significant
step forward in that regard. Providing publicly available
narrative summaries of reasons for listing is one
important element of due process. The Committee
is doing an excellent job in its qualitative review of the
list — to be completed by the end of June — which will
provide as accurate a consolidated version as possible.
The establishment of the office of an eminent,
independent and impartial ombudsperson for de-listing
requests is also a very important development. We
hope that a candidate who fulfils the criteria set out in
resolution 1904 (2009) may soon be appointed.
For its part, the European Union has also recently
revised its procedures to make them fairer and clearer
and to ensure respect for the fundamental rights of
persons affected by targeted measures, in response to
pertinent rulings by the European Court of Justice.
That will continue to require reinforced collaboration
between the European Union and the United Nations,
primarily with the 1267 Committee. The European
Union remains committed to further enhancing the
transparency and fairness of United Nations
procedures. We trust that further changes will be
considered where necessary.
In relation to the implementation of resolution
1373 (2001), excellent work has been carried out by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and its Executive
Directorate (CTED) to monitor compliance with
resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005). Another
welcome development is the enhanced cooperation
between the CTC and the relevant bodies in the United
Nations system and other international organizations —
for example the Council of Europe — especially on the
promotion and protection of human rights in the context
of the fight against terrorism.
CTED must be commended for facilitating the
provision of technical assistance and on its intention to
undertake a permanent dialogue between donor States
and recipients to achieve greater efficiency. The recent
discussions in the CTC in areas such as mutual legal
assistance and effective judicial cooperation have been
very productive and should be fully reflected when
CTED’s mandate is renewed later this year.

27

S/PV.6310

The European Union fully supports the work of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) and its efforts to create monitoring mechanisms
to ensure the universal implementation of the
resolution. Resolution 1540 (2004) gives a strong legal
basis to the EU’s diplomatic and financial efforts to
tackle proliferation by explicitly addressing illicit
trafficking and procurement networks and, in
particular, the involvement of non-State actors,
including terrorists, in the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction technology. The European Union
strategy against the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction of 2003 was complemented in 2008 by the
EU New Lines for Action, which focuses on very
concrete action-oriented projects to be undertaken by
the end of 2010.
The European Union has been active in ensuring
the full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) both
internally — for instance, through regular updates of
its regulation on export controls on dual-use goods —
and externally by assisting others’ efforts in
implementing resolution 1540 (2004). Beyond export
controls, the European Union will spend around
€300 million on chemical, biological, radiological and
nuclear cooperation with third countries in the period
2007 to 2013. Our objective is to develop a strong
regional approach, in line with requirements of
resolution 1540 (2004), through the creation of
regional centres of excellence in those areas in
partnership with key regions such as the Middle East,
South East Asia and parts of Africa.
Continued cooperation between the Committee
and Member States, as well as among Member States
themselves, will be necessary in order to overcome the
remaining difficulties in the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004). In that context, we welcome
the adoption of resolution 1810 (2008) and the
comprehensive review process that took place last year.
We fully support the clearing-house role of the 1540
Committee in matching assistance requests and offers.
Let me conclude by commending once again the
crucial and complex work of these three specialized
Committees to prevent and combat terrorism in all its
forms. The European Union hopes that the three
Committees will continue their important endeavours
to effectively tackle terrorist threats.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cuba.

28

Mr. Núñez Mosquera (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank the Chairs of the Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373
(2001) and 1540 (2004) for the information they have
provided.
Cuba condemns all acts, methods and practices of
terrorism in all their forms and manifestations
wherever, by whomever and against whoever they are
committed and whatever their motivations may be. The
Cuban territory has never been used, nor will it be
used, to organize, finance or carry out terrorist acts
against any country.
Our country supports the position of the 118
member States of the Non-Aligned Movement against
the unilateral drafting of lists accusing States of
allegedly supporting terrorism, which are incompatible
with international law and United Nations resolutions.
Since 1982, the United States Government has
included Cuba on the Department of State’s annual list of
State sponsors of international terrorism. With the
purpose of keeping Cuba on that list, various pretexts —
all of them untenable — have been used throughout the
years without putting forward a shred of evidence of our
country’s participation in any terrorist act.
The inclusion of Cuba on that list has entailed the
application of economic sanctions by the United States
Government, including a freeze on financial
transactions, a prohibition on technology transfers and
restrictive and isolating measures against our country
and its citizens. Those sanctions are in addition to the
already draconian measures imposed by the economic,
commercial and financial blockade decreed by the
United States Government against Cuba more than
50 years ago.
Cuba demands its immediate exclusion from that
spurious list, as it constitutes an unjust, arbitrary and
politically motivated designation that contradicts the
exemplary conduct of our country in facing terrorism
and puts into question the seriousness of the United
States in the fight against this scourge.
By keeping Cuba on that list, the new United
States Government is denying the political rationality it
publicly proclaims and following the erroneous path of
its predecessors, as it resorts to political manipulation
and flagrant lies against Cuba in order to justify its
discredited, isolated and untenable policy against our
country. It is not in Cuba, but in the United States,
where a terrorist mafia that acts with impunity has
10-35734

S/PV.6310

organized, financed and carried out hundreds of
terrorist acts against the Cuban nation.

unfair and groundless inclusion of Cuba on the list of
countries that supposedly sponsor terrorism.

During the past 51 years, the Government of the
United States of America has been involved in
numerous terrorist acts that have caused the Cuban
people 3,478 deaths, produced 2,099 disabled persons
and generated material losses that exceed $54 billion.
While the Government of the United States of America
claims for itself the right to label the behaviour of
other nations with regard to terrorism, it employs a
double standard by not prosecuting, and allowing the
continued freedom of, those who have confessed to
horrendous acts of terrorism against Cuba.

For years now, our country has submitted detailed
information on terrorist acts committed against Cuba to
the Security Council. Our denunciations have still not
received an appropriate response. We reiterate our
willingness to make a more detailed presentation on
this matter before the Counter-Terrorism Committee or
to submit to it any additional information or
clarification it deems necessary.

Despite having all the evidence to charge as a
terrorist Luis Posada Carriles — who has been justly
designated as the most notorious terrorist in the
Western hemisphere — the United States Government
has only carried out legal proceedings against him for
petty offences. The sham of the proceedings is also
evidenced in the continuous delays and postponements,
which prove the lack of interest in prosecuting and
sentencing that individual. Cuba reiterates that the way
that the United States Government has handled this
case is a clear and flagrant violation of resolution 1373
(2001) and other relevant resolutions of the Security
Council and General Assembly, as well as of several
international legal instruments in the fight against
terrorism. Cuba demands once again that the
authorities of the United States prosecute Posada
Carriles as a terrorist or return him to the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, a country that requested his
extradition on 15 June 2005, nearly five years ago.
If the new American Administration really wants
to illustrate its commitment to the fight against
terrorism, it now has the opportunity to act firmly and
without double standards against the terrorist
organizations that have attacked Cuba from United
States territory throughout the years. It has the
opportunity to achieve justice and to release, without
further delay, the five Cuban anti-terrorist fighters
whom it has kept as political prisoners in high-security
prisons for more than 11 years in spite of the fact that
they were just trying, with great altruism and courage,
to gather information about Miami-based terrorist
groups in order to prevent their violent acts and save
the lives of Cuban and American citizens. It is up to the
United States Government to stop using the issue of
terrorism to political ends and to bring an end to the

10-35734

As in the past, Cuba will continue to strictly
comply with the provisions of resolutions 1267 (1999),
1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004), and to cooperate with
the subsidiary bodies established pursuant to them.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Ms. Shalev (Israel): I thank you, Madam, for
having convened this important debate on counterterrorism. I express my thanks, too, to the Chairpersons
of the counter-terrorism Committees for their
professional work and for their informative briefings
this morning.
Close cooperation and coordination among all
three subsidiary bodies in the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force are of the utmost
importance, and we encourage the Committees to
continue providing more frequent informal briefings to
Member States as part of their growing effort to
provide for transparent engagement with their work.
Less than two weeks ago, a car bomb was planted
in the heart of Manhattan in a failed attempt to kill
scores of innocent civilians. Earlier this year, the
people of Russia witnessed the terrible toll of suicide
terrorism. Thus, we are reminded time and again that
terrorism is a global and vivid threat that transcends
boundaries and nations.
The international community, and the United
Nations in particular, have a crucial role to play in
coordinating counter-terrorism efforts. The response to
those providing safe haven to terrorists should be
unequivocal. Sponsoring terrorism and permitting
terrorist groups to act with impunity from one’s
territory are not among the prerogatives of sovereignty.
A State that is unwilling to deal effectively with such
activities must be held accountable for its deeds. A
number of United Nations treaties already provide a

29

S/PV.6310

legal framework to address this threat. What remains to
be seen is sufficient political will.
We Israelis know first-hand the devastation of
terrorism. In certain parts of our region, we witness
safe haven given to terrorists, the transfer of weapons
to terrorist organizations and the growing incitement to
terrorism. Most alarming in this regard are the Member
States of this Organization that support, harbour,
finance, train, transfer and smuggle terrorists and
weapons in our region.
The most dangerous terrorist organizations
threatening Israel’s security are Hamas in the South
and Hizbullah in the North. In this regard, we
emphasize the pressing need to address the
implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624
(2005), in particular, as well as other relevant
resolutions, beyond the mere obligation of State
reporting. In addition, we believe that no counterterrorism strategy is complete unless it addresses the
issue of incitement.
Regarding the Counter-Terrorism Committee and
the work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED), I should like to
commend Mr. Smith for his able leadership. We
appreciate his ongoing dialogue with Member States,
as well as the informal briefings on current affairs,
which are an effective and valuable tool.
Israel supported the adoption of resolution 1805
(2008), which extended the mandate of the CTED, and
is further encouraged by the professional dialogue
between Member States and the CTED related to the
Preliminary Implementation Assessments. We also
welcome the finalization of the technical guide that
will serve as a road map for the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001).
Israel’s strong commitment to confront global
terrorism has led it to strengthen its professional
cooperation with the CTED. Through our unique and
tragic experience in this field, which has developed
over many years, Israel has willingly shared its best
practices with other interested parties, and we are
constantly considering ways to strengthen our technical
cooperation.
At the same time, however, I wish to emphasize
the overarching goal of the work of the CTED, beyond
the valuable aspects of technical assistance and
capacity-building. As reinforced in Security Council

30

resolution 1805 (2008), the crucial role of the CTED
remains first and foremost to ensure the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) and to
support the Counter-Terrorism Committee in the
fulfilment of this task.
The Al-Qaida sanctions Committee remains an
important part of the efforts to isolate terrorists and
their means to inflict harm. Israel welcomes the
progress towards promoting clear and fair procedures
concerning the inclusion of individuals on the
consolidated list. Israel encourages efforts to ensure
due process guarantees in the process of listing and delisting terrorist groups. In this regard, we welcome in
particular the adoption last year of resolution 1904
(2009) which, among other things, created the post of
an ombudsperson to address key aspects of due process
and human rights concerns. We hope that a
professional, competent individual will be appointed to
this important post. We further welcome the decision of
the Council to make accessible a summary of the
reasons for listing and to conduct a review of all names
on the consolidated list in order to ensue that it is
updated and accurate.
Israel fully supports resolution 1540 (2004) and
the subsequent renewal of its mandate. Israel believes
that it is critical to continue to develop international
standards against the use and proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction. Nuclear terrorism and radiological
substances in the hands of terrorists represent a grave
global threat and a concern to us all. Export control
systems and appropriate national counter-terrorism
legislation are critical elements in the overall effort to
prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and related dual-use items.
Israel further believes that, in order to enhance
the dialogue among Member States and the 1540
Committee, it would be extremely helpful to receive
periodic briefings by the Expert Coordinator of the
work of the Committee.
The international community must continue to
seek and implement measures that keep the world’s
most dangerous weapons out of the hands of the
world’s most dangerous individuals. It has an
obligation to address in a proactive and decisive
manner the threat posed by the transfer of weapons and
capabilities by some Member States to terrorist
organizations, including in our region, where the
danger from the continuous smuggling of arms is

10-35734

S/PV.6310

increasingly clear. This support, which constitutes a
violation of numerous Security Council resolutions,
undermines the stability of our entire region.

confidentiality and respect for due process. Trust in
and the experience of the Monitoring Team can be an
important contribution in this regard.

We in Israel are all too familiar with the
horrifying toll that terrorism exacts. The struggle
against this plague will require our joint will, effort
and action. We appreciate this opportunity for dialogue
and an exchange of views. Israel, for its part, will
continue to actively engage in the work of the
Council’s counter-terrorism Committees and to fully
support their work.

At the same time it is important to identify an
effective process to review the consolidated list of
individuals and entities associated with Al-Qaida and
the Taliban, pursuant to resolution 1822 (2008). For
that, the Committee must have all relevant information
available to States. It is also vital to remove the names
of deceased persons remaining on the consolidated list.
The credibility and quality of the list are essential.
Thus, it is also essential to continue working to
improve the process for identifying and listing
individuals and entities.

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Argentina.
Mr. Argüello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset allow me to congratulate you, Madam, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of May. I would also like to
thank you for convening this open debate to consider
the work of the sanctions Committees whose activities
are related to the fight against terrorism. Likewise, I
would like to thank the Permanent Representatives of
Mexico, Turkey and Austria for their briefings.
Argentina welcomes the adoption of resolution
1904 (2009) last December. The establishment of the
post of Ombudsperson is a positive step for bringing
the sanctions regime into greater conformity with the
minimum requirements of due process and thus
strengthens respect for jus cogens, human rights and
the rule of law. In that regard, I express my
delegation’s appreciation to the members of the
Committee, to its Chairman, the Permanent
Representative of Austria, and to the delegation of
Denmark, which proposed the appointment of an
Ombudsperson during the period 2005-2006, when my
country, Argentina, chaired the Committee.
Resolution 1904 (2009) must be implemented as
soon as possible, with the urgent appointment of an
Ombudsperson possessing the highest moral and
professional qualifications and with the immediate
implementation of appropriate Committee guidelines
for the new institution. This is how to provide an
effective and fair system to review de-listing decisions.
My delegation considers it necessary to address
challenges from certain international bodies, courts and
parliaments of various States. To that end, we hope that
there will be effective and adequate treatment of
evidentiary issues and facts. It is possible and
necessary to strike a balance between security,
10-35734

Regarding the work of the 1540 Committee,
allow me to reiterate Argentina’s commitment to the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
their means of delivery. Argentina has submitted its
national report and the relevant updates, in fulfilment
of its obligations under the relevant resolutions. On the
domestic front, among other measures, we have
established a technical group to train national and
foreign experts in the identification of sensitive items.
Argentina’s non-proliferation policy is enhanced by our
membership in the five control regimes for sensitive
exports.
At the same time, Argentina reaffirms the
inalienable right of States to develop research,
production and peaceful use of nuclear energy. In this
regard, I would like to highlight, as was recently done
by my Minister for Foreign Affairs during the general
debate of the Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
that in 2010 Argentina is celebrating 60 years of
peaceful nuclear activity. This activity has contributed
to the improving the quality of life of the people of
Argentina, in particular through its applications in the
field of medicine.
In concluding, allow me to reiterate that
Argentina believes that terrorist acts are a threat to
international peace and security and to human life and
dignity and that they endanger the stability, the
democracy and the social and economic development
of countries. Argentina reaffirms that the fight against
terrorism must be based on respect for international
law, international humanitarian law, international
human rights law and the principles and purposes of
the United Nations Charter.

31

S/PV.6310

The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor
to the representative of Morocco.

of which related to maritime security and acts of
terrorism on the high seas.

Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset I would like to express my pleasure at
participating in this debate under your presidency,
Madam, to discuss the work of these three Security
Council Committees and their efforts to combat
terrorism and to prevent non-State actors from
acquiring weapons of mass destruction. At the same
time, I thank the three Chairmen for their
comprehensive briefings.

Turning to the 1267 Committee, the Moroccan
delegation commends the continued efforts to improve
the effectiveness, credibility and transparency of the
three elements of the sanctions regime, especially
through the conclusion, which is expected in June, of
the process to review the entries on the consolidated
list. Here, my delegation would like to renew its
commitment to continue to contribute to that process
and to maintain dialogue with all relevant players
working to achieve our common objectives.

(spoke in French)
These three Security Council Committees
represent an important element of the United Nations
counter-terrorism architecture, and there can be no
doubt that their actions towards that end contribute to
the overall efforts of the international community
aimed at assisting Member States in their efforts aimed
at fully implementing the Council’s resolutions in this
field.
Morocco recognizes the primary role played by
the Security Council in the maintenance of
international peace and security and fully shares the
determination of the international community in its
resolute and united fight against terrorism, and it
reiterates its commitment to continue its efforts for the
full implementation of the Security Council’s
resolutions in the area of the fight against terrorism in
all its manifestations.
Here, my delegation welcomes the valuable
cooperation and the rich dialogue which mark our
interactions with the three Security Council counterterrorism Committees and their expert groups. My
delegation welcomes the efforts made to strengthen
coordination and cooperation among the three
Committees with a counter-terrorism mandate, as well
as with the expert groups assisting them in discharging
their mandates.
Regarding the 1373 Committee, my delegation
welcomes with interest the ambitious programme of
work announced by the Turkish chairmanship of the
Committee, especially measures aimed at ensuring the
effective implementation of the obligations pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) and the continuation of
initiatives aimed at promoting the implementation of
the resolution through regular thematic discussions and
informal briefings with Member States, the most recent

32

Finally, on the 1540 Committee, my delegation
takes note of the submission of its annual programme
of work for the period 1 February 2010 to 31 January
2011 and welcomes the activities planned to increase
awareness, consultation, assistance and cooperation in
promoting the implementation of all aspects of the
resolution. Likewise, Morocco welcomes the
confirmation of the approach adopted by the
Committee to strengthen its role in facilitating and
providing technical assistance towards implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004), inter alia, by actively
matching offers and requests for assistance.
International efforts to confront the threat of
terrorism are essential, and they must continue without
pause. To be effective, they require solid, systematic
and unfailing regional and subregional cooperation.
Such cooperation, which is the main, crucial link
between national efforts and those of the international
community, is indispensable, especially in regions that
are the declared targets of terrorist groups and the
traffickers of all sorts who sustain it. That cooperation
cannot be successful unless it involves all the parties
concerned without exception.
Experience has also amply demonstrated that, in
the face of the breadth and sophistication of the means
that can be mobilized by terrorist groups, it is delusory
to seek to combat terrorism that targets a specific
region through either individual efforts or an
exclusionary partnership. The Maghreb subregion, to
which my country belongs, and the neighbouring Sahel
region continue to experience terrorist acts of which
the Security Council has repeatedly taken note. These
acts, unfortunately, once again prove that terrorist acts
against the security of these areas are far from being
eradicated. They also prove that national efforts,
howsoever significant, remain inadequate insofar as

10-35734

S/PV.6310

they do not take place in a framework of genuine
partnership and mutual confidence conducive to
ongoing regional and international cooperation that is
effective and inclusive.
For our part, in line with our commitment to
combating terrorism since the issue was first placed on
the agenda of the General Assembly in 1979, Morocco
will continue to spare no effort to contribute to all
honest initiatives in support of collective regional and
subregional efforts to combat and eradicate this threat.
This commitment is inspired by our deeply held belief
that terrorism remains a complex phenomenon and
that, as a result, efforts to eradicate it must necessarily
be based on synergistic actions that include addressing
its underlying causes.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of Morocco would
like once again to reiterate its resolute and unequivocal
condemnation of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations and whatever its perpetrators, sources or
motivations. We also reiterate our genuine commitment
to work with our neighbours and with the rest of the
international community to eliminate it.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Norway.
Mr. Wetland (Norway): Today, I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the five Nordic countries
Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden.
Terrorism continues to threaten innocent people
around the world. Terrorism must never be tolerated
and can never be justified. Terrorism can be effectively
countered only by applying a broad range of measures.
It is essential to deny terrorists safe havens, mobility
and financing. It is also essential that we ensure that
terrorists are brought to justice. This is necessary, but
not sufficient. We need to supplement it by improving
education, fostering cultural understanding, promoting
economic and social development, and encouraging
peaceful coexistence, the peaceful resolution of
conflicts and respect for human rights regardless of
background, ethnicity, gender or religion. Our efforts
to combat terrorism will succeed only if they are in full
accordance with the principles of the rule of law and
universal human rights.
Capacity-building is of vital importance in all
those areas. Capacity-building is the responsibility of
every individual State, but the task is not easy. We
must all be prepared to assist, country to country and

10-35734

through the relevant United Nations institutions. Let
me point in particular to the obligations of Member
States under resolution 1373 (2001) to assist and
promote cooperation among countries in countering
terrorism and those under resolution 1535 (2004),
which set up the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate to facilitate technical assistance to Member
States.
If we are to succeed, we need well-coordinated,
strategic and sustained engagement by different parts
of the United Nations system — not only with United
Nations bodies dealing with security, but also with
those dealing with development, such as the United
Nations Development Programme. Security and
development go hand in hand.
The Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force is essential, both in coordinating within the
United Nations system and in mobilizing support
among Member States for the universal implementation
of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. We are
pleased that the Task Force now has its own budget
line and staff. The Task Force is currently assisting two
countries with the integrated implementation of the
Global Strategy. That project might be expanded to
include more countries. We support that effort and look
forward to continued cooperation with the Task Force.
It is important to maintain targeted sanctions as
effective, legitimate and credible tools available to the
Security Council. To that end, the Nordic countries
welcome the progress achieved in enhancing the
transparency and fairness of the listing and de-listing
procedures of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999). Resolution 1904 (2009) and
previous resolutions on the issue, such as resolution
1822 (2008), have added transparency and clarity to
the procedures of the Committee by introducing a
number of important innovations.
One of those is the comprehensive review of the
names on the 1267 Committee list and the obligation to
add narrative summaries of reasons for their listing by
June 2010. Unfortunately, we now hear that this
deadline is in danger and might not be kept. By
mid-April, only 136 out of 488 entries had been
reviewed. The Nordic countries encourage all States to
cooperate with the Committee and to respond to
information requests in order to allow the Committee
to complete its review in a timely manner.

33

S/PV.6310

The establishment of the office of the
ombudsperson, under resolution 1904 (2009), is
another important innovation. We are pleased to see
that the institution of the ombudsperson, which was
originally suggested by one of the Nordic countries, is
now becoming a reality. Once an ombudsperson is in
office, it will mark an important milestone. Given the
importance of the mandate, the Nordic countries now
encourage the swift appointment of the ombudsperson.
Once the implementation of those measures is
completed, they will further enhance the transparency
of the procedures of the Committee and strengthen the
due process rights of listed individuals and entities.
The Nordic countries believe that the procedures for
listing and de-listing need to be kept under constant
review and that the Council needs to remain open to
further procedural improvements in the regime, such as
the establishment of an independent review panel.
How to limit the appeal of violent extremism is
today a question that many countries are trying to
address. One area that needs increased attention in that
regard
is
deradicalization
and
rehabilitation
programmes aimed at bringing groups and individuals
back into society. Several countries in various parts of
the world now have considerable experience with such
programmes. We welcome increased knowledge
sharing on what works and what does not. That will
enable us to develop more effective policies in the
future. The United Nations might be able to facilitate
the exchange of knowledge and experiences between
interested countries and to support those that need
assistance in starting up such programmes. The Nordic
countries believe that this should be discussed at the
second review conference for the Global CounterTerrorism Strategy.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Permit me at the outset, Madam President, to
congratulate your brotherly country, Lebanon, on
presiding over the proceedings of the Council for this
month. We would also like to thank your predecessor
for his presidency last month.
We followed with interest the briefings by the
Chairmen of the Committees in the course of this
meeting. My country, Syria, has always condemned
terrorism as aggressive, unjust and criminal activity
targeting the lives and property of innocent people. We

34

have stressed the need to combat international
terrorism at all levels, in all its forms and
manifestations and in conformity with the principles
and purposes of the United Nations Charter and the
provisions of international law.
It is well known that Syria has been one of the
primary victims of the scourge of terrorism and
foresaw its dangers since its earliest manifestations. In
the mid-1980s, Syria was among the first countries to
call for the promotion of international efforts to
eradicate international terrorism. In addition, it has
called for the establishment of an effective global
strategy to combat terrorism, including through an
international conference under United Nations auspices
to address that phenomenon by elaborating a specific
and clear-cut definition of the concept of terrorism that
distinguishes it from the legitimate struggle for
freedom of peoples chafing under the yoke of foreign
occupation. That right has been entrenched in
international norms and instruments.
Any serious international effort to combat the
phenomenon of international terrorism cannot
disregard the need to combat State terrorism, which is
the most dangerous type. A clear case in point are the
crimes perpetrated by Israel against the Palestinian
people in the occupied territories. This was made quite
clear in Israel’s aggression against Gaza and against
Syrian citizens in the occupied Syrian Golan, and prior
to that its aggression against Lebanon in 2006. Such
State terrorism — not to mention the nuclear terrorism
practiced continuously by Israel against all States of
the region — is recognized as a documented and
designated war crime and an explicit violation of
international law, resolutions of international
legitimacy, Security Council resolutions and human
rights instruments.
Syria, proceeding from its belief in the pivotal
role of the United Nations in the fight against terrorism
at the international level, cooperates fully with the
three Security Council Committees established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and
1540 (2004). My country has established joint national
committees with all the relevant organs to monitor the
optimal implementation of those resolutions and to
achieve the best form of cooperation with the
Committees in their implementation. This cooperation
is inspired not only by my country’s interest in fully
implementing the resolutions of international
legitimacy and Security Council resolutions, but also

10-35734

S/PV.6310

by the urgent need to cooperate with the Committees
with a view to eradicating terrorism.
That is all the more so since Syria has suffered
for decades under the scourge of terrorism and terrorist
operations carried out on its territory, the most recent
of which was the Al-Qazzaz operation of 2008. Council
members will remember that the Security Council
condemned that operation at the time.
Syria reiterates that terrorism poses an ongoing
threat to international peace and security. We also
emphasize our commitment to the relevant
international counter-terrorism resolutions. We are
convinced of the need for the United Nations to play a
central role in combating terrorism at the international
level and in crystallizing an international consensus on
this issue.
My country is of the view that the Security
Council’s counter-terrorism Committees can contribute
to coordinating the international effort to combat
terrorism. Yet we note the existence of a certain degree
of discrimination practiced by the Committees in
dealing with the Member States. For instance, we
notice a concentration on certain States or geographic
groups and not others. While the Committees request
some States to submit reports on the implementation of
terrorism-related resolutions, they fail to issue such
requests to others.
Syria is making strenuous efforts to combat
money-laundering and the financing of terrorism. The
Syrian Commission on Combating Money Laundering
and the Financing of Terrorism acceded to the Egmont
Group of Financial Intelligence Units. The Group’s
membership includes the financial intelligence units of
108 States and is responsible for receiving and
addressing reports of financial operations suspected of
money-laundering or financing terrorism. My country’s
efforts are acknowledged internationally in the Group’s
joint evaluation report, which states that Syria has
managed in recent years to adopt important domestic
measures and legislation on this score, alongside
relevant international efforts. The relevant entities in
Syria are undertaking a study on amending the 2005
law on money-laundering and financing of terrorism in
line with international efforts in this respect.
We would also refer to decree No. 30 of 2010,
issued by President Bashar Al-Assad, on banking
confidentiality, which regulates the work of financial
institutions. The decree seeks to strike a balance

10-35734

between the banking confidentiality of financial agents
and the measures necessary to combat moneylaundering operations and the financing of terrorism.
Syria has participated in numerous workshops on
combating terrorism, including the Doha workshop on
implementing resolution 1540 (2004) and a regional
workshop held in Abu Dhabi from 28 to 30 June 2009,
organized in cooperation with the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime. Syria also participated in
the workshop on national counter-terrorism focal
points held in Vienna in 2009. My country has also
presented a national report to the 1540 Committee on
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
As is well known, Syria was one of the first States
to sign the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) in 1968. Syria stands against the
possession of nuclear weapons by any State. Moreover,
we signed an IAEA Comprehensive Safeguards
Agreement in 1992. As is well known, since then Israel
has been the only party in the Middle East in possession
of a colossal arsenal of nuclear weapons; it is the only
party in the region that refuses to accede to the NPT or
to permit any IAEA supervision of its installations. This
is evident in its position on the current NPT Review
Conference. There have been dangerous repercussions
from Israel’s failure to comply with the Treaty, which
demonstrates its lack of respect for resolution 1540
(2004), for the IAEA and for all international efforts
aimed at achieving nuclear disarmament.
In conclusion, Syria reaffirms its ongoing call for
the Middle East to be freed of nuclear weapons. In that
context we refer to the draft resolution we submitted to
the Security Council in 2003 during our membership of
the Council (see S/2003/1219), calling for freeing the
Middle East region of nuclear weapons.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Jomaa (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to congratulate you, Madam, on
Lebanon assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council and to convey to you and your delegation our
sincere wishes for success. We appreciate the approach
that you have taken in guiding the work of the Council,
particularly with regard to encouraging interactions
with non-members. My delegation values this
opportunity to participate in the Council’s discussions,
and we are grateful to Lebanon for having organized
this open debate.

35

S/PV.6310

(spoke in English)
I would like to extend my thanks to Ambassador
Apakan of Turkey, Ambassador Heller of Mexico and
Ambassador Mayr-Harting of Austria for their
informative briefings on the activities of the CounterTerrorism Committee and the Committees established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1540 (2004)
during the past six months. We appreciate their efforts
as Chairs of those important subsidiary bodies of the
Council to engage more with Member States through
frequent and regular briefings. We welcome such
practices and encourage greater interaction with
Member States on the work of the Council on this issue
as well as better coordination between the work done
by the Security Council and its specialized Committees
and by the General Assembly in the fight against
terrorism.
My country has been fully engaged in the
implementation of all Security Council resolutions
related to the fight against terrorism. In fact, Tunisia
has presented the Council with a total of seven reports
pursuant to its resolutions 1373 (2001), 1455 (2003),
1540 (2004) and 1624 (2005). Moreover, Tunisia
submitted its reply to its first Preliminary
Implementation Assessment more than a year ago. My
country is party to 12 sectoral conventions on terrorism
adopted under the auspices of the United Nations. Last
month our Council of Ministers considered a draft law
approving Tunisia’s adherence to the International
Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear
Terrorism.
We have noted with particular interest the active
role played by Turkey, as Chair of the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC), and by the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) in
seeking to improve transparency in the work of the
1373 Committee, as evidenced by the recent changes
made in the CTC’s working methods, aimed at
improving the value of its thematic discussions by
following them up with informal briefings to Member
States. So far two thematic briefings have been
organized, on legal cooperation and maritime security.
We welcome this evolving practice and look forward to
more events of this type.
The
CTC
continues
to
monitor
the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) through its
continuous stocktaking exercises, as well as by
conducting country visits. In this context, in March the

36

Executive Directorate visited Tunisia where it had open
and constructive discussions with the relevant Tunisian
authorities, enabling the Committee to be better
informed about Tunisia’s comprehensive counterterrorism strategy in general, and to keep abreast of the
important steps taken by Tunisia to ensure full
implementation of the various provisions of resolution
1373 (2001).
I take this opportunity to thank the Executive
Director and his team for their much-appreciated
collaboration in the preparation and conduct of that
visit, which from our perspective was an interesting
and useful exercise. We look forward to timely followup on the findings of the visit, particularly in regard to
addressing the technical assistance needs that were
identified in collaboration with Tunisia. Capacitybuilding is of paramount importance to national and
global counter-terrorism efforts. It is also one of the
main pillars of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy adopted by the General Assembly in
2006 (see General Assembly resolution 60/288).
Terrorism is a global threat and requires a
coordinated
and
concerted
global
response.
Multilateral action through the United Nations system
is a vital element in any international strategy for
addressing terrorism and violent extremism. In this
regard, we believe that, because of its non-contentious
nature, capacity-building through technical assistance
is a field where international cooperation and solidarity
can bring tangible results in the fight against terrorism.
It is a field where United Nations organs have the
potential to play a more relevant and efficient role and
to bring greater added value to the fight against this
scourge. Yet this field has not yet reached its full
potential. Technical assistance should go beyond the
development of legislation and best practices. It should
include cooperation, information-sharing and transfer
of technology and equipment in such areas as border
control and surveillance.
Over the past period, the 1267 Committee has
been engaged in reviewing the consolidated list of
individuals and entities subject to the sanctions regime
and has been striving to complete that exercise by the
end of June, as was mandated by resolution 1822
(2008). While we recognize the importance of meeting
deadlines, we believe that the completion of such a
delicate task should not lead to any precipitate or hasty
decisions.

10-35734

S/PV.6310

I would like to take this opportunity to commend
the Monitoring Team for its efforts to reach out to
Member States and engage in constructive dialogue
with them on the sanctions regime and review exercise.
Tunisia has participated fully and constructively in that
exercise and has responded to all information requests,
providing all available updated data on time. We will
remain fully engaged in the review of the list so as to
keep it as accurate as possible, because we believe that
such an exercise should be a continuing effort and a
permanent commitment. Having said that, we also
believe that the Committee could further enhance its
procedures, in particular with regard to transparency,
so that the monitoring of the list could be a more
inclusive prerogative, whereby States of nationality
that are not members of the Committee would be duly
consulted, and their views taken into account to the
greatest extent possible, before listing or de-listing
decisions concerning their nationals are taken. I am
confident that doing so will greatly reinforce our
collective commitment to ensuring that the 1267
regime remains an effective multilateral tool for
responding to the threat of terrorism.
We also note that the 1267 Committee has been
updating its working guidelines to take into account the
new procedure established under resolution 1904
(2009), designed to improve due process and ensure
that de-listing requests are addressed in a timely
manner, including through the creation of the post of
ombudsperson to serve as a point of contact for
individuals and entities wishing to be de-listed. While
welcoming this improvement, we join others in
encouraging the necessary follow-up, including
through the timely appointment of the ombudsperson
by the Secretary-General.
Resolution 1904 (2009) also brought forth
another important element, namely, the issue of
payment of ransoms to terrorist groups. As the
Monitoring Team rightly pointed out in its tenth report,
there is no difference between ransom payment and any
other form of financing of Al-Qaida, the Taliban and
their associates. Hostage-taking is becoming an
increasingly lucrative activity, and the payment of
ransoms to terrorist groups not only encourages further
hostage-taking, but inevitably results in further terrorist
attacks. While noting the encouraging steps taken by
the Security Council in its resolution 1904 (2009) by
placing funds resulting from ransom payments under
the sanctions regime, we believe that there is still room

10-35734

for more action to condemn unambiguously the
payment of ransom to terrorist groups. Such
condemnation would be fully consistent with
paragraph 2 of resolution 1373 (2001).
In conclusion, let me underline that Tunisia
remains fully committed to continuing to work with the
Security Council Committees and their expert groups
to strengthen our capacity to fight terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran.
Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): Madam
President, I wish to begin by congratulating you and
your colleagues at the Permanent Mission of Lebanon
on your country’s assumption of the Council’s
presidency for the month of May, and to thank you for
convening this open debate on the work of the
subsidiary bodies of the Security Council on terrorism.
I would also like to thank the Ambassadors of Turkey,
Mexico and Austria for their informative briefings on
the activities of their respective Committees.
The United Nations has made considerable
progress both in standard-setting and in the
implementation of counter-terrorism measures. Despite
all these efforts and activities, however, we have
unfortunately witnessed the escalation of terrorist
attacks in many parts of the world. Addressing the
global threat posed by terrorism requires an integrated
and comprehensive approach, taking into account the
variety of underlying causes that may lead to terrorist
acts and violence, as well as other contributing factors
which provide a breeding ground in which terrorist
groups can take hold and operate.
Eliminating terrorism requires that all States
manifest their political will by avoiding double
standards and organizing themselves under the
auspices of the United Nations and in full conformity
with the United Nations Charter, international law,
international human rights and humanitarian law.
Fighting terrorism should not be carried out at the
expense of the principles of the United Nations
Charter, in particular the sanctity of the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence of
States. The application of double standards in dealing
with terrorism and terrorist groups is a matter of grave
concern and seriously undermines the international
community’s collective fight against terrorism.

37

S/PV.6310

The Islamic Republic of Iran condemns all acts of
terrorism, including those committed by States against
innocent people and those under occupation. As a
victim of terrorism, the Islamic Republic of Iran has
spared no effort to fight this threat and continues to do
so. My country has taken far-reaching measures in
implementing Security Council resolutions on
terrorism, including resolution 1373 (2001). We have
presented six national reports on the measures taken to
implement that resolution. In those reports, we have
elaborated the concrete steps that the Islamic Republic
of Iran has taken to implement the provisions of that
and other relevant resolutions, including the
intensification of border controls and security and
surveillance measures at the points of entry and exit at
border checkpoints. Moreover, we continue to counter
drug trafficking assiduously, given the fact that drug
trafficking has proved to provide important financial
resources for certain terrorist groups in the region. Iran
has shouldered this burden almost single-handed.
With regard to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), we believe that the
work of the Committee should not have operative
impact on the rights enshrined in internationally
negotiated instruments such as the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), the Chemical
Weapons Convention and the Biological and Toxin
Weapons Convention, as well as the Statute of the
International Atomic Energy Agency.
The Islamic Republic of Iran also believes that
any emphasis on the concept of prohibiting access of
non-State actors to weapons of mass destruction and
nuclear materials should be balanced by the
commitment of Member States to nuclear disarmament,
as this issue is also currently gaining momentum in the
current Review Conference of the Parties to the NPT
taking place here in New York. In this regard, it is
important to emphasize that the fight against nuclear
terrorism should not be carried out as a justification for
the maintenance and operation of nuclear arsenals.
Delegations have been informed of the arrest of
Abdulmalik Rigi, a terrorist and gang leader of the socalled Jundallah, which has operated over the past few
years along Iran’s south-east borders and conducted
armed robberies and terrorist acts in which more than
140 innocent Iranians, including women and children,
have been killed in the most horrific manner and over
260 wounded. There is irrefutable evidence, including
the terrorist’s own confession, that he enjoyed

38

extensive support from certain States that have a
military presence in countries neighbouring ours. This
issue was clearly set forth in the letter sent by the
President of the Islamic Republic of Iran to the
Secretary-General and the President of the Security
Council.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that we
should all strengthen our cooperation in the fight
against terrorism. In this regard, I would like to inform
the Council that my country is going to host an
international conference on the fight against terrorism
in September this year. The conference will be in line
with the international efforts in this area, as we believe
that only by adopting a coordinated and comprehensive
approach can the international community’s fight
against terrorism yield lasting results.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Madam President, we
would like to congratulate you on presiding over the
work of the Council this month and to wish you every
success in your work. We would also like to greet the
Chairs of the subsidiary committees of this Council
who today have given us their valuable briefings on the
subject at hand.
Approximately 2,500 years ago, the classical
Chinese writer Sun Tzu, in the The Art of War, wrote
that “war is of vital importance to the State; it is a
matter of life and death, a road either to safety or to
ruin”. Today, that sentence is just as relevant in the
face of attempts to reimpose a new imperial rule on the
world.
One of the central topics addressed here is the
Counter-Terrorism Committee. It is a matter of great
concern to my country, Venezuela, which has acted in
keeping with the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy, adopted by the General Assembly
in September 2006 in resolution 60/288.
We wish to recall that, at our country’s request,
on 28 May 2007 the Permanent Council of the
Organization of American States adopted the
Declaration on Strengthening Cooperation in the Fight
Against Terrorism and the Impunity of its Perpetrators,
based on Security Council resolution 1373 (2001). The
Declaration underscores that terrorism is inimical to

10-35734

S/PV.6310

the full enjoyment and exercise of human rights and
peace, and reaffirms that all States should deny safe
haven to those who finance, plan, support or commit
terrorist acts. We also note with great interest the
Counter-Terrorism Committee’s programme of work
for the period 1 January to 30 June 2010, which seeks
to monitor and promote the implementation by States
of resolution 1373 (2001).
However, the effectiveness and implementation
of such measures may be weakened when imperial
Powers impose privileges which they absolve
themselves from implementing. The fight against
terrorism, whatever its manifestations and by
whomever committed, be it persons, organizations or
States, gives rise to situations of great concern. We
have seen with alarm how State terrorism is practiced
with impunity under false slogans of peace and
security. Such is the case with the warmongering
Government of Israel, which slaughters defenceless
people, including the Palestinians in Gaza. The Council
has endlessly considered this issue without even
adopting the necessary remedies to put an end to
genocide.
We also recall that, in 2002, the former President
of the United States, George W. Bush, affirmed that
Iraq was amassing weapons of mass destruction. That
is why the country was invaded. Hundreds of
thousands have died. One of the most precious cultural
heritages of humankind has been destroyed and, to
date, no weapon of mass destruction has been found.
One issue that must be urgently addressed by the
Security Council is that of the terrorist Luis Posada
Carriles. This organ knows myriad details of this case,
which has been submitted by both my country and the
sister Republic of Cuba.
The serious crimes committed in 1976 by
terrorists led by Luis Posada Carriles — killing 73
people, for the most part sportsmen, in the fateful
blowing-up of a Cuban aircraft over Barbados —
remain an issue that the Council is obliged to examine.
That terrible act is considered to be one of the worst
terrorist attacks in the history of civil aviation. Ample
information can be found in the classified archives of
the United States Department of State, and the
declassification of some official documents, now
published and distributed in various media, show that
Luis Posada Carriles is responsible for that flagrant
terrorist act.

10-35734

It has been irrefutably demonstrated that the
brains behind the attack were Luis Posada Carriles and
Orlando Bosch and that those who planted the bombs
in the Cubana de Aviación aircraft were Venezuelans
Hernán Ricardo Lozano and Freddy Lugo. Having
escaped from prison in Venezuela, Luis Posada Carriles
lived freely in Miami, despite not being a United States
citizen. The authorities of that country knew of his
whereabouts, but they did not arrest him.
Having learned of this situation, in May 2005
Venezuela asked the United States Government to
arrest Luis Posada Carriles so as to try him on 73
counts of first-degree murder in relation to the
sabotage of the Cuban aircraft. Venezuela’s extradition
request to the United States Government is based on
three specific instruments: the extradition treaty
between the United States and Venezuela, the
Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts
against the Safety of Civil Aviation, the International
Convention for the Suppression of Terrorist Bombings.
Once Posada Carriles called a news conference in
Miami on 16 May 2005, at which he boasted that the
State Department was not even looking for him
because he was an agent of the Central Intelligence
Agency, the United States Government had no other
option than to arrest him. On 11 January 2007, the
United States Government indicted Posada Carriles on
seven counts of immigration fraud, rather than charge
him with murder and terrorism.
From then on, a series of delays and legal
obstacles, enveloped in mystery, have obstructed the
possibility of trying that dreadful terrorist. Recently, in
a new rigging of the system, the judge in the
proceedings indefinitely postponed consideration of the
case. It would seem that the strategy being followed is
to protract, defer and delay the case of Luis Posada
Carriles. This particular situation raises questions
about the commitment of the United States
Government and its vow to fight terrorism.
We take this opportunity to repeat Venezuela’s
call for the release of the five anti-terrorist Cuban
heroes who have been held prisoner in United States
jails for 11 years. It must be recalled that resolution
1373 (2001), adopted by the Security Council at its
meeting of 28 September 2001 (see S/PV.4385), enjoins
States from providing safe havens to those who commit
terrorist acts and from recognizing as valid any political
motive for refusing a request to extradite terrorists.

39

S/PV.6310

I conclude by reiterating my Government’s
request to the Security Council and the CounterTerrorism Committee to enforce the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001), which would allow the terrorist
Luis Posada Carriles to be extradited to Venezuela or
tried as a terrorist in the United States.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor
to the representative of Colombia.
Ms. Blum (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to congratulate Lebanon on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month and
to thank the Chairs of the Committees established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and
1540 (2004) for their briefings.
The work of the Committees is especially
appreciated by my country for their contribution to the
task of eradicating the grave threat that terrorism
represents to all States and societies. Experience
clearly shows that no country can face terrorism alone
or remain indifferent to this crime. Terrorism is an
attack on peace and democratic institutions and
freedoms, and its global nature requires a joint and
coordinated global response.
The activities of the Government of Colombia in
the fight against terrorism are underpinned by our
international commitments and by our respect for the
norms of international law, in particular human rights
law. Through the democratic security policy we have
followed over the past eight years, we have been able
to reduce crime, guarantee the effective enjoyment of
human rights and strengthen democratic institutions.
Day after day, my country contributes to the
international community’s work to close the loopholes
that allow for the financing, movement and actions of
terrorist organizations. As a demonstration of our
commitment, Colombia is a party to nine of the 13
international conventions to counter terrorism in its
various aspects.
My country firmly supports the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. My country’s
voluntary contributions to this initiative amount to
some $150,000 over the past two years. These resources
are allocated, among other things, to strengthening
national capacities through inter-institutional platforms
and legislative technical assistance.
Colombia also supports the counter-terrorism
mechanisms provided for in resolutions 1566 (2004)

40

and 1624 (2005), which establish the obligation to
penalize incitement to commit acts of terrorism and to
punish and deny protection and refuge to those who
support or facilitate the financing, planning,
preparation or commission of acts of terrorism. They
reaffirm the need for full cooperation with those
countries on whose territory or against whose citizens
terrorist acts are committed.
My delegation supports the steps recently taken
with regard to the consolidated list of individuals and
entities subject to the measures provided for in
resolution 1267 (1999), in particular those aimed at
guaranteeing due process and timely consideration of
requests for de-listing from the relevant list.
With regard to cooperation with the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC), I note that Colombia
recently submitted its fifth report on the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). The report
covers our efforts in the fight against the financing of
terrorism and the allocation of resources to address
terrorist activities. Among the measures adopted by
Colombia to fully implement the resolution, I highlight
Law No. 1121 of December 2006, which criminalizes
the funding of terrorism.
The Government of Colombia, through the
Presidential Agency for Social Action and International
Cooperation, has developed a programme of support
for victims of terrorism. The programme includes the
rebuilding of housing destroyed in terrorist attacks, the
rebuilding of communities affected by violent acts,
humanitarian aid and financial support for the families
of people who have died because of the actions of
illegal armed groups.
In Colombia, kidnapping has also been used to
fund illegal armed groups. With Law No. 986 of 2006,
we extended the benefits and thresholds for the
protection of victims of kidnapping and their families.
We thereby seek to offer a comprehensive
humanitarian response in the form of employment,
financial, tax, education and health benefits, among
others.
Colombia shares the concern of the Security
Council with regard to the links between terrorism and
transnational organized crime, illicit drugs and illicit
arms trafficking. My country welcomes the fact that
the Committee continues to work to strengthen
dialogue with Member States aimed at providing
assistance to strengthen national capacities and to

10-35734

S/PV.6310

contribute to the effective implementation of resolution
1373 (2001). This includes the regional dialogue
initiatives undertaken by the Chair of the Committee in
order to address the specific challenges arising from
the survey on the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001).
Additionally, since the adoption of resolution 1540
(2004), Colombia has adopted broad legal measures in
the areas of capacity-building, security and training in
order to prevent the access of non-State actors to any
information or material that would help them to
manufacture, possess, transport, transfer or use nuclear,
chemical or biological weapons and their means of
delivery. We agree that the implementation of the
resolution requires a long-term approach that will
enable us to confront the challenges of non-proliferation
through cooperation between the Committee and
Member States and between Member States themselves.
In conclusion, allow me to reiterate the firm
resolve of the Government of Colombia to continue to
cooperate with the United Nations in the fight against
terrorism and to buttress the efforts of other countries
to address the factors that support this grave scourge,
including drug trafficking, the financing of terrorism
and other manifestations of crime in general. Although
painful, my country’s experience has left us with a
better capacity, good practices and lessons learned that
serve as a basis for our cooperation in international
actions in this area.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The
representative of the United States has asked to make
an additional statement.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
do not wish to detract from the reports we have heard
from the three counter-terrorism-related Committees
this morning and now this afternoon, but I want to
respond for the record to the comments made by two
delegations with respect to the case of Luis Posada
Carriles.
Contrary to the statements the Council has heard,
the United States has taken a number of law
enforcement actions with respect to Luis Posada
Carriles, which we have described in detail on several
occasions. The measures taken include the imposition
of reporting and monitoring requirements on Posada
and an indictment of him on several criminal charges.
His trial on these charges is pending. These actions are
consistent with international law, as well as with our

10-35734

domestic legal framework that provides for due process
and various constitutional safeguards.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The
representative of Cuba asked to make an additional
statement. I give her the floor.
Mrs. Orellana Alvarado (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): I have asked for the floor to respond to the
statement just made by the representative of the United
States with respect to Cuba’s intervention in this
debate. The United States authorities have limited
themselves once again to reiterating their justification
for their position in this case — that Posada Carriles is
being subjected to criminal proceedings in their
country. What they do not say is that at no time have
they prosecuted Posada for his well-known terrorist
acts. Instead, this issue continues to be treated merely
as a case of illegal immigration.
The Government of the United States has all the
evidence and information showing that Posada Carriles
is guilty of committing the in-flight bombing of a
Cuban aircraft that cost the lives of 73 innocent people.
That Government also knows that Posada Carriles
planned and directed a series of terrorist acts in 1997
using explosive devices against hotels in Havana,
among many other repulsive acts in his long career.
The terrorist himself has publicly confessed to his
horrible crimes. We therefore wonder what more is
needed before action will be taken. Cuba once again
urges the United States authorities to try Posada
Carriles as a terrorist or to deliver him to the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, which has requested
his extradition for more than five years.
Cuba is convinced that the only effective way to
prevent and combat terrorism is through bilateral and
multilateral cooperation among all States on the basis
of mutual respect, non-interference in the internal
affairs of States and the equal sovereignty of States.
Double standards cannot prevail. It will be impossible
to eliminate terrorism if certain acts are condemned
while others are met with silence and acceptance.
We reiterate that, if the Government of the United
States genuinely wants to show its commitment to the
fight against terrorism, it now has an opportunity to
take firm action, without double standards, against
several terrorist organizations that, from territory here
within the United States, have displayed continued
aggression against Cuba for many years.

41

S/PV.6310

It is up to the new Government of the United
States to stop using the topic of terrorism for political
ends and to bring an end to the unjust and groundless
inclusion of Cuba on the list of countries that
supposedly sponsor terrorism. It is up to the new
Government of the United States to try Posada Carriles
because he is a terrorist, to free the five young Cuban
counter-terrorist fighters being unfairly detained in
United States prisons, and to make progress through
cooperation instead of the prevailing confrontation.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
Once again for the record, let me just say that United
States actions in this particular case are consistent with
international law as well as with our domestic legal
framework, which provides for due process and various
constitutional safeguards. As in democracies around
the world that follow the rule of law, these safeguards
provide that an individual cannot be brought to trial or
extradited unless sufficient evidence has established
that he committed the offence charged. In the United
States, this standard is described as probable cause.
I should like to give the Council a brief overview
of the steps the United States has taken with respect to
Posada within this legal framework.
Posada entered the United States illegally in early
2005. Posada was detained by United States
immigration authorities on 17 May 2005 and placed in
removal proceedings in accordance with United States
law. The immigration judge who handled the removal
proceedings ordered that Posada be removed from the
United States on 27 September 2005. This order remains
in effect. The United States has been seeking ways to
carry out the terms of the order, consistent with United
States regulations that implement our obligations under
the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.

Enforcement, which imposes certain restrictions on
Posada,
including
reporting
and
monitoring
requirements.
In sum, with respect to Posada, the United States
continues to be engaged in an ongoing series of actions
consistent with our legal requirements and due process.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The
representative of Cuba has again asked to speak. I give
him the floor.
Mr. Núñez Mosquera (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
I will be brief. What the representative of the United
States has just said is exactly what the Cuban
delegation is saying. Mr. Luis Posada Carriles, a wellknown and self-confessed international terrorist,
continues to be prosecuted for lesser crimes relating to
immigration in this country. I wonder when Posada
Carriles will be tried for the crimes of terrorism to
which he himself has confessed.
I reiterate that the Counter-Terrorism Committee
has all the information it needs and that the delegation
of Cuba is prepared to come and make yet another
presentation before it on this matter.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
has asked to make an additional statement. I give him
the floor.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I will be very brief
because the explanation given by the representative of
Cuba allows me to leave out major details. I should like,
however, to reiterate our request to the Government of
the United States to expedite the extradition requested
by our Government on the basis of the treaties and
conventions we referred to in our statement.

Moreover, the United States sought and obtained
a criminal indictment charging Posada with violations
of our immigration laws. On 8 April 2009, the new
criminal charges were brought against Posada in that
case, accusing him of lying about his involvement in
certain terrorist bombings in Havana. Trial in the case
is currently pending.

The terrorist Luis Posada Carriles, after having
committed his crimes against the Cubana de Aviación
aircraft, was detained and tried in Venezuela. He then
escaped from prison there and has since evaded justice.
Thus, in addition to his other crimes, he is a fugitive
from the Venezuelan legal system, which had granted
him all the legal provisions required to exercise his
rights.

In the meantime, Posada remains subject to the
order of removal issued by the immigration judge and
is without legal status in the United States. He is also
subject to an order of supervision from the Department
of Homeland Security, Immigration and Customs

He escaped, as I said, from a Venezuelan prison
and somehow ended up in this country. The
Government of the United States was well aware of his
presence here. We should like to reiterate Venezuela’s

42

10-35734

S/PV.6310

call on the Government of the United States to give due
attention to our request for this convicted and selfconfessed criminal to face the consequences of the law.
Venezuela will guarantee all the conditions needed for a
transparent trial even though we know, because Posada
Carriles himself has said so, that he was the brains
behind the bombing of the Cubana de Aviación airliner.
We are, of course, concerned that allegations of
lesser crimes, such as immigration offences, continue to
be pursued against Posada Carriles, while the major
crimes committed by that international terrorist are
being ignored. Those crimes were committed not only
in Venezuela, but also in several Central American
countries, because Posada Carriles was for many years
in the service of the Central Intelligence Agency and, in
that capacity, committed terrorist acts in many countries
of Latin America and the Caribbean. He was even
responsible for many acts of torture against political
leaders of the left in Latin America and the Caribbean.
We wish to stress that Luis Posada Carriles must
be prosecuted as a terrorist in the United States or that
the United States must heed the extradition request
made by the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.

10-35734

The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now
make a statement in my national capacity.
Lebanon considers it unfortunate that certain
States have misused today’s debate and diverted it from
its original focus on the work of Committees, which is
mostly technical in nature. In that regard, we condemn
today’s reference to Hizbullah — a Lebanese party
represented in my country’s Government — in the
context of issues pertaining to terrorism. More
important, the delegation that made that reference
practices occupation and continues to commit
aggression against its neighbours, which confirms
something that my delegation has always stressed: the
need to differentiate between terrorism and the
legitimate right of nations to resist foreign occupation.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 2.25 p.m.

43
