General Assembly-Forty-ftrst Sesslon

186

14. Acknowledges the vital role played by the United
Nations Fund for Drug Abuse Control and calls upon
Member States to contribute and/or increase their contributions to the Fund;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-second session on the implementation ofthe present resolution under the item entitled "Intemational campaign against traffic in drugs".
97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986

41/128.

Declaration on the right to development

The General Assembly,
Having considered. the questjon of the right to development,
Decides to adopt the Declaration on the Right to Development, the text ofwhich is annexed to the present resolution.
97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986
ANNEX
Declaration on the Right to Development
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the purposes and principies of the Charter of the
United Nations relating to the achievement ofinternational co-operation
in solving international problems of an economic, social, cultural or
humanitarian nature, and in promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for ali without distinction as to
race, sex, language or religion,
Recognizing that development is a comprehensive economic, social,
cultural and political process, which aims at the constant improvement
ofthe well-being ofth~ entire population and of ali individuals on the basis of their active, free and meaningful participation in development and
in the fair distribution of benefits resulting therefrom,
Considering that under the provisions of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights2 everyone is entitled to a social and international order in
which the rights and freedoms set forth in that Declaration can be fully
realized,
Recalling the provisions of the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights 22 and of the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights, 22
Reca/ling further the relevan! agreements, conventions, resolutions,
recommendations and other instruments of the United Nations and its
specialized agencies concerning the integral development of the human
being, economic and social progress and development of ali peoples, including those instruments concerning decolonization, the preventíon of
discrimination, respect for and observance of, human rights and fundamental freedoms, the maintenance of international peace and security
and the further promotion of friendly relations and co-operation among
States in accordance with the Charter,
Recalling the right ofpeoples to self-determination, by virtue ofwhich
they have the right freely to determine their political status and to pursue
their economic, social and cultural development,
Reco/ling a/so the right of peoples to exercise, subject to the relevant
provisions ofboth International Covenants on Human Rights,24 full and
complete sovereignty over ali their natural wealth and resources,
Mindful of the obligation of States under the Charter to promote universal respect for and observance of human rights and fundamental freedoms for ali without distinction of any kind such as race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin,
property, birth or other status,
Considering that the elimination of the massive and flagran! violation,
of the human rights of the peoples and individuals alfected by situation,
such as those resulting from colonialism, neo-colonialism, apartheid, ali
forms of racism and racial discrimination, foreign domination and occupation, aggression and thrcat, against national sovereignty, national

unity and territorial integrity and threats of war would con tribute to the
establishment of circumstances propitious to the development of a great
part of mankind,
Concerned at the existence of serious obstacles to development, as well
as to the complete fulfilment of human beings and of peoples, constituted, in ter alia, by the denial of civil, political, economic, social and
cultural rights, and considering that ali human rights and fundamental
freedoms are indivisible and interdependent and that, in order to promote development, equal attention and urgent consideration should be
given to the implementation, promotion and protection of civil, political,
economic, social and cultural rights and that, accordingly, the promotion
of, respect for and enjoyment of certain human rights and fundamental
freedoms cannol justify the denial of other human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Considering that international peace and security are essential elements for the realization of the right to development,
Reaffirming that there is a close relationship between disarmament
and development and that progress in the field of disarmament would
considerably promote progress in the field of development and that resources released through disarmament measures should be devoted to
the economic and social development and well-being of ali peoples and,
in particular, those of the developing countries,
Recognizing that the human person is the central subject of the development process and that development policy should therefore make the
human being the main participan! and beneficiary of development,
Recognizing that the creation of conditions favourable to the development of peoples and individuals is the primary responsibility of their
States,
A ware that efforts at the international leve! to promote and protect human rights should be accompanied by efforts to establish a new international economic order,
Confirming that the right to development is an inalienable human
right and that equality of opportunity for development is a prerogative
both of nations and of individuals who make up nations,
Proclaims the following Declaration on the Right to Development:
Artic/e I

L The right to development is an inalienable human right by virtue
of which every human person and ali peoples are entitled to participate
in, con tribute to, and enjoy economic, social, cultural and political development, in which ali human rights and fundamental freedoms can be
fully realized.
2. The human right to development also implies the full realization
of the right of peoples to self-determination, which includes, subject to
the relevan! provisions of both International Covenants on Human
Rights, 24 the exercise of their inalienable right to full sovereignty over ali
their natural wealth and resources.
Article 2

1. The human person is the central subject of development and
should be the active participan! and beneficiary of the right to development.

2. Ali human beings have a responsibility for development, individually and collectively, taking into account the need for full respect for their
human rights and fundamental freedoms as well as their duties to the
community, which alone can ensure the free and complete fulfilment of
the human being, and they should therefore promote and protect an appropriate political, social and economic order for development.
3. States have the right and the duty to formulate appropriate national development policies that aim al !he constan! improvement of the
well-being of the entire population and of ali individuals, on the basis of
their active, free and meaningful participation in development and in the
fair distribution of the benefits resulting therefrom.

Arride 3

L States have the primary responsibility for the creation of national
and international conditions favourable to the realization of the right to
development.
2. The realization of the right to development requires full respect
for the principies of international law concerning friendly rclations and
co-operation among States in accordance with the Charter nf the United
Nation,.

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

3. States have the duty to co-operate with each other in ensuring development and climinating obstacles to development. States should realize their rights and fulfil their duties in such a manner as to promote a
new international economic order based on sovereign equality, interdependence, mutual interest and co-operation among ali States, as well as
to encourage the observance and realization of human rights.
Artic/e 4

1. States have the duty to take steps, individually and collectively, to
formulate international development policies with a view to facilitating
the full realization of the right to development.

2. Sustained action is required to promote more rapid development
of developing countries. As a complement to the efforts of developing
countries, effective international co-operation is essential in providing
these countries with appropriate means and facilities to foster their comprehensive development.
Article 5

States shall take resolute steps to eliminate the massive and flagran! violations of the human rights of peoples and human beings affected by
situations such as those resulting from apartheid, all forms of racism and
racial discrimination, colonialism, foreign domination and occupation,
aggression, foreign interference and threats against national sovereignty,
national unity and territorial integrity, threats of war and refusal to
recognize the fundamental right of peoples to self-determination.
Article 6
l. Ali States should co-operate with a view to promoting, encouraging and strengthening universal respect for and observance of ali human
rights and fundamental freedoms for ali without any distinction as to
race, sex, language or religion.

2. Ali human rights and fundamental freedoms are indivisible and
interdependent; equal attention and urgent consideration should be given
to the implementation, promotion and protection of civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights.
3. States should take steps to eliminate obstacles to development resulting from failure to observe civil and political rights, as well as economic, social and cultural rights.
Article 7

Ali States should promote the establishment, maintenance and
strengthening of international peace and security and, to that end, should
do their utmost to achieve general and complete disarmament under effective international control, as well as to ensure that the resources
released by effective disarmament measures are used for comprehensive
development, in particular that of the developing countries.
Article 8
l. States should undertake, at the national level, ali necessary measures for the realization of the right to development and shall ensure, inter alia, equality of opportunity for ali in their access to basic resources,
education, health services, food, housing, employment and the fair distribution of income. Effective measures should be undertaken to ensure that
women have an active role in the development process. Appropriate economic and social reforms should be carried out with a view to eradicating
ali social injustices.

2. States should encourage popular participation in ali spheres as an
important factor in development and in the full realization of ali human
rights.
Article 9

1. Ali the aspects of the right to development set forth in the present
Declaration are indivisible and interdependent and each of them should
be considered in the context of the whole.
2. Nothing in the present Dedaration shall be construed as being
contrary to the purposes and principies of the U nited Nations, oras implying that any State, group or person ha~ a right to engage in any activity orto perform any act aimed al the violation ofthe rights set forth in
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights2 and in the lnternational
Covenants on Human Right,_24

187

Artic/e JO
Steps should be taken to ensure the full exercise and progressive enhancement of the right to development, including the formulation, adoption and implementation of policy, legislative and other measures at the
national and intemational levels.

41/129.

National institutions for the protection and promotion of human rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 32/123 of 16 December 1977,
33/46 of 14 December 1978, 34/49 of23 November 1979,
36/134 of 14 December 1981, 38/123 of 16 December
1983, 39/144 of 14 December 1984 and 40/123 of
13 December 1985 concerning national institutions for the
protection and promotion of human rights,
Mindful of the guidelines on the structure and functioning of national and local institutions for the protection and
promotion of human rights, endorsed by the General Assembly in its resolution 33/46,
Emphasizing the importance of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 2 the International Covenants on
Human Rights 24 and other international human rights instruments for promoting respect for and observance ofhuman rights and fundamental freedoms,
Conscious of the significant role that institutions at the
national leve! can play in protecting and promoting human rights and fundamental freedoms and in developing
and enhancing public awareness and observance of those
rights and freedoms,
Welcoming the holding at Geneva, under the auspices of
the United Nations, of a Seminar on the Experience of
Different Countries in the Implementation of lnternational Standards on Human Rights, from 20 June to l July
1983, and a Seminar on Community Relations Commissions and Their Functions, from 9 to 20 September 1985,
and other current United Nations initiatives to assist in
the development of national machinery to combat racial
discrimination,
I. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General; 111
2. Emphasizes the importance of developing, in accordance with national legislation, effective national institutions for the protection and promotion of human rights,
and of maintaining their independence and integrity;
3. Encourages ali Member States to take appropriate
steps for the establishment or, where they already exist,
the strengthening of national institutions for the protection and promotion of human rights;
4. Draws attention to the constructive role that national non-governmental organizations can play in the
work of such national institutions;
5. Encourages ali Member States to take appropriate
steps to promote the exchange of information and experience concerning the establishment of such national institutions;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to give due attention to the role of national institutions and nongovernmental organizations concerned with the protection and promotion of human rights and to provide ali
necessary assistance to Member States, upon their request,
in the implementation of paragraphs 3 and 5 above, according high priority to the needs of developing countries;
7. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to
provide and, as appropriate, to enhance assistance in the
111

A/411464
