S/2020/360

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
5 May 2020
Original: English

United Nations Support Mission in Libya
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report, submitted pursuant to Security Council resolutions 2486
(2019) and 2510 (2020), covers political, security-related and economic
developments in Libya, provides an overview of the human rights and humanitarian
situation and includes an outline of the activities of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) since the issuance of my previous report on 15 January
2020 (S/2020/41).

II. Political, security-related and economic developments
2.
Following a relative reduction in fighting in the immediate aftermath of the truce
of 12 January called for by the Presidents of the Russian Federation and Turkey and
accepted by the Government of National Accord and the Libyan National Army,
fighting gradually resumed. Both parties redeployed forces along the front lines in
the Tripoli area. As at 21 April, more than 850 reported breac hes of the ceasefire had
been recorded by UNSMIL, including an unprecedented increase in indirect fire
observed in urban areas, resulting in civilian casualties, damage to civilian
infrastructure and disruption of commercial air operations. At other flashp oints in
western Libya, tensions also remained high. On 26 January, the Libyan National Army
launched an offensive against the forces of the Government of National Accord in the
Abu Qurayn area, south of Misratah, prompting heavy clashes and casualties on both
sides. At the end of March, heavy artillery fire and rocket attacks were continued by
both sides in parts of southern Tripoli and in the central and western regions.
Locations along the western coastal road towards the border with Tunisia were seized
by the forces of the Government of National Accord in mid -April. On 18 April, those
forces launched a coordinated attack against the city of Tarhunah.
3.
Reports continued of foreign mercenaries providing the Government of National
Accord and the Libyan National Army with enhanced combat capabilities, amid
persistent reports of military equipment and arms being supplied to both sides in
violation of the United Nations-imposed arms embargo. Those developments
undermined United Nations-led dialogue initiatives and added to more human
suffering. From 1 January to 31 March, there were at least 131 civilian casualties in
Libya, including at least 64 persons who were killed. Since April 2019, more than

20-05854 (E)

080520

*2005854*

S/2020/360

200,000 persons have been forced to leave their homes in and around Tripoli owing
to armed conflict.
4.
To prevent the spread of coronavirus disease (COVID-19), the national
authorities and the unrecognized “interim government” based in eastern Libya
introduced preventive measures, including the closure of all air, land and sea borders;
restrictions on movement between municipalities and regions; curfews; lockdowns;
the suspension of Friday prayers and gatherings; the closure of schools and
non-essential shops; and restrictions on public transportation. On 14 March , the Prime
Minister, Faiez Mustafa Serraj, announced a state of emergency in Libya and
allocated 575 million Libyan dinars (about $406 million) to COVID -19 preparedness
and response. Separate committees were established in the east and the west to
address the impact of the disease.
5.
Although prevention and preparedness measures taken with regard to the
COVID-19 pandemic were introduced by authorities with the support of the United
Nations, Libya remained at an extremely high risk. The situation was comp ounded by
increasing levels of fighting and insecurity, political fragmentation and a weak and
overstretched health system. The pandemic led to a loss of income for segments of
society, food shortages and an increase in the price of basic commodities. In a ddition,
measures to restrict the spread of COVID-19 hampered access to humanitarian aid
and the movement of medical and humanitarian personnel.
6.
The ongoing conflict and the current pandemic further weakened the already
tenuous economic situation in Libya. The declaration of force majeure by the National
Oil Corporation on 18 January as a result of a closure of oil ports in areas under the
control of the Libyan National Army reduced oil production to less than a tenth of its
prior output. The Libyan National Army-supported blockage of oil exports prompted
the Government of National Accord to take austerity measures to reduce spending,
including payroll reductions. The austerity measures will further exhaust coping
mechanisms at a time when the population is facing tremendous additional economic
pressures owing to COVID-19.
7.
On 18 and 21 March, respectively, the Government of National Accord and the
Libyan National Army responded positively to international calls for an immediate
humanitarian truce and a halt to the continuing transfer of all military equipment and
personnel to Libya in order to allow local authorities to respond to the pandemic. On
21 March, I welcomed the positive responses received from both sides. On 23 March,
I called for an immediate global ceasefire in all corners of the world in order for all
efforts to be focused on addressing the pandemic and saving lives.
8.
Respect for the humanitarian truce was short-lived. Armed confrontation
intensified in southern Tripoli and spread to areas around the airbase in Watiyah, in
the country’s north-west section. On 23 March, the Government of National Accord
launched Operation Peace Storm, which it said was a response to the increased attacks
by the Libyan National Army on civilian neighbourh oods in Tripoli. The military
escalation complicated efforts by civilian authorities and the population towards
putting preventive measures in place to address the pandemic.
9.
Violence escalated unabated, even after the Security Council issued elements
for the press on 26 March, in which concern was expressed about the significant
escalation of hostilities on the ground and the possible impact of the pandemic in
Libya. The parties were called upon to de-escalate the fighting, cease hostilities and
ensure unhindered access to humanitarian aid throughout the country. The Council
also reaffirmed the central role of the United Nations in facilitating a Libyan -led and
Libyan-owned inclusive political process.

2/16

20-05854

S/2020/360

10. On 23 April, the Speaker of the House of Representatives, Agila Saleh,
announced a new political initiative, calling for the social and political constituencies
in eastern, western and southern Libya to each elect a representative to a three member Presidency Council under the supervision of the United Nations. On the same
day, the Commander of the Libyan National Army, General Khalifa Haftar, reiterated
that the Libyan Political Agreement and the current Presidency Council were no
longer valid, requesting Libyans to empower an institution that was able to lead the
country during the transitional period on the basis of a new constitutional declaration.
On 27 April, General Haftar announced that he had accepted the mandate provided
by the Libyan people to the Libyan National Army to lead the country. On 2 9 April,
the Libyan National Army announced a halt to all military operations during the holy
month of Ramadan.
11. Following the resignation of my Special Representative for Libya and Head of
UNSMIL for health-related reasons, on 11 March, I designated his Deputy, Stephanie
Turco Williams, my Acting Special Representative and Head of UNSMIL. The
process of appointing a new Special Representative is continuing.
Implementation of the three-step initiative and the political process
12. International efforts to de-escalate the conflict and pave the way for a political
solution to the Libyan crisis continued. The United Nations and the Government of
Germany organized the Berlin Conference on Libya on 19 January. Other participants
included Algeria, China, the Congo, Egypt, France, Italy, the Russian Federation,
Turkey, the United Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland and the United States of America, as well as senior officials from the African
Union, the European Union and the League of Arab States. All participants signed the
press release, in which they committed themselves to assisting in ending the fighting,
refraining from interfering in the conflict and implementing the arms embargo
established in Security Council resolution 1970 (2011). Participants called for the
cessation of all hostilities and the start of ceasefire negotiations and urged the Libyan
parties to resume the political process. In the press release, all parties were urged to
respect international humanitarian law and human rights law fully, and support for
security and economic reform was highlighted.
13. An international follow-up committee to the Berlin Conference, consisting of
all countries and international organizations that had participated in the Berlin
Conference, was established and tasked with assisting in the operationalization of the
conclusions of the conference, under the auspices of the United Nations. On the
margins of the conference, Mr. Serraj and General Haftar appointed their respective
representatives to the UNSMIL-facilitated 5+5 Joint Military Commission.
14. On 13 February, the Security Council adopted resolution 2510 (2020), endorsing
the conclusions of the Berlin Conference on Libya and expressing unequivocal
support for the intra-Libyan dialogue.
15. On 6 January, UNSMIL facilitated the first meeting of the economic track of the
intra-Libyan dialogue in Tunis, with 19 participants. At the second meeting, held in
Cairo on 9 and 10 February and involving 28 representatives of Libyan economic
institutions and economic experts, participants agreed to a draft terms of reference for
a Libyan expert economic commission and the creation of three working groups to
refine specific policy recommendations. All of the working groups have since met to
develop policy recommendations on issues of immediate priority, including revenue
distribution, the banking and private sectors and development and reconstruction. The
third meeting of the economic track of the dialogue, scheduled for 15 March, was
postponed owing to COVID-19. The working groups continued to meet in Libya, with
remote participation from other locations, to develop the policy recommendations.
20-05854

3/16

S/2020/360

16. On 3 February, the Joint Military Commission held its first session in Geneva
under the auspices of UNSMIL with the aim of reaching a lasting ceasefire and
restoring security to civilian areas. The Government of National Accord and Libyan
National Army delegations, each composed of five military and security officers,
discussed provisional security measures and ceasefire arrangements. At the end of the
second round of talks, held on 23 February, UNSMIL prepared a draft ceasefire
agreement with provisions for the safe return of civilians to their areas of residence.
It was agreed that the two delegations would present the draft agreement to their
respective leaderships for further consultations and that t he Joint Military
Commission would reconvene in March to finalize the terms of reference of the
subcommittees in charge of the implementation of the agreement. Because of
COVID-19, that meeting was postponed. My acting Special Representative was in
direct contact with Mr. Serraj and General Haftar to urge them to respond to the draft
agreement.
17. On 26 February, UNSMIL convened a meeting of the Libyan Political Forum,
the political track of the intra-Libyan dialogue, in Geneva. A total of 50 members of
the House of Representatives and the High Council of State, other political
representatives, women leaders and civil society representatives were invited to
attend. Shortly before the meeting, the High Council of State reaffirmed its
commitment to the political dialogue, but announced that the participation of its
delegates would be contingent on progress made on military talks and on the return
of displaced persons to their places of origin. Also on 26 February, members of the
House of Representatives delegation representing the districts in eastern Libya and
who were close to General Haftar withdrew amid disagreement over the selection of
representatives of the House of Representatives at the talks.
18. The launch of the three tracks of the dialogue enjoyed significant support in
Libya. On 4 March, 130 prominent Libyans, representing the business community,
academia, technocrats, civil society and young people, called for a continuation of
the three tracks as the only way to protect Libya from the spect re of war and
destruction. As at 27 April, the meetings of the three UNSMIL-facilitated tracks had
been postponed owing mainly to measures taken in response to COVID -19. UNSMIL,
however, continued to engage with all Libyan representatives on the three trac ks with
a view to resuming the meetings as soon as possible.
International follow-up committee to the Berlin Conference
19. Under the co-chairmanship of the Government of Germany and UNSMIL, the
international follow-up committee to the Berlin Conference held its inaugural meeting
in Munich, Germany, on 16 February. Representatives of South Africa and Tunisia
joined the committee as participants. As the executive secretariat of the Berlin
Process, the committee is an essential tool for progressively turn ing the principles of
the conclusions of the Berlin Conference into tangible action. Its next meeting,
scheduled to be held in Rome on 19 March under the joint chairmanship of the
Government of Italy and UNSMIL, was postponed owing to the pandemic.
20. On 2 April, UNSMIL chaired the second meeting of the follow-up committee,
held on closed-circuit television. Participants reiterated their call upon both parties to
cease military operations and commit themselves to a humanitarian pause to focus
national efforts on addressing COVID-19. Participants stressed the need to maximize
international efforts to achieve a permanent ceasefire between the parties to the
conflict and encourage the Libyan parties to continue their engagement on the three
UNSMIL-facilitated tracks of the dialogue. Participants agreed on the co-chairs of
three committee working groups (political, security and economic). The
co-chairmanship of the international humanitarian law and human rights working
group was opened to Member States outside the Berlin format after the Netherlands
4/16

20-05854

S/2020/360

and Switzerland formally expressed interest in co-chairing that group. Following the
agreement on the co-chairmanship of the three working groups, the political and
economic group each met once, while the security group met four times by
videoconference.
International and regional engagement
21. In addition to cooperating in the Berlin Process, the United Nations sustained
its engagement with international and regional stakeholders to enlist support for a
political solution to the Libyan conflict. My former Special Representative attended
the eighth Summit of the Ad Hoc High-level Committee on Libya of the African
Union, hosted by the President of the Congo in Brazzaville on 30 January. During a
trilateral meeting with the Chair of the African Union Commission and the High Level Committee, held in Addis Ababa on 8 February, I tabled a number of proposals
to enhance cooperation and synergies between the United Nations and the African
Union on Libya. On 9 February, I participated in the African Union summit, held in
Addis Ababa, during which the Assembly of the African Union adopted a decision to
support the convening by the African Union of an inter-Libyan reconciliation
conference, in line with the conclusions of the Berlin Conference. On 11 and
12 March, my Chef de Cabinet represented me, heading a delegation, which included
my Special Representative to the African Union and the Acting Special
Representative for Libya, to the inaugural meeting of the Cont act Group of the Ad
Hoc High-level Committee on Libya of the African Union, held in Oyo, the Congo.
The Contact Group decided that the reconciliation conference would be organized in
Addis Ababa and expressed the determination of the African Union to coope rate
closely with the United Nations to advance the implementation of the conclusions of
the Berlin Conference.
22. On 31 March, the European Union officially launched a new Common Security
and Defence Policy military operation in the Mediterranean, opera tion EUNAVFOR
MED IRINI, effective 1 April, for an initial period of one year, replacing the European
Union military operation in the Southern Central Mediterranean, EUNAVFOR MED
operation Sophia, whose mandate ended on 31 March. The new operation’s core
mandate is to contribute to the implementation of the United Nations arms embargo
through the use of aerial, satellite and maritime assets. Inspections will be carried out
of vessels on the high seas off the coast of Libya that are suspected to be carrying
arms or related materiel to and from Libya, in strict accordance with Security Council
resolution 2292 (2016) and other relevant resolutions. The operation will also monitor
illicit oil exports, build the capacity of and train the Coast Guard and Navy of Libya
and support the detection and monitoring of human smuggling and trafficking
networks through information gathering and patrolling by aerial assets.
23. On 8 April, at the request of the Security Council, the Under-Secretary-General
for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and the Deputy Secretary -General of the
European External Action Service briefed the Council EUNAVFOR MED operation
IRINI.
Situation in the western region
24. During the reporting period, armed clashes, shelling and air strikes continued
along the front lines of southern Tripoli. The intensity of the attacks became acute
during the political and military talks held in Geneva. Intense fighting also occurred
in other cities in western Libya, including Abu Qurayn, Gharyan, Misratah, Qarabulli,
Sabratah, Surman and Zuwarah.
25. In Tripoli, the Libyan National Army reinforced its positions in the Abu Salim,
Salah al-Din and Ayn Zarah districts with personnel, armoured vehicles and
20-05854

5/16

S/2020/360

weaponry, including heavy artillery batteries, ammunition shipments and additional
infantry elements. The Libyan National Army also targeted alleged Government of
National Accord reinforcements, including from foreign sources. On 18 February, the
Libyan National Army targeted the Tripoli port with a barrage of heavy artillery and
Grad rockets aimed at destroying a cargo vessel allegedly delivering military
equipment to the Government of National Accord. Later that day and on 29 February,
uncrewed aerial vehicles operated in support of the Government of National Accord
attempted to target Libyan National Army positions south of the Ayn Zarah district,
but were shot down by Libyan National Army air defence systems. The concentration
of forces by both parties was confirmed in the Zatarnah area and Qarabulli, where
clashes had been reported, with the Libyan National Army unsuccessfully attempting
to reach the eastern coastal road to disrupt the connection between Misratah and
Tripoli. In addition, major Libyan National Army reinforcements reportedly arrived
in Aziziyah and the Hayrah area north of Gharyan, which the Libyan National Army
lost to the Government of National Accord in June 2019 and has been trying to
reclaim.
26. On 22 January, the Libyan National Army further extended its previously
declared no-fly zone southwards, towards Gharyan and Tarhunah, and threatened to
shoot down any military or civilian aircraft approaching Mitiga Airport, in Tripoli.
The airport was targeted with indirect fire in a string of Libyan National Army attacks
with indirect fire by forces, with a peak of 50 shells on 28 February. The attacks
disrupted the airport’s operation and resulted in civilian casualties and damage to
nearby civilian homes.
27. Notwithstanding initial positive responses by both sides to the call for a
humanitarian truce by both sides, heavy artillery fire continued on 21 March along
the front lines in Tripoli. On 24 March, repeated shelling, reportedly by Libyan
National Army-affiliated forces, impacted the Ayn Zarah district, including the
Ruwaymi prison. UNSMIL condemned the attacks, which had resulted in several
injuries, reportedly including inmates and judicial police. On 25 March, an attack by
Government of National Accord forces against the airbase in Watiyah was repelled by
the Libyan National Army, aided by reinforcements from the strategic western coastal
cities of Sabratah and Surman. Government of National Accord forces reportedly
gained control over Surman and Sabratah, as well as Ujaylat, Raqdalin, Jumayl,
Zaltan and Assah. The developments could endanger the previous fragile stability in
towns close to the Tunisian border that have thus far not been affected directly by the
conflict.
28. Thus far in 2020, 12 reported attacks have impacted 7 health facilities in Libya,
while in 2019, 62 attacks impacted 19 health facilities throughout the country. On
4 March 2020, 10 schools in Ayn Zarah and all schools in Misratah that had been
closed for more than a month reopened, allowing 127,000 students to return.
However, on 8 March, eight schools near Mitiga Airport were closed owing to the
risks posed by shelling. As at 16 March, at least 930 families (approximately 4,650
persons) were reported to have fled to neighbouring areas.
29. Vital services and civilian infrastructure continued to be impacted by the
hostilities. On 6 April, an attack on the Great Man-Made River Project in Shuwayrif
left some 2 million persons without water for more than a week. Following a mediated
solution, the resumption of water distribution was complicated by the hindering of
the supply of natural gas to power stations in Misratah and Khums by another armed
group in a different area.

6/16

20-05854

S/2020/360

Situation in the eastern region
30. In the eastern region, there were continued reports of criminal activity and
incidents related to explosive remnants of war. On 23 February, the police in Benghazi
reportedly arrested a prominent drug dealer. Demonstrations in support of the Libyan
National Army and against Turkish intervention were held in several cities, including
at the United Nations hub in Benghazi, with one demonstration turning violent.
31. On 18 January, the National Oil Corporation declared a force majeure on oil
exports from ports in eastern Libya following demonstrations that day accompanied
by calls from the Libyan National Army for ports to be shut down. Oil exports from
the eastern ports of Burayqah, Ra’s Lanuf, Hariqah Zuwaytinah and Sidr were halted.
Situation in the southern region
32. The military operations of the Libyan National Army in western Libya
continued to exacerbate the security vacuum in the southern region, with criminality
and suspected terrorist-related activity continuing. In Sabha, Tebu-affiliated armed
elements established checkpoints and imposed illegal taxation on the movement of
people and goods. On 30 January, one civilian was reportedly killed in clashes
between two unidentified armed groups on Mahdiah Road. Other reported criminal
incidents included assassinations, carjacking, abductions and smuggling.
33. In a move coordinated between the Libyan National Army and local tribal
actors, oil fields in the south-western portion of Libya were shut down. On 20 January,
the National Oil Corporation extended the force majeure to all onshore ports
following instructions from the Libyan National Army to shut down production at oil
fields in Shararah, Hamada and Fil.
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in Libya
34. On 28 January, suspected members of Islamic State in Iraq and the Le vant (ISIL)
reportedly attacked a checkpoint west of the southern city of Murzuq, killing one
security element. While there was limited ISIL activity during the reporting period,
observers assessed that ISIL and other terrorist groups may seek to take adva ntage of
the general lack of security in southern Libya in order to expand their activities.
Economic situation
35. The sustainability of the economic situation in Libya is becoming increasingly
tenuous, and the situation will be further exacerbated b y COVID-19. Since the
blockage of oil exports imposed by the Libyan National Army on 17 January, the
primary export of Libya was reduced from 1.2 million to 72,000 barrels per day,
resulting in accumulated losses amounting to more than $4 billion. To offse t the
diminished revenues, the Central Bank of Libya and the Government of National
Accord attempted to impose long-overdue austerity measures, including cuts to the
public service payroll and a reduction in fuel subsidies. The blockage of oil exports
also resulted in the shutdown of the country’s domestic oil refinery capacity, thereby
requiring the National Oil Corporation to purchase refined petroleum products.
Although the Corporation had been providing sufficient refined fuel for commercial
purposes, on 13 March, authorities in eastern Libya imported fuel from the United
Arab Emirates to Benghazi, thus undermining the authority of the Corporation and
marking the first time that fuel was imported outside normal Corporation channels.
36. The blockage of oil exports and the lack of agreement on a national budget
caused delays in salary payments and a reduction in access to foreign exchange,
leading to shortages and higher prices for goods. The branch of the Central Bank of
Libya in Bayda’ stated on 9 March that it was unable to finance the parallel
20-05854

7/16

S/2020/360

government beyond salaries, evidence of the growing reluctance of Libyan
commercial banks to continue to finance questionable government bonds issued by
the parallel Ministry of Finance in eastern Libya. If left unaddressed, the prices of
staple goods are likely to increase further, and tensions within the banking sector
could lead to its collapse.
37. UNSMIL, in coordination with international financial institutions, continued its
efforts to address economic issues, including the worsening banking crisis. The
UNSMIL-facilitated economic dialogue between the two branches of the Central
Bank of Libya alleviated some stress on the banking sector, but workarounds are
becoming increasingly difficult to maintain. A lack of cooperation on the part of the
Libyan authorities in facilitating the international audit review of the structure of the
Central Bank also narrowed opportunities for the unification of that bank. Working
groups, established during a second meeting of the economic track in Cairo in
February, are working to find solutions, including by addressing deficiencies in
development spending and revenue allocation.
38. Notwithstanding COVID-19, UNSMIL continues to address urgent economic
issues, including with regard to resuming foreign exchange for basic commodities,
facilitating public salary payments, ensuring adequate fuel supply, urging the
disbursement of social benefits in exchange for a reduction in fuel subsidies and
taking measures to support small and medium-sized businesses.

III. Other activities of the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya
A.

Electoral support
39. UNSMIL, and the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) continued
to support the High National Elections Commission and the Central Committee for
Municipal Council Elections by upgrading voter registration systems. The new
Commission compound was completed and is fully operational. The operations of the
Commission and the Committee continued to be hampered by budget shortages and
the prevailing security situation in Tripoli.
40. Following a dispute resolution process that lasted eight months, on 14 January,
the Central Committee for Municipal Council Elections announced the final results
of the Municipal Council elections in Sabha, which had been held on 27 April 2019.
That process was followed by the election of the new Mayor and the swearing -in
ceremony of the new Council by the Minister of Local Governance in Tripoli on
23 January.
41. On 4 March, the Government of National Accord agreed to approve an
amendment of the regulation governing municipal elections (decision No. 18/2019),
which will allow the Central Committee for Municipal Council Elections to resume
the holding of municipal elections that had been on hold since July 2019. While the
amendment has not yet been published in the Official Gazette, the Government signed
the respective decree on 18 March (decision No. 7/2020). A new series of elections is
tentatively planned for after the holy month of Ramadan, which ends in May 2020,
although it is subject to developments related to COVID -19.

B.

Human rights, transitional justice and the rule of law
42. In response to the appeal by UNSMIL and other United Nations entities to
release persons arbitrarily detained and to consider releasing pretrial prisoners in the

8/16

20-05854

S/2020/360

context of COVID-19, between March and April, the authorities reportedly released
an estimated 1,900 prisoners and detainees. UNSMIL is providing technical guidance
to the Ministry of Justice, the Ministry of the Interior and the Supreme Judicial
Council with regard to alternatives to detention to support the release of 4,200
detainees who have been awaiting trial for years.
43. On 27 January, UNSMIL and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights issued a joint report on the air strike on the Tajura’
detention centre on 2 July 2019, which resulted in the death of at least 53 migrants
and refugees. In the report, accountability for violations of interna tional law, as well
as urgent action to prevent a repeat of a such an incident, were called for. On
13 March, the Group of African States, with the support of Libya, tabled a resolution
at the Human Rights Council to establish a fact-finding mission on the human rights
situation in Libya to document alleged violations and abuses of international human
rights and humanitarian law by all parties in Libya since 2016. Owing to the
pandemic, however, the session was suspended and voting on the resolution was
postponed to a later session.
Unlawful deprivation of liberty, detention and torture
44. Some 8,800 individuals, of whom an estimated 60 per cent were in pretrial
detention, were held in 28 official prisons nominally under the Ministry of Justice. In
total, 278 women, including 184 foreign nationals, and 109 children were held in
prisons and/or in judicial police custody. Thousands of others were held in facilities
nominally under the control of the Ministry of the Interior or the Ministry of Defence,
as well as in facilities directly operated by armed groups.
45. UNSMIL and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights continued to receive reports of arbitrary or unlawful detention, torture,
enforced disappearances, overcrowding, a lack of sanitation and medical neglect,
among others, in relation to detention facilities under the control of the Ministry of
the Interior. During the reporting period, courts in Libya heard civil and personal
status cases only. Criminal cases were postponed because members of the Office of
the Public Prosecutor were unwilling or unable to investigate them owing to their fear
of retaliation from armed groups. A declaration of emergency was issued on 14 March
regarding COVID-19, and on 15 March, the Supreme Judicial Council issued a
decision to postpone the proceedings of civil or criminal court cases until the end of
May, with a possibility of further delay. The decision introduces limitations on
attendance into court proceedings, including that of defendants in criminal cases. If
implemented, the provisions would violate existing Libyan law.
46. UNSMIL documented an increase in abductions and enforced disappearances
carried out by armed groups across Libya, including of professionals and civil society
activists. The Mission continued to receive reports of gross human rights abuses,
including killings and the destruction of private property by the armed group 9th
Brigade (Kaniyat) in Tarhunah. UNSMIL also received credible reports of serious
human rights violations in Sirte. Many families were reportedly forced to flee owing
to looting and their being perceived as supportive of the Government of National
Accord. On 6 February, UNSMIL issued a statement condemning the destruction of a
Sufi shrine and the reported arbitrary arrest of Sufis in Sirte, calling upon the
authorities in control of Sirte to investigate and bring the perpetrators to justice.
47. UNSMIL received credible reports of hundreds of pretrial detainees and
convicted persons being released from prisons in several towns, having been
promised freedom following the end of the conflict in return for agreeing to fight
against the Libyan National Army or the Government of National Accord. In addition,
all 60 pretrial detainees at the prison in Sirte, all 60 pretrial detainees were released
20-05854

9/16

S/2020/360

after the Libyan National Army took over Sirte, reportedly owing to fear of
indiscriminate shelling or a direct attack on the prison. UNSMIL noted with grave
concern the break at Surman Prison of 14 April and the re lease of 401 prisoners
without adequate legal proceedings or vetting shortly after the forces of the
Government of National Accord recaptured the town.
48. From 14 to 16 January, together with the Libyan judicial police and the Legal
Affairs Department of the Ministry of Justice in Tunis, UNSMIL and UNDP jointly
organized workshops on prison reform aimed at improving services at the technical
and operational levels by creating model prisons. A total of 19 participants, including
2 women, took part in the workshops.
Groups in vulnerable situations
Migrants and refugees
49. More than 3,115 refugees and migrants were registered as rescued and/or
intercepted at sea by the Libyan Coast Guard. Many were returned to detention in
Libya. UNSMIL received credible reports of smuggling of and trafficking in asylum
seekers and refugees at the Abu Isa and the Nasir detention centres in Zawiyah. More
than 1,400 migrants and refugees are currently held in detention centres under the
control of the Ministry of the Interior, a decrease from the more than 5,000 held in
January 2019.
Journalists and peace activists
50. On 20 January, a Libyan journalist who had reportedly been abducted in Tripoli
by the Special Deterrence Force on 15 January for allegedly sharing information with
the Libyan National Army was released. Reportedly, the journalist had been subjected
to torture and ill-treatment. On 16 January, Libyan National Army forces set fire to
the building housing the Sirte offices of the Information a nd Culture Authority and
two radio stations.
Women and girls
51. Women and girls detained in prisons and detention centres continued to be
exposed to sexual violence. During the reporting period, UNSMIL documented eight
cases of women and girls who had been raped by traffickers and Libyan security
personnel during captivity or arbitrary detention. Migrant and refugee women who
had not been detained reported being subjected to sexual harassment by armed men
in Tripoli.
52. Six months after the abduction and disappearance of a member of the House of
Representatives, Siham Sergewa, in a statement and a Security Council briefing, on
17 and 30 January, respectively, UNSMIL reiterated its call upon the authorities in
eastern Libya to do more to clarify the lawmaker’s fate and whereabouts, in line with
their international human rights law obligations. UNSMIL also welcomed the joint
statement issued by several Member States in January echoing the same calls.
53. On the occasion of International Women’s Day, 8 March, UNSMIL and its
partners held a panel discussion, in coordination with the Legal Aid Coalition for
Conflict-related Cases, to discuss challenges to protecting human rights defenders in
Tripoli with the aim of developing a baseline protection strategy. UNSMIL and United
Nations agencies also issued a joint statement marking the twentieth anniversary of
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), reiterating that Libyan women need to be at
the forefront of peace efforts in the country.

10/16

20-05854

S/2020/360

Reconciliation and transitional justice
54. Under the Mission’s national reconciliation project, implemented with UNDP,
some 145 persons, 30 per cent of whom were women registered as members of the
project’s network of mediators. Through the project, 70 members, including 21
women, will enhance their skills in conflict analysis, conflict resolution and
mediation by participating in a two-week training course, the first week of which was
completed in Tunis on 5 March.
55. United Nations agencies continued to provide technical expertise on
reconciliation and mediation. The United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) facilitated 13 meetings with the Libyan
Women Network for Peacebuilding and supported coordination efforts among women
activists, civil society organizations, academics and lawyers. As a result, prior to the
Libyan Political Forum, held in February, the Network issued a statement reinforcing
the important role played by women in the Forum.
Human rights due diligence policy
56. The United Nations system in Libya continued its efforts to implement the
human rights due diligence policy, including by providing support to non -United
Nations security forces (see A/67/775-S/2013/110, annex), with a view to mitigating
the identified risks of grave violations of international humanitarian law, human rights
law or refugee law.

C.

Security sector
Support for Libyan plans for interim security arrangements and the unification
of security forces
57. UNSMIL and UNDP continued to build the capacity of staff of both the Ministry
of the Interior and the Ministry of Justice through the Policing and Security Joint
Programme, with special attention given to promoting a gender-sensitive approach in
the security sector. The Joint Programme organized a workshop, held from 27 to
30 January, on the model police station, at which job descriptions and structure, as
well as human rights and gender-sensitive approaches, were discussed. About one
third of the participants were female police officers.
Arms and ammunition management
58. UNSMIL continued to assist Libyan authorities and communities in addressing
the increasing threat of explosive hazards and the proliferation of weapons and
ammunition through the technical assistance of the Mine Action Service. In Benghazi,
teams from the Service conducted clearance activities in residential areas and at 11
sites. An estimated 9,455 residents benefited from the removal of more than 500 items
of unexploded ordnance and small arms ammunition. Non-technical surveys
conducted in Sabri and Laythi benefited some 23,900 persons through the mapping
of explosive hazards to inform future activities. In Tripoli, two new teams from the
Service removed unexploded ordnance from the Janzur, Abu Salim and Tariq al-Matar
areas. The Service also provided training in capacity development to young people
and women to help to address the proliferation of small arms and light weapons.
Advancing a possible ceasefire
59. During two rounds of meetings in the context of the Joint Military Commission,
held from 3 to 8 and 18 to 23 February, respectively, delegations from the Government
of National Accord and the Libyan National Army made progress towards a ceas efire

20-05854

11/16

S/2020/360

agreement. At the end of the second round, UNSMIL prepared a draft ceasefire
agreement on the basis of the nine points that the parties had agreed on. The points
included the need to preserve the sovereignty of Libya and to protect its borders;
ending foreign interference; the need to expel foreign fighters; the importance of
countering United Nations-designated terror organizations that would be exempt from
any ceasefire; and the need to continue to take confidence-building measures, such as
the exchange of mortal remains and prisoners.
60. Five subcommittees were envisaged by the Joint Military Commission to
oversee the implementation of a ceasefire agreement, namely, on a ceasefire and
monitoring, the mapping and dismantling of armed groups, the ca ntonment of
weapons, the repatriation of foreign fighters and interim security arrangements. Both
parties agreed that the next meeting of the Commission should develop the terms of
reference for the subcommittees in order to outline the mechanisms necessar y for
their implementation.

D.

Empowerment of women and young people
61. UNSMIL sought to mainstream gender into and ensure the meaningful
participation of women and young people throughout the three -track dialogues. After
only 1 woman had been selected to attend the Libyan Political Forum, 10 additional
seats were made available for women therein. In partnership with UN -Women, they
were provided with technical support that was focused on the gender perspective in
political dialogue.
62. In Sabha, the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), UN-Women and the
World Food Programme (WFP) launched a joint pilot project on 26 January, in which
57 women were provided with skills to strengthen leadership and livelihood . From
16 January to 16 March, UNFPA undertook a number of initiatives, including the
provision of psychosocial support and the raising of the awareness of vulnerable
women and girls in Tripoli and Sabha of gender-based violence, as well as holding
consultations with young female entrepreneurs in Sirte.

E.

Coordination of international assistance
63. The humanitarian response in Libya continued to be coordinated at the field
level by the area coordination groups covering the eastern, southern and western
regions of the country, as well as through sectors and the Inter-Sector Coordination
Group, under the leadership of the humanitarian country team and the Humanitarian
Coordinator and supported by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs.
64. Through the 2020 Libya Humanitarian Response Plan, sector coordination will
be strengthened through an emphasis on the participation of non -governmental
organizations (NGOs) and supporting the co-leadership of sectors by international
NGOs as well as the increased participation of local actors.

F.

Humanitarian, stabilization and development assistance
65. As at 27 April, there were 61 confirmed cases of COVID-19, including two
deaths, in Libya. The United Nations system, chiefly the World Health Organization
(WHO), engaged closely with health authorities in Tripoli and in western and eastern
Libya. Technical support was extended to the Ministry of Health, the National Centre
for Disease Control and others, focusing on prevention, preparedness and response

12/16

20-05854

S/2020/360

measures, including through increasing the COVID-19 testing capacity and providing
adequate training to health workers. United Nations country team members, together
with national and international NGO partners, provided technical support to enhance
national surveillance, early warning systems and alert and response networks;
upgrade laboratory capacity; improve public information; and establish isolation
wards in several hospitals.
66. The WHO assessment of the detection and response capacities of Libya for
COVID-19 revealed several weaknesses. The health information system functioned
poorly, and only a limited number of health-care facilities were reporting the disease
to the Early Warning and Response Network. Contact tracing capacity was assessed
as extremely weak. Although authorities could perform basic influenza tests on
clinical specimens, there was no adequate capacity to test for COVID-19. In many
hospitals, isolation units were either non-existent or inadequate.
67. The National Centre for Disease Control continued to monitor the COVID -19
situation closely and took steps to prevent and control the possible importation of the
virus from other countries. Screening points were set up to monitor arrivals at points
of entry and isolate suspected cases. WHO, in collaboration with the health authorities
and health partners, prioritized six technical areas for urgent support: enhancing
surveillance, strengthening rapid response teams, supporting health control offices at
points of entry, improving laboratory capacity, increasing health information and
communication and supporting the establishment of isolati on wards in selected
hospitals and quarantine areas at points of entry.
68. Nearly 345,000 civilians remain in front-line areas, with an additional 749,000
persons estimated to be residing in areas affected by clashes. Internally displaced
families that remain close to areas of conflict, as well as host communities providing
them with shelter and migrants and refugees in urban communities or detention
centres, remain at significant risk.
69. From 1 January to 25 March, UNSMIL documented at least 131 civili an
casualties (64 deaths and 67 injuries). The victims included 82 men (43 deaths and 39
injuries), 22 women (9 deaths and 13 injuries), 19 boys (7 deaths and 12 injuries) and
8 girls (5 deaths and 3 injuries). During the first three months of 2020, ground fighting
was the leading cause of civilian casualties (73 per cent of the total). UNSMIL
documented 78 civilian casualties (32 deaths and 46 injuries) resulting from the use
of heavy weapons and 18 civilian casualties (12 deaths and 6 injuries) resulting from
the use of small arms fire. Targeted killings were the second leading recorded cause
of civilian casualties, with 20 victims (14 deaths and 6 injuries), representing 15 per
cent of total civilian casualties. Air strikes were the third leading cause thereof, with
9 victims (6 deaths and 3 injuries), followed by improvised explosive devices, with 6
injuries.
70. In response to the fighting in Tripoli and near Sirte and Abu Qurayn, more than
24,000 internally displaced persons were provided with humanitarian assistance
during the reporting period. There are currently more than 654,000 migrants and
refugees in Libya, according to the International Organization for Migration.
71. United Nations agencies and partners continued to provide assistance to
migrants and refugees, reaching more than 10,000 since January. In addition, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees continued to support
the evacuation or resettlement of refugees from Libya. Since January, the Office
supported the evacuation or resettlement of 289 refugees from Libya. As a result of
the closure of borders in Libya and other countries owing to COVID -19, voluntary
humanitarian return of migrants and the evacuation and resettlem ent of refugees were
suspended temporarily as at 18 March. Similarly, ongoing humanitarian activities
were affected by restrictions on movement owing to COVID -19, in addition to
20-05854

13/16

S/2020/360

existing challenges to access owing to insecurity and bureaucratic requirement s. The
United Nations will continue to engage with all relevant counterparts regarding
possible exemptions to allow critical humanitarian operations to continue.
72. Since 16 January, the International Organization for Migration has facilitated
the voluntary humanitarian return of 1,466 vulnerable migrants (275 women and
1,191 men) from 19 countries of origin, surpassing the 50,000 mark in terms of the
overall number of vulnerable migrants assisted since the start of the programme.
73. From 16 January to 16 March, UNFPA medical teams provided life-saving
maternal and newborn health services in Tripoli to 1,242 women and 474 children;
advice to 219 men; life-saving medications to several hospitals for about 640 women;
and, with other United Nations agencies, held eight consensus-building workshops on
developing an action plan for the national strategy on reproductive, maternal,
newborn, child and adolescent health.
74. WFP reached nearly 108,000 persons in need in Libya. The WFP-supported
emergency telecommunications sector launched a feedback mechanism on
16 February, providing affected populations with free access to information on
humanitarian assistance programmes.

IV. Deployment of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
and security arrangements
75. The United Nations maintained a continuous international civilian staff presence
in Tripoli on a rotational basis of generally between 80 and 90 persons, reviewed and
adjusted regularly on the basis of the security situation and growing humanitar ian
requirements. The remainder of the international staff worked from the Mission’s
Tunis office. National staff living in areas affected by the conflict worked from home
or were advised to move to safer areas. All international staff in Tripoli continued to
be accommodated at the compound in Oea, which was protected by the United
Nations Guard Unit. UNSMIL maintained a small international staff presence at the
Benghazi hub. Ground movements in Tripoli and Benghazi were conducted following
case-by-case assessments.
76. The security situation in the wider Tripoli area resulting from the armed conflict,
including the Libyan National Army-imposed no-fly zone and increased Army attacks
on Mitiga Airport, required United Nations flights to use Misratah Airport,
approximately 220 km from the United Nations compound in Oea.
77. With the spread of COVID-19, Libya and Tunisia imposed restrictions on
movement in March as part of their preventive measures. The United Nations crisis
management team in Libya met regularly since 28 February, taking a range of
measures aimed at protecting staff based in the two countries from contracting and
potentially spreading the disease. United Nations staff in Tunisia were also guided by
the decisions taken by the Resident Coordinator for that country. The rotation of the
military personnel of the United Nations Guard Unit, initially scheduled for March,
was put on hold until conditions allow for it to be conducted safely.

V. Observations and recommendations
78. I reiterate my call of 23 March for an immediate global ceasefire and urge the
warring parties in Libya to lay down their weapons without delay in support of the
greater battle against COVID-19. A ceasefire would allow humanitarian actors to
reach the populations most vulnerable to the pandemic. Given the already dire

14/16

20-05854

S/2020/360

humanitarian situation in Libya and the possible impact of COVID -19, I call upon the
parties to combine efforts to address the threat and ensure unhindered access to
humanitarian aid throughout the country. Continuing violence will continue to
obstruct preventive efforts by the civilian authorities and the population to address
the global threat of COVID-19.
79. I am disappointed that the positive response by the Government of National
Accord and the Libyan National Army to my call for a humanitarian pause in the
context of the pandemic has not translated thus far into a ceasefire. However, I am
encouraged by the constructive discussions held by the 5+5 Joint Military
Commission, as well as the development of a draft ceasefire agreement. I reiterate my
call upon the respective leaderships to accept the draft ceasefire agreement and move
forward with its implementation. I am deeply concerned that a further escalation of
violence risks reversing the fragile progress that has been achieved and further
complicating a peaceful resolution of Libya’s protracted conflict. In due course, I
intend to report to the Security Council on the conditions necessary for an effective
ceasefire monitoring mechanism under the auspices of the United Nations. I also
intend to make detailed recommendations to the Council on possible ceasefire
arrangements when a ceasefire is agreed by the Libyan parties, in accordance with
resolution 2510 (2020).
80. The international community has a vital role to play in ensuring that progress
achieved on the tracks of the intra-Libyan dialogue is sustained. The momentum
generated by the adoption of resolution 2510 (2020), the endorsement of the
conclusions of the Berlin Conference and the Council’s elements for the press,
released on 26 March, should not be squandered. I thank the participants in the Berlin
Conference for agreeing to co-chair, with UNSMIL, the upcoming meetings of the
international follow-up committee. In the face of continuing hostilities in Libya, I
remind Member States of the commitments made at the Berlin Conference and urge
them to spare no effort and use all of their influence to help to secu re a ceasefire and
an environment conducive to political talks, in line with resolution 2510 (2020).
Cohesive and strong support for the sustained engagement of the United Nations with
the parties and key constituencies on outstanding issues is vital to pave the way for a
comprehensive political solution to the conflict in Libya.
81. I welcome the important efforts of the African Union to support the resolution
of the Libyan conflict, including the decisions taken during the Assembly of the
African Union, held in Addis Ababa on 9 and 10 February. I reiterat e the United
Nations commitment to working with the African Union to enhance cooperation and
synergies between the two organizations on Libya, including through supporting the
work of the Ad Hoc High-level Committee on Libya of the African Union, as well as
the organization of the African Union-led inter-Libyan reconciliation conference.
82. I remain deeply concerned by the persistent violations of the arms embargo. To
prevent the continued escalation of violence and support efforts to end the conflict
and its consequences for Libyans, it is essential that there be strict adherence to the
embargo, in accordance with Council resolution 1970 (2011). I also remind Member
States of their obligation to not sell or supply arms to the Libyan parties and urge
them to implement all measures related to the embargo, in accordance with
resolutions 2473 (2019), 2509 (2020) and 2510 (2020).
83. I strongly condemn the indiscriminate shelling and air strikes affecting civilians
and residential areas, as well as the repeated targeting of medical personnel and
facilities. I remind all parties of the strict prohibition of indiscriminate attacks under
international humanitarian law and appeal to all of them to refrain from conducting
aerial bombardment or shelling of residential neighbourhoods and other civilian
areas. I also recall the obligation of all parties to ensure respect for and the protection
20-05854

15/16

S/2020/360

of medical personnel and hospitals and other medical facilities. I stress that attacks
on civilians and civilian infrastructure, including hospitals, violate international
humanitarian law and may constitute war crimes.
84. Armed groups throughout Libya hold thousands of men, women and children in
prolonged arbitrary and unlawful detention and subject them to torture and other
human rights abuses. I call for those detained arbitrarily or otherwise unlawfully
deprived of their liberty to be released immediately and unconditionally and for all
those lawfully deprived of their liberty to be transferred to official detention facilities
and treated in accordance with applicable international laws and standards. Th e
decision on 15 March by the Supreme Judicial Council of Libya to postpone all cases
until the end of May is a matter of concern because it extends the detention of
thousands of persons for another 11 weeks, pending trial.
85. The lack of accountability for serious crimes has had a clear impact on peace
and stability in Libya. I reiterate the need for credible investigations into alleged
systematic violations of international humanitarian law and human rights law in the
country to hold accountable the perpetrators of those violations and to provide justice
and remedies to victims and survivors.
86. The blockage of the export of oil imposed by the Libyan National Army is
negatively affecting the country’s already weakened economic and financial situation.
The recent efforts by the parallel unrecognized authorities in eastern Libya to import
fuel violate resolution 2509 (2020) with regard to the integrity and unity of the
National Oil Corporation.
87. I encourage all Libyan actors to implement resolution 1325 (2000). Women and
young people have a critical role to play in dialogue and peacebuilding efforts, and I
welcome the continued efforts towards ensuring their inclusion in the intra -Libyan
dialogue process.
88. The situation of migrants and refugees in Libya, including those being held in
detention centres, remains an issue of grave concern. Refugees and migrants in Libya
should be released and provided with safe shelter until those with asylum claims can
have their claims processed or those who are willing to be repatriated can be provided
with repatriation assistance. Libya is not considered to be a safe port of
disembarkation for refugees and migrants, and I urge Member States to revisit policies
that support the return of refugees and migrants to that country.
89. I urge Member States to support the Libya Humanitarian Response Plan to
enable humanitarian partners to respond to the immediate and growing needs of
persons affected by the conflict and to address in particular the possible spread of
COVID-19 in Libya.
90. I express my gratitude to my former Special Representative for Libya for his
accomplishments and his tireless efforts to return peace and stability to Libya. I thank
the staff of the United Nations system in Libya for its hard work in support of pea ce
and security in the country and reiterate my sincere appreciation to the Government
of Nepal for providing the personnel of the United Nations Guard Unit. I also thank
the Government of Tunisia for supporting UNSMIL staff and providing assistance to
the office in Tunis.

16/16

20-05854
