UVITED

iVATIOiVS

TWENTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

th
MEETING:

NEW

1.5 DECEMBER

1973

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

, ,. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Record of the meeting

. . . . , . . . . . . , . . . . _. . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , .

1

Adoption

. . . .. . , ,. . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . .

1

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/ 1760)

of the agenda

Arrangements

for the proposed Peace Conference on the Middle

East

. .. . . . . .

1

S/PV. 1760

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. , .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions aud Decisiorn oj’ the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SEVENTEEN

HUNDRED

Held in private in New York

AND

SIXTIETH

on Saturday,

President: Mr. HUANG Hua (China),

MEETING

15 December

1973, at 10 a.m.

membersof the Council, nameIy that in the courseof the
consultationswe have beenhaving we have already clearly
defined what we believe to be the responsibility of the
Security Council.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, China, France, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America and Yugoslavia.

5. Indeed during the night of 21.22 October 1973 the
Security Council adopted resolution 338 (1973), submitted
by two of its permanent members,the Soviet Union and
the United States, which, in its paragraph3, clearly
stipulatedthat the Security Council

Provisional agenda (S/Agen&/l760)
1. Adoption of the agenda.

“‘Decidesthat, immediately and concurrently with the
cease-fire, negotiations start between the parties concerned under appropriate auspicesaimedat establishinga
just and durablepeacein the Middle East.”

2. Arrangements for the proposed Peace Conference on
the Middle East.
i?he meeting was culled to order at 11 a.m.

6. As we have always maintained and continue to maintain, for us,the 10 non-permanentmembersof the Security
Council, and, I am sure, for all the 15 membersof the
Security Council, the appropriate auspiceswere clearly
those of the United Nations. We wanted to stressthis point,
becausefor 25 years the United Nations has been faced
with this distressingproblem of the Middle East. For 25
years at eachsessionthe GeneralAssemblyhastried to find
a solution to this problem. Since June 1967 the Security
Council in its turn has regularly debatedthis problemin an
attempt to find a solution and to bring peaceto this part of
the Middle East.

Record of the meeting
1. The PRESIDENT (translation from Chinese): As a
result of consultations held with members of the Council, I
understand that there is general agreement that rule 51 of
the provisional rules of procedure of the Security Council
will not be invoked on this occasion and that the verbatim
record of this meeting of the Security Council will be
circulated in all the working languages as an unrestricted
document in accordance with rule 49. If there is no
objection, l shall take it that, that is agreed.

7. Therefore the Security Council, whoseessentialtask is
the maintenanceof international peaceand security, in our
view has the heavy responsibility of playing its full part
under the Charter. It is by virtue of this constant concern
of respectfor the role of the Security Council, respect for
the responsibility incumbent upon it, that the 10 nonpermanent members of the Council-Australia, Austria,
Guinea, India, Indonesia, Kenya, Panama,Peru, the Sudan
and Yugoslavia-have submitted the draft resolution contained in document S/l 1156, the text of which reads:

2. As this meeting is being held in private, it will be
necessary to apply rule 55 of the provisiona rules of
procedure and to issue a communiqui through the Secretary-General at the close of the meeting. The text of the
draft communiqu6 will be circulated to members of the
Council in due course.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

(The speakerread out the text of the draft reSOlutiol~.l

Arrangements for the proposed Peace Conference
on the Middle East

8. As I have just said, the 10 non-permanentmembersof
the Security Council are aware of the difficulty of the
problem. They are also aware-and I should like to stress
this-of the responsibility of the Council and want that to
be very clearly defined. We the IO non-permanentmembers
of the Security Council trust that if in the future-the near
future, aswe hope-the Secretary-Generalshould receive a
letter from the interested parties, which would be transmitted to the Presidentof the Security Council, we could
perhaps meet again to make some changesin the text we
arc submitting to you.

3. The PRESlDENT (translation from Chinese): The
members of the Council have before them the text of a
draft resolution sponsored by Australia, Austria, Guinea,
India, Indonesia, Kenya, Panama, Peru, the Sudan and
Yugoslavia (S/11156/ which will be introduced by the
representative of Guinea.
4. Mrs, Jeanne Martin CISSE (Guinea) (interpretation
$ymz French): I shall be very brief for reasonsfamiliar to

1

9. In any case, in submitting this very brief text to the
Security Council we should like to express anew our
conviction that together we shall find ways of seeing that
there is respect for the responsibility of the Council.
10. I shall not go on; I said I would bc brief. The aim of
the non-permanent members of the Security Council is not,
as some have sought to say, to give a lesson to others on the
responsibilities incumbent upon members of the Council.
Not at all. Our only concern remains respect for the
mandate entrusted to the Security Council. We shall remain
faithful to that mandate and we want all of us together to
see to it that there is strict respect for the role which the
Charter entrusts to the Security Council.
11. The PRESIDENT (translation from Chinese): If there
are no further speakers at this stage, I shall now put the
draft resolution in document S/l 1156 to the vote.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour: Australia, Austria, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Yugoslavia.
Against: None,
Abstaining: France, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America.
Tke draft resolution was adopted by 10 votes to none,
with 4 abstentions. 1
One member (China) did not participate in the voting.
12. The PRESIDENT (translation from Chinese): I shall
now call on representatives who wish to explain their votes.
13. Mr, DE GUIRINGAUD (France) (interpretation from
French): As the Council has just adopted the draft
resolution submitted by 10 delegations concerning the
Middle East question, I should like very briefly to explain
the reasons why my delegation abstained.
14. The French Government welcomed with satisfaction
the announcement that peace negotiations were about to
begin. Their purpose is in fact to put an end to the conflict
that for 25 years has raged in the Middle East. My
Government sincerely hopes that those negotiations will
lead in a reasonable period of time to the establishment of
an agreement acceptable to the parties directly involved in
the conflict and in keeping with the principles of international law embodied in the Charter.
15. Desirous as it is of giving such negotiations every
chance, my Government understands and recognizes that
we must beware of being excessively formalistic, and to
that end must avoid to the utmost public debates at so
delicate a time. What it could not accept, on the other
hand, is that, on a question in which the responsibility of
the United Nations has been involved from the very outset,
the Security Council itself should abdicate the exercise of
1 Seeresolution 344 (1973).

that respollsibility to the point of Seenlillg
to be extraneous
to the negotiatiolls that are about to open. This, incidentally, wasthe starting-point of resolution 338 (1973) of 22
October, which itself refers to CeSOhtiOtl
242 (1967)
of 22
November 1967, and the fact that
the
resohtiorl
is
fundamenta]to a just and durable settlement is recognizcd
by all.
16. If, as we hope, the Geneva
Conference
achieves
positive results, it will be up to the Council to give its
approval to the final settlement by accompanying it with
suchguaranteesas it deemsfit. It would 10s~its prestige
and authority if it merely confined itself to recording the
fact. In the event that the Conference should not meet the
hopes we have justly placed in it, the States conc~rncd
sooneror later would not fail again to have recaurse to the
Council.
17. Lastly, it is not only the Middle East that is at issue,
and it is the possibility of settling other international
disputesthat we must preservefor the future.
18. For all of those reasonsthe Council, in our view, is
duty bound to recall in an appropriate manner, before the
inauguration of the Conterence, the link that must necessarily be establishedbetween the negotiations and the
Council. Similarly, we believe that the Secretary-General
should not go to Geneva without a clear and precise
mandate.
19. In this respect--and despite its merits-the draft
resolution submitted to us doesnot offer all the guarantees
we would have wished to find in it. On the one hand, the
terms in which it takes note of the participation of the
Secretary-Generalin the Conference are not sufficiently
explicit and do not clearly spell out the Secretary-General’s
role. It is, moreover, regrcttablc that the Council should
have found itself obliged to meet and to take so important
a decisionwithout even knowing under what conditions the
Secretary-Generalwould be invited to participate in the
Conference. This is a situation that is hardly compatible
with the dignity or the ttormal role and prerogatives of the
Council.
20. Moreover, the text that hasjust been adopted rncrcly
usesa very vague formula concerning the procedure b\
which the Secretary-General would keep the Council
informed. On this point, when WCarc embarking upon what
might be a long process,it would have been desirnble, in
our view, to stipulate that the Secretary-General would
keep the Council regularly and fully infornlcc] of tile
developmentof negotiations so that the Council might tx:
in a position to ensure the strict implcmctitation of its
relevant resolutionson the Middle East.
21 Theserequirements,which merely reflected the provisionsof the Charter concerning the respectivecvnlpetcnccs
and roles of the Security Council and of the SccrctaryGeneral,appearto us to be such asto allow for constructive
negotiations and to ensure the proper execution of the
agreement
, while preserving for the future the responsi.
bilities incumbent upon the Council. As there W;~S IIO
unanimity on these recluirementsmy delegation was COIIstrained to abstain and to express its reservations on the
text submittedto the Council.

-..

22. Sir Donald MAITLAND (United Kingdom): I understand and sympathize with the feeling of frustration and
impatience of some members of this Council at the delays
which have occurred in completing the preparations for the
peace conference. I fully support the provisions of the
resolution which the Council has adopted this morning,
Indeed, I have maintained since this Council passed
resolution 338 (1973) that the “appropriate auspices”
referred to in that resolution should be United Nations
auspices. We have also consistently supported the thesis
that the Secretary-General should have a full and effective
role to play in the conference. I was-and indeed I still
am-looking forward to voting in favour of a resolution
containing the provisions set out in the resolution adopted
this morning.

i

to me that every effort is beingmade to give this ‘:ouncil its
rightful role in the proceedings.
28. I am sure that we all hope that the detailswill soon be
worked out. According to the latest information, which I
receivedearlier this morning, there are severalproblemsstill
remaining,and it was on that basisthat I was not able to
support the resolution and, therefore, abstainedon behalf
of the United States.
29. The PRESIDENT (translation from Chinese): As no
other representative wishesto spe’akat this time, 1 should
like to make a brief statement asrepresentativeof CHINA.
30. Last October the two super-Powers
contrived Security
Council resolution 338 (1973) with the aim of putting out
the raging flames of the Arab peoples’war againstaggression and reimposingthe situation of “no war, no peace” on
the Arab people so as to facilitate the two super-Powers’
contention for hegemony in the Middle East and their
division of spheres of influence there. We stated our
position when the Security Council adopted that resolution. Consequently, the Chinese delegation cannot
accept the present draft resolution which is derived from
resolution 338 (1973). The Chinese delegation is always
firmly opposedto any attempt of the two super-Powersto
makebehind-the-scenes
dealsat the expenseof the interests
of the Arab and Palestinianpeoples.

23. As I understand it, the sponsors of resolution
338 (1973) are not opposed to the provisions of the
resolution just adopted but they are not in a position today
to vote in favour of it. I recognize that the Securjty Council
depends to a significant extent on the sponsors of resolution 338 (1973) for the implementation of this resolution. I have preferred to withhold my vote until the two
sponsors of resolution 338 (1973) are in a position to
endorse this resolution. That is the sole reason for my
abstention today, and I hope that there will soon be an
opportunity when there can be a larger favourable vote for
the provisions of this resolution.
24. Mr. BENNETT (United States of America): I apprcciate the efforts that have been made by many members of
the Council in this very delicate phase of preparations for
an important conference which I am sure all of us hope will
at long last provide the way to find a just and enduring
peace in the Middle East. I know, and in fact I share, the
sense of frustration that many members round the table
have expressed in the last few days.
25 My delegation has abstained in the vote on the
resolution this morning because I did not have any
authorization to support it. We ourselves have not felt that
formal action by the Council was necessary. We would have
preferred a consensus approach; but I do not make any
great issueof that.
26 The problem of my delegation-and I think it is not a
new problem, and to me it is not an unusualor a surprising
one, given what I have referred to as the delicacy of the
situation- is that negotiations regardinginvitations to the
Geneva Conference are still proceeding,and we have not
felt that we could support the resolutionat this time.

31 According to the Charter, the Security Council hasthe
primary responsibility for the maintenanceof international
peace and security. In pursuance of the purposes and
principlesof the Charter, the Council should,on the Middle
East question, support the just demand of the Arab and
Palestinianpeoples who are the victims of aggressionand
oppose Israeli aggressionand the two super-Powers’contention for hegemony in the Middle East. Under the
provisionsof the Charter, the Security Council is composed
of 15 Member States. It is obvious that, in fulfilment of its
responsibilities, the Security Council can establish its
position only by a formal decisiontaken by itself. Without
the consent of the Security Council, HO individuals 01
countries have the right to represent the Council or to
undertake obligations or sign documents on important
mattersin the nameof the Security Council.
32. Based on its consistent position, the Chinesedelegation has decided to dissociateitself from this resolution.
33. Speakingnow as PRESIDENT, I would say that if no
other representative wishesto speakI shallassumethat the
CounciI is ready to consider the text of the draft
communiqut?which hasbeencirculated[S/l 1159/.

27 My delegationhas already madeclear in the informal
consultations, and I shouldlike to repeatthis morning,that
wc envisagethat the Secretary-Generalwould presideat the
opelling
sessionof the Conferenceand that his reprcsen- 34. Rule 55 of the provisional rulesof procedureprovides
that “At the close of each private meeting the Security
tative would be there continuously: in other words, that
Council . . ,“-there would be the full involvement of the SccretaryGeneral, as there should be, in the PeaceConference
35. May I ask the representative of the Soviet Union on
praceedings,
as is outlined in the resolution that has jLiSt
what questionhe wishesto speaknow?
been adopted. 1 would stressonce again that the Whole
basis of the Conference, the framework for the negotiations, is to bc found in the resolutions which have 36 Mr MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Kepublics)
already
beenadopted by the Security Council, SO it seems (translation.from Russian): In exerciseof my right of reply
3

draft communiquk meets with the approval of the members
of the Council.

37. The PRESIDENT (translation from Chinese): I would
ask the representative of the Soviet Union please to wait
until the end of the meeting to make his reply.

It was so decided.
38. Rule 55 of the provisional rules of procedure provides
that “At the close of each private meeting the Security
Council shall issue a communiqui through the SecretaryGeneral”. Accordingly, I would ask whether any member of
the Council has any comment to make on the draft
communiqd. If not I shall take it that the draft text meets
with the wishes of the members of the Security Council.

46. The PRESIDENT (translation from Chinese): I now
call on the representative of the Soviet Union,
47. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translation from Russian): I asked the President of the
Security Council to allow me to speak in exercise of my
right of reply in connexion with the Chinese representative’s regular statement with its routine and customary
fantastic inventions about some non-existent deal on the
Middle East, supposedly directed against the interests of the
Arab peoples.

39. Sir Donald MAITLAND
(United Kingdom): I wonder
if a reference could also be included to the explanation of
vote which I made. It might perhaps follow, as it did
chronologically, the reference to the statement made by the
representative of France.

48. With regard to this matter, I should like to inform the
Chinese representative of what is known to the whole
world, except, apparently, China and its representative in
the Security Council, namely that the Soviet Union has
been and still is a true and faithful friend of the Arab
peoples-the victims of Israeli aggression-and
that the
USSR will struggle firmly and consistently for the elimination of the casequences of Israel’s aggression, for a just
settlement in the Middle East and for the establishment of a
lasting and durable peace in that area.

40. The PRESIDENT (translation from Chinese): We have
taken note of the request of the representative of the
United Kingdom,
41. Mr. BENNETT
(United States of America): The
representative of the United States also made a statement,
42. The PRESIDENT (trunslatio,l from Chinese): Then, in
the appropriate paragraph, following the reference to the
statement of France, we shall add references to the
statements of the United Kingdom and the United States.

49. In this connexion, it is also appropriate to inform the
Chinese representative of the following universally known
international fact.

43. Perhaps the Under-Secretary-General
for Political and
Security Council Affairs can read out the full text of the
conimuniqu&

50. At the recent meeting of the Heads of Arab States in
Algiers at the end of November of this year, the participants in that high-level meeting made the following
statement:
“They are proud to note the whole-hearted political
support and military and economic assistance offered by
the Soviet Union and other socialist countries to the Arab
States in their just struggle for the liberation of the
occupied Arab territories and the restoration of the
lawful rights of the Arab people of Palestine.”

44 Mr. SHEVCHENKO
(Under-Secretary-General
for
Political and Security Council Affairs): The draft communiquC now reads as follows:
“The Security Council held its 1760th meeting in
private on 1.5 December 1973 at the request of many of
its members, to discuss the following item: ‘Arrangements
for the proposed Peace Conference on the Middle East’.

That is the best possible answer to the Chinese representative.

“The Council voted on the draft resolution (S/Il.Z56/
submitted by Australia, Austria, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Kenya, Panama, Peru, the Sudan and Yugoslavia. The
draft resolution was adopted by IO votes in favour to
none against with 4 abstentions (France, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America) as resolution
344 (1973).

51. The PRESIDENT (translation j’fom Chinese): As
representative of CHINA, I should like to make a brief
reply to Mr. Malik’s statement.
52. As the Chinese proverb puts it, facts speak louder than
words.
53. I believe that the members of the Council and all the
Members of the United Nations, and the peoples of all the
countries in the world, have drawn the proper conclusions
from the course of the Israeli-Zionist aggression against the
Arab and Palestinian peoples in the Middle East in recent
years, and from the actual deeds of the two super-Powers,
the United States and the Soviet Union, there.

“The representatives of France, the United Kingdom
and the United States made statements.
“The representative of China did not take pert in the
vote and made it clear that China dissociated itself from
this resolution.”

54. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translation Ji-om Russian): I entirely agree with the
proverb quoted by the Chinese representative that facts

45. The PRESIDENT (translation from Chinese): If there
are no other comments, I shall take it that the text of the
4

speak louder than words. The fact which I cited-the
statement made and the deep appreciation expressed at the
high-level mecting of the Heads of Arab States-is more
powerful, and has a louder and more convincing ring than
the routine piece of slander uttered by the Chinese
representative.

55. The PRESIIIENT (translation Porn Chinese): Again as
representative of CHINA, I wish to say one sentence: the
facts that now obtain in the Middle East speak louder than
any words from Mr. Malik.
The meeting rose at 11.45 a.m.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

Unite I Nations
publications
may
be obtained
throuk;hout
the world.
Consult
your
bookstore
Section. New York or Geneva.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

Las publicaciones
de Ins Naciones
Unidns
estin
buidoras
en todas pa&s
de1 mundo.
Consulte
Unidas. Secci6n de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S.

1.00 (or equivalent

from bookstores
and distributors
or write to: IJnited
Nations.
Sales

NACIONES

UNIDAS

en venta en lihrerias
y casas distria su librero
o dirfjase
a: Naciones

in other

currencies)

73-82001-August

1979-2,200
