United Nations

GENERAL
GSSEMBLY

(CLOSING MEEXING~
Thursday, 21 Artgwt 1958,
at 3 p.m*

Oficial Records
TIiU&D

EMERGENCY

CONTENTS
Pa08

Agenda item S:
Questions considered by the Security Council at its
838th lpeeting on 7 August 1958 (c~?~l~deed).
. . . . . . . . 169
Agenda item 3;
Credentials Committee
Report of the Credeniials Committee. r_, . , . , . . . , . , +. . . 183
Agenda item 2:
Minute of silent prayer or meditation,. . . . , . . . . . . . . , . . . 189
Closing nf the session .,..,...‘.a..!
..“....,...,.,,.‘,.’
18P

Piegident;

Sir Leslie MUNRO (New Zealand).

AGENDq

Qaeetione cousidered
its 838th meeting

ITEM

5

by the Security Council at
on 7 August 1958 (con-

cluded)
1. The PRESIDENT
I Members of the Assembly
have before them the draft resolution sponsored by Iraq,
Jordan, Lebanon, Libya, Morocco, Saudi Arabia, the
Sudan, Tunis& the United Arab Republic and Yemen
[A/3893/Xev.l].
The first speaker for this afternoon
is the rqxesentative of the Sudan.
2. Mr. MAHGOUB
(Sudan) : I am not speaking
this time in the name of the delegation of the Sudan.
It is my honour and privilege to speak in the name of
all the Arab States represented in the General Assembly,
It is a great honour and privilege because when I speak
I speak in the name of ten Arab States which are related
not only by a common language or a common heritage
of history and culture, but also by blood,
3. In the first place, I wish to express our gratitude
to all the representatives who participated in this debate
of the emergency special session and who were very
helpful in their speeches, which gave a good analysis
of the situation, recognised Arab nationahsm and, no
doubt, gave us the line to follow in order to reach a
solution to this problem. We are also very grateful to
those who made attempts to draw up draft resolutions
with a view to finding a solution to the present impasse
and to lessening international tension,
4. I am sure it is the goal of the United Nations and
the intention of every Member of this Organization
always tp,, reach a peaceful solution of any dispute that
is brought before the Assembly. There is no doubt that
it is the aim and purpose of the United Nations to establish peace and international
security. The draft resolution which has just been distributed in document
A/389.3/pevJ
of 21 August 1;9.58’%, I am proud to
say, an example for peaceful solutions, and I, hope it
indicates the beginning of. an understanding not only

SPECIAL

SESSlOil’

New Yqrk

among the Arab States but among all the Member States
assembled here,
5. This draft resolution is co-sponsored by all the
ten Arab States. In our deliberations amongst ourselves
we were dealing with a dispute between members of
one family, Our discussions were frank, and therefore
we were able to reach a happy conclusion. It is possible
for us to deliberate in that mamler because, as I have
said, we are members of one family. We have had strong
ties in the past ; we have strong ties at present ; and we
all aspire to a glorious future for the Arab nations in
order once more to contribute to the human heritage in
all fields of knowledge for the promotion of human
welfare.
6. The League of Arab States is a regional institution
which is in conformity with the provisions of the Charter
of the United Nations, and the preamble of its Pact is
quoted, in part, in the preamble to the draft resolution:
“Noting that the Arab States have agreed, in the
Pact of the League of Arab States, to strengthen the
close relations and numerous ties which link the Arab
States, and to support and stabilize these ties upon a
basis of respect for the independence and sovereignty
of these States, and to direct their efforts toward the
common good of all the Arab countries, the improvement of their status, the security of their future and
the realization of their aspirations and hopes,”
But the preamble of the Fact goes on to say I‘. . I and
responding to the wishes of Arab public opinion in all
Arab lands”, This will show beyond any doubt that
anything that takes place in any one of the Arab lands
affects the inhabitants of the rest of the Arab lands.
This is proved by the fact that when we were meeting
to discuss this draft resolution not only the representatives of the independent Arab States were present but
also representatives of other Arab States that are not
yet fully independent and are not Members af this
Organization,
though we hope they will soon be
amongst us.
7. This draft resolution is, in effect, the fruitful result
of your wise guidance, Mr. President, and the efforts
of the Secretary-General as wall as the wise deliberations
of the representatives who spoke with such good intentions and good will, The draft is a simple and straightforward one, In the preamble it takes note of the questions considered by the Security Council at its 838th
meeting on 7 August 1958 and it notes the Charter
aim that States should practise. tolerance and live to-’
gether in peace with one another as good neighbours,
I am sure that every Member of this Organisation
upholjs this aim and obeys the provisions of the Charter,
which.is a prerequisite for membership, Thenit goeson
ta note the aims of the League of Arab States, I think
that is so for the first tinie. It will, no doubt, be a
source of pride to the. United Nations that we are giving
recognition to. a regional orgpnizatlon ‘which emanates

270’

General

Assembly-Third

Emergency

from the Charter of the United Nations. T%e preamble
also expresses the desire to relieve international tension,
which, is, no doubt, the hope of every member here.
8. In paragraph 1, the draft resolution welcomes the
renewed assurances given the Arab States to observe
the provision of article 8 of the Pact of the League of
Afab States, that each member State shall respect the
systems of government established in the other member
States and regard them as exclusive concerns .of these
States, .afid that each shall, pledge to abstain fiofn my
action calculated to change established s$t&ns > of
government.
9; It is my respectful submission that the principle
involved here, which has ,been given the renewed assurances of the Arab States, is a very high principle tihich
should. be observed not only by the members of the
League of Arab, States but .by all the Member States of
the United Nations. It is, bf course, the wish of ,qery
one of. us to respect the systems. df government established in one State or another. And it is equally the
wish of every one of us to pledge to ,abstain from any
action calculated to change established systems of government. Established systems of government can only
be changed by the will of,$he people.pf the State through
con$ttitional
means’ al;4 democratic ways. At this
moment we pledge ourseJfes to this purpose.
10. Then, it is very necessary for any (raft &solution
at this juncture to provide for the ways and means
whereby the ‘present tension in the Middle East will
be relieved. Therefore, tlie‘present
draft calls upon all
Member States to act strictly in accordance with the
principles of mutual respect for each other’s territorial
integrity and sovereignty, ,of non-aggression, of strict
non-interference in each .other’S internal affairs and of
equal and lnutual benefit, and to ensure that their ,conduct by word and deed conforms to these principles.
It requests the ‘Secretary-General to make ‘fbrthwith,
in consultation with the Governments concerned’ and
in accordance with .t.he Charter, and having in mind
section I of the resolution, such ,practical arrangements
as would adequately help in upholding the purposes and
principles of the Charter in relation to Lebalion and
Jordan in the present circumstances,’ and thereby facilitate the early withdrawal of .the ,foreign troops from’
the two couutrie8.
11. .We h&e thus ‘provided’ the machinery for ‘the’
Secretary-General
to see that tension is relieved, that
international
peace and security are saved, ,and that
instability and unrest in the Middle East are eradicated
forever.
12. There are two other sections of the draft resolution; One refers particularly to the long-term .‘poljcy’
of economic development in the Middle East. I ‘am sure
the Secretary-General
will consult with the League of,
Arab States regarding the best ways ‘and means of
providing for economic development in the .Middle East.
Economic development is a necessary elemetit for stability.
We are ready to : &o-operate with one and all fcir .pro-.
vjdjng economic development in our regiori with the
hope that, when our countries are fully developed and.
our resburces fully exploited.. ,for the: benefit of .‘@’
people. 5.n the diea, %e .o,urselves &lb- be. in .,a’ posi.tion
to: e&&d our: hantl: to* help other $crts’. of the , worldwhjqh till perhaps be in ‘tieed of, our ass$a.rXe.. . ’
1’3.“ Wh’en ‘Wi ask .for cb-op&ioti
:at ‘@-es&t ‘anil ‘for
thi: -&velopment of ourare&,’ we,d~ 30 not ably ii, the:
interests of the Arabk but also in the interest of the
world at ‘largi. We hbpe that, in tuni, in the future we

Special

Session-Plenary

Meetings

will be able to return the good that has been done for us
here by others and, if possible, to return it with interest.
14. I asked for the Assembly’s indulgence to see if
the -Arabs could find a solution, and this time they were
able to do it and do it magnificently. At the time when
the dispute came from our side, and when all the world
felt the gravity of the situation, when some people lost
every hope of a remedy and many thought that we were
at the brink of a world war, the Arabs themselves were
able to meet in a mutulil” and ‘cordial ,atmosphere and
provide the solution which I am sure will be acceptable
to everyone in this Assembly. It is the aim of all ‘of,us
here to see that this dispute is settled and that. the way
for removing .instabjlity and unrest, and laying the foundations of a permanent peace in that area, ,and thereafter permanent peace in the world, can be realize?. I
am sure that by accepting the draft resoluti&j we will
have achieved that end:
15: For us, the Arabs, this will be the .bi&i-iiining of
ti glorious future. It will be ‘the’ begintiing bf strength&ilig our ties, co-operating among ourselires, “and being
tolerant with each other. We shall, no’ doubt, do all
that is, possible. to realize our hopes and aspirations ,and
co-operate among ourselves wholeheartedly. We hope
that we will be able to contribute to the well-being of
our Arab nation, whethef thtit nation remains distributed
among different independent States, in a regional organization or under any form of goirernment to which the
peoples of the Arab lands will agree, or becomes one
State. We will be able to contribute also to the wellbeing of the international family,
16. Once more, perhaps, the light will come from our
region. We may bring forward our preachings. which
call for peace and security for all Knanity’
and for
liigh principles of equality among all individiials
indiscrjminately.,
.’
17. Our mission hencdorth will be’ the pursuit of
human perfection, peace and security, and uot the destruction and annihilation of, the human race, As this
draft resolution came unanimously from the Arab States
with full understanding and agriement, may I appeal
to my fellow representatives here to put their approval
on it and give it the unanimous support of the Assembly
in order to prove to Member States and other States
everywhere in the world that the men who meet here
are w&e men, that they have the interests of humanity
at heart, and that their mission is a miss& of peace and
security and not of destruction and annihilatibn,
18. Mr. ‘ENGEN
(N&way) : I have asked to .speak
in order to make a very. brief announcement.
19. The representative of the Sudan. has just intro-.
djced a new draft resolution sponsored by, the ‘delegations bf all the Arab Members of this Organization.
I think this is a very significailt‘ development. and one
.
which, I am sure, we all welcome.
20. In. this connexion, I sl~oulcl like to announce, on,
behalf of .the &leg&o&+
Canada, Colombia, Denmark,
Liberia, Norway, Panama and Pai-qguay-al!
the .spon-.
sors of .the .draft. .resblyti& ,contained in document
A/3878&hat.
we do not. &lc for prior&. in the fvote
0~ otir:&ft
~qsolti$@‘: in’ $at&.
t?.,th< .A?&: +ft
I..
1’ ..
resolutin. .
.*
.
21 : ,Sjr;&&
CbR$
g&ion
j:: ‘Eviiis?i&‘&&d
fast j;deed,. and .at. this moment :we- iari: faced with’ ‘a
h,+torjc:
vd, momen&s
event.’ “.. :. , ‘. ‘.. . . .:
+
22. Not so long ago there were many of us who were
.wrestling with ‘the probiem of finding mrne speedy and

~

’
j
)
i

?%th

meeting-21

satisfactory solution to the grave problem we had before
us. There were not a few who genuinely were anxious
as to the result of our meeting here. There were not a
few who dreaded the possibility of this Assembly’s not
achieving any useful result. It is true that there were
many who made brave efforts to solve the problem,
but still there was genuine doubt. Those who followed
the deliberations of this Assembly must have been deeply
impressed not only by the moderation of the attitudes
of those who took part, but also by the sincerity which
characterized their efforts.
23. It is undoubtedly the case that differences of opinion
on an issue of this magnitude must exist, and they did
exist here. So that there has undoubtedly been an effort
on the part of all the Members of this Assembly-those
who took part by expressing their views and those who
did not; those who tried .to put forward resoh$ions and
those who did not; amongst them all; there was the
great desire and unanimous feeling that something
should be done.
24. In that body of ‘people who are ,representatives of
the countries of Africa and -Asia, there was deep concern
and tin earnest effort tiade to see what they, could contribute to the solution of our problem. There were great
difficulties, there were differences of opinion among
them. But in the course of their deliberations, it became
clear-and it was accepted with great enthusiasm and
gratitudethat
it would be in the best interests of all
if the countries most immediately concerned were’to take
a hand in the solution of the difficulty. So we heard
with gladness, and certainly not without gratitude, that
the representatives of the Arab countries here present
had eirpressed a desirc.xnd ,a willingness to look at the
problem among themselves, to se< if in their wisdom
and in ‘their ‘concern something might not be dtine to
help the whole Assembly to reach a solution which
would be acceptable to all, We are therefore glad that
they have succeeded.
25. The statement so feelingly and eloquently made by
the Foreign Minister of the Sudin, on behalf of all the
ten Arab Member States, has I am sure been received with great relief, with much enthusiasm and,
~ undoubtedly, entire satisfaction in ‘all sections of this
i Assembly. For it is, as I said before, momentous and
~ historic. This is Bn event which will go down in the
I annals of the history of this great Organization as an
1 occasion when people met tog&her in a spirit of conI ciliati’on and’good will to resolve diaerences tihich tame
before this Assembly, but which primariljt afi,d immtidiately concerned themselves and. their problenis. It is
i ati iristance of fraternal good will such as we haveseldom
’ seen. The issues were profound, the differences ’ were
great; the’ settlement was difficult, and yet, with that
i true spirit of fraternal unity, the Arab States have com’ bined to produce a settlement which will not only help
their- countries but will help all countries, which will
not drily provide for stability in their own domains but
will also provide for stability throughout the.world, and
which will bring peace not only to themselves but to
the, whole world.
1
26. This is, therefore, certainly a historic ‘and a momentous occasion. It is momentous’ also because, as a
1 result of our difficulties here, the Arab States have fouhd’
an $pportunity
of meeting together thems’elves, Of
strengthening that -frat.ernal tie which ‘no d.oubt +und,
; them throughout ,tbeir. long, history. But strengthen&Z
; that tie $38 q&led. them to, ensure. that in the, fufnre.,
1I

August

1958

171

the interests of their countries will be safeguarded by
a united outlook.
27. We are also glad for another reason : we .are glad
that in the .early preambular paragraphs of this draft
resolution there is a reference to the Pact of the Arab
League, a regional, arrangement which it is the desire
of all peoples to strengthen, so that by that regianal
union the affairs of that area may be carefully considered,
its unity preserved and its welfare ensured. We are
also glad that this draft resolution. endorses the principles which ,have come to be known as the Bandung
principles, and which I believe are subscribed to wherever civilized nations try to preserve their peace and
welfare. The fact that the Arab States have made it
clear that they accept the prindple of ‘mutual regard
for the sovereignty, of .each country and the principle
of non-agg+essidn
and . nbn-interference-princip!es
which they have. always. .accepted, piinciples which thq
have no doubt followed, but principles the emphasis of
which Gould help this Assembly and all cdncemed to
see that the peaceful coexistence of nations will continue
for all time-makes
us particularly happy.
28. Finally, we are glad that the countries of Africa
and Asia have been able to play some part in the
effort to bring this about. It is sometimes asserted that
the African-Asian countries are themselves divided and
that, in an emergency of this kind it is not possible to
expect these countries to get together and contribute
to a useful settlement. But I should like on this occasion
to -take this opportunity to dissipate any such erroneous
impression that may exist in the mind of anyone. It is
true that there is no closely knit, formal, hidebound
body of men functioning as a group without any flexibility. But there are in, this Assembly Member States
from Africa and Asia,which are animated by a comtion
desire.to secure for all peoples their freedom and their
inclependeilce and to work together for the welfare of
humanity as a whole. These countries have been considering this problem and have been making a great
effort to reach a solution, and their efforts have certainly
helped in producing this great gesture-a gesture which
should be an example to this Assembly for all time,
and one which is clearly in keeping with the Charter of
the United Nations. Then the Arab States themselves
were enabled to s’ee what could be done. The African
and ,Asian countries left it to the Arab States to seti
what could be done. We are glad that, that feeling’
e%i&d dmong the African and Asian countries, and
we are glad that the Arab States shouldered thi.s ;great
respbnsibility sti .su~cessfully that -within a very brief
period, probzibly not mdre than twenty-four hours, they
ware. able to reach an agreettient which I have no doubt
will be acceptable to ritl those assembled here.
29.’ It. is my privilege to support the proposal placed
befoie you, Mr. President, by,the Foreign Minister of
the Sudan, to commend it to your acceptance, and to
hope and pray that the future will show that we have
reached not only a sensible but a really good settlement.
And may that settlement not only be the beginning of
greater prosperity for the Arab lands, but also britg
all countries; great and small, together so that peace m
)..
.I
the world may be ensured.
34., Mr. DULLES
(United States of America) : The
General Assembly, deals here .with a most difficult and
d&ate problem. On the one hand, it is necessary +t
two:
.s~z$
States, ,L&anon an.d Jordan, ‘shall be given
semrity a& aqurance of. political ‘independence. Oe the
other ha&, we need to make sure that this sha.ll,bC done

172

General

Aerembly-Tbird

Emergency

in ways which do not themselves encroach upon political
independence.
31. The United States responded to. the unsolicited
appeal of the Government of Lebanon because we believed that failure to respond would have condemned
many small nations to a sense of insecurity and instilled
in many a fatalistic resignation to the inevitability
of
being dominated by powerful neighbours. This would
have frustrated one of the basic concepts of our Charter,
namely, that of the equal rights of nations large and
small. The world must be made safe for small nations.
We acted in that spirit and. for that purpose and that
purpose alone.
32. But we did not feel that our action was an ideal
solution. The preferable solution would have been collective action of the world community as represented by
the United Nations, but that would have taken time.
However, the moment the United States acted, we also
went to the Security Council and sought from it action
which would have replaced our own. When relief in
the Security Council was frustrated, we came here.
33. As a result of the discussions here, public and
private, there has, it seems, emerged general agreement
on three basic propositions.
(1) There is need to reaffirm, not only in terms of
words but in terms of deeds, the principle of our Charter
and of prior General Assembly resolutions that each
Member State should respect the freedom, independence
and integrity of other States and scrupulously avoid
what might foment civil strife within another State.
(2) Any resolution reaffirming
these principles
should be reinforced in the case of Lebanon. and Jordan
by some presence there of the United Nations that would
serve both as reassurance and as warning.
(3) The foreign troops which went into Lebanon
and Jordan as an emergency measure should be withdrawn, and withdrawn as quickly as other measures
are taken which could reasonably be expected to ensure
the independence,
security and integrity
of these
conntries.
34. These three elements were present in the United
States and Japanese draft resolutions in the ‘Security
Council, they were present in the draft resolution submitted to the Assembly by Norway and other sponsors,
and they are also present in the draft resolution now
introduced under the co-sponsorship of the ten. Arab
countries.
35. We think it particularly
important and. much to,
be praised that the countries involved directly in the
controversy which gave rise to’ this emergency meeting
of the General Assembly have themselves agreed on a
formula of solution, This is an event of happy augury,
and the United States, I may say, suppotis the Arab
draft resolution.
36, Let me now comment briefly upon the two draft
resolutions, the Arab and the Norwegian draft resolutions. Both of these draft resolutions begin by emphasizing the Charter aim that States should “practice tolerance
and live together in peace with one another as good
neighbours”.
37. The general area of the Near East has been unhappily plagued by much intolerance. Zt is devoutly
to be hoped that this admonition of the two principal draft
resolutions now before this General Assembly means in
fact that a new era of tolerance may be dawning in the
Netir East.

Special

Scrrion-Plenary

Meeting8

38, The second preambular section of the Arab draft
resolution notes the undertaking of the Arab countries
pursuant to the Pact of the League of Arab States. The
United States, which is itself a member of such organizations as the Organization of American States and the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization,
welcomes the
strengthening everywhere of ties which are designed to
keep peace and harmony between the members and which
equally accept the overriding provisions of the Charter
dealing with relations of States with each other.
39. With respect to section I of the Arab and Norwegian draft resolutions, we find them substantially equivalent. We would have somewhat preferred, primarily as
a matter of taste or precedent, the language of the Norwegian draft resolution, which reflects prior resolutions of
this General Assembly rather than comparable language
of a group of our Members. But if the Arab draft resolution is, as we expect, to be voted upon as a whole,
without amendments, we will accept the language of section I, particularly because paragraph 2 of section I goes
beyond the obligations of the Arab nations as between
themselves and deals broadly with the obligations of all
Members of the United Nations under our Charter
to deal with each other in accordance with the provisions
of that Charter.
40. Section II of the two draft resolutions is substantially identical in the mandate to the Secretary-General,
a mandate which we think should produce solid reasq
surances of security, integrity and independence for
Lebanon and Jordan.
41. The two draft resolutions differ in form, although
not, we think, in substance, with respect to the withdrawal of foreign forces. The Norwegian draft resolution
took note of the declarations of the Government of the
United States and the Government of the United Kingdom that they would withdraw as soon as the Governments of Lebanon or Jordan so requested or as soon
as substitute arrangements were made by the United
Nations.
42. The Arab draft resalution, in effect,, incorporates
the latter concept into the draft resolution itself. This
is entirely acceptable to the United States. We have
made clear from the beginning that we do not believe
that nations, particularly small nations, threatened with
danger from without, should be dependent upon inviting
the presence of the forces of other nations. This is legitimate in cases like those of Lebanon and Jordan, but
intervention is a practice which can be abused and can
lead to the domination of one country by another. That
regrettably has happened.
43. The course much to be preferred is that which
these d.raft resolutions indicate, namely, to have United
Nations ready, willing and able to take measures so
that the need for foreign forces is obviated.
44. The United States desires, at the earliest practicable moment, to withdraw its forces from Lebanon.
We said this when we went in, we have been saying it
almost every day since and, also, we and the United
Kingdom have solemnly affirmed our position in cammunications to the President of this Assembly. We
rejoice at. the prospective assumption by the United
Nations of responsibilities which, in an emergency, we
reluctantly assumed and which we are eager to lay down.
45. In this connexion, I want to take this occasion
to express on behalf of the Government of the United
States our appreciation of the fact that it seemd that
every nation. here-whatever some may have said-really

746th

meeting-21

has confidence in the integrity of the purposes of the
,United States in this matter. That is a tribute we appreciate and we shall seek always to deserve.
46. Section III of the Arab draft resolution coincides
with the provisions of paragraph 2, section III of the
Norwegian draft resolution. This deals with the possible creation of an Arab development institution. We
believe, and President Eisenhower’s address to the
Assembly [733rd ?lceet&g] clearly emphasized, that this
is an important aspect of the Near East problem. The
Arab draft resolution omits reference to the consideration by the thirteenth session of the General Assembly-that
is, the forthcoming General Assembly-f
a stand-by United Nations peace force. We believe that
it would have been appropriate to keep this reference
in the draft resolution but, irrespective of that, the
fact is that the matter will in any event be considered
hy the thirteenth session of the General Assembly.
47. Section IV of the Arab draft resolution is identical
with section IV of the Norwegian draft resolution dealing with the operative provisions.
48. The United States takes considerable satisfaction
from the fact that the countries in direct controversy
have found it possible to agree on action by this emergency specialsession.That is cause,we know, for constructive action, thinking and planning by all concerned, on
whichever side. The result arrived at justifies the great
faith which the United States has always placed in this
General Assembly, which operates free of veto power
and where free world opinion has an opportunity to
crystallize along sober and constructive lines.
49. Having said this, let me stress that no resolution,
of itself, will solve the problems of the Near East. These
problems have deep roots; they cannot easily be eradicated. They have explosive aspects which can surprise
us at any time. No Assembly resolution can, of itself,
solve these problems, and it would be folly for us to
leave here confident that the problem of the Near East
has been solved by this draft resolution. But if the prin.
ciples of the Arab draft resolution are put into practice,
then the problems, we believe, can be solved.
50. In the broadest sense, what we confront here is
not intrinsically a question of detailed wording;,it is a
matter of spirit and a purpose. What we say here constitutes an appeal for wisdom and moderation on the
part of the leaders of the countries of the Near East
and, indeed, on the part of the leaders throughout the
whole world.
51. The United States believes that this emergency
session of the General Assembly creates an opportunity
which, if it is taken, will not only mark a great, new
triumph for the United Nations but will also promote
the political, economic and social welfare of the nations
of the Near East. That, however, we repeat, depends
primarily not upon
our words but upon deeds, Words
that we utter here can be helpful but the final answer
is to be sought elsewhere. The fact that the nations
which complained and the nations which were complained against now are in agreement is a good augury.
It does not, of itself, mean that we can take the future
for granted but we can ancl do look to that future
hopefully.
52. Mr. GROMYKO
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) ( frnnslnfed from
1pussian): The emergency
special session of the General Assembly is coming to
an end and today we are summing up the results of
the debates which have taken place.

Angnet

1958

53. After the discussion of the qiestion of the withdrawal of United States and Unitecl Kingdom forces
from the territories of Lebanon and Jordan respectively,
I believe there is every justification for stating that the
overwhelming majority-I
repeat : the overwhelming
majority-of
States have spoken in favour of the immediate and urgent withdrawal of these forces from
the territories of the countries concerned. This can only
be a source of gratification to us, because the Soviet
Government’s proposal to convene an emergency special
session of the General Assembly was based on the
premise that the United Nations should use its influential voice to urge the need for the prompt and
urgent withdrawal of United States and United King.
dam forces from the territory of the Near Eastern
countries.
54. The resolution which has been submitted as a
result of the agreement between ten Arab States, although its drafting is inadequate in some respects,
fulfils the principal task before the General Assembly,
namely, to pronounce itself in favour of the early withdrawal of United States and United Kingdom forces
from the Near East, and is essentially in agreement
with the Soviet Union’s proposal, as it says what the
General Assembly had to say.
55. Today, we should like to express the hope that
the Government of the United States of America and
the Government of the United Kingdom will seriousIy
heed the voice of the overwhelming majority of the
States Members of the United Nations, who spoke in
favour of the immediate and early withdrawal of United
Kingdom and United States forces from Lebanon
and Jordan,
56. We should also like to express the hope that the
United States of America and the United Kingdom
will not attempt, under various pretexts and by means
of various spurious agreements, to delay the withdrawal
of their forces and thus to contravene the decision of
the General Assembly-we use the word “decision”,
becausewe hope that the draft resolution submitted by
the Arab States will receive a favourable vote from the
General Assembly.
57. If the Governments of the United States of
America and the United Kingdom fail to take this de=
cision seriously and, under various pretexts, delay the
withdrawal of their forces from the territory of Lebanon
and Jordan, the Soviet Government deems it necessary
to state forthwith that it will resubmit this problem for
consideration by the United Nations at the regular
sessionof the General Assembly.
58. It follows from what I have said that the Soviet
Union delegation which, acting on behalf of ihe Soviet
Government, submitted to the Assembly its own proposal on the question of the immediate withdrawal of
the United States and United Kingdom forces from
the Near East, will not insist on this proposal being
given priority in the vote since its fundamental purpose
is expressed in the draft resolution of the Arab States.
In taking this line, we of course take account of the fact
that, as has been stated here, the so-called Norwegian
or, more accurately, the United States and United
Kingdom draft resolution will not be put to the vote.
59. In conclusion, I should like, on behalf of the Soviet
delegation, the Soviet Government and all the people
of the Soviet Union, to welcome the agreement reached
between the Arab countries, as. a result of which they
have submitted a joint proposal on the question of the

174

General

Assembly-Third

Emergency

withdrawal
of United States and United Kingdom
forces from the Near East. This good example will
serve the interests of the Arab States, the interests of
restoring normal conditions to the Near and Middle
East, the interests of strengthening peace in that area
and the interests of world peace. In bringing its work
to such a conclusion, the Assembly has furthered the
cause of peace and done useful work. We have no doubt
that not only the Soviet people, but the peoples of other
States, whether represented in the United Nations or
not, will only express profound satisfaction at this
decision.
60. The PRESIDENT
: At this stage of our deliberations I think perhaps I can assist the Assembly by
suggesting that this draft resolution [A/3893/Rev.l]
should be voted upon this evening. I say that, because
the draft resolution is, in my judgement, for the good of
the world Organization.
It. is for the good of the area
of the Middle East; it is for the good of the future
work of the Secretary-General
because it affords him
an assurance and a prospect, at least, that he can succeed ; and above all-and this is of vital importance-it
is sponsored, and therefore agreed to, by all the Arab
States Members of the United Nations.
61. I therefore make so bold as to suggest to the
Assembly that ‘we act with expedition on this fortunate
occasion.
62. Mr, FUJIYAMA
(Japan) :I Before the present
draft resolution is put to the vote, I wish to state the
views of the Japanese delegation.
63. This draft resolution has incorporated to every
possible extent the general will expressed at this emergency special session of the General Assembly by all
the Member States. My delegation expresses its keen
satisfaction that the draft resolution stresses the point
made by me in my statement during the general debate
[73&h meeting], namely, that the solution of the problems of the Middle East should be based upon the
legitimate
national aspirations of the peoples of the
area and upon the just understanding and support of
all of our countries in the realization of these aspirations.
64. With
regard to the problem of mutual noninterference in internal affairs, which has been one of
the agenda items since the discussions in the Security
Council on the Middle East, it is gratifying that this
session, instead of debating on the whys and wherefores
of past circumstances, has taken a constructive approach
reaffirming
the principle of mutual non-interference
among the countries concerned, and declaring their will
to adhere to that principle.
65. I believe it is significant that, in consummating
and presenting the draft resolution, the Arab countries
themselves have displayed initiative and have expressed
their resolve to seek the solution of their problems by
themselves through their regional organization. It is
for us to extend our wholehearted understanding for
and support of the initiative
thus displayed by supporting this draft resolution, For it is by such support
and understanding
that the permanent settlement of
the problems of the Middle East can be achievid.
66. The efforts made under such initiative give us
hope and confidence. As they take on concrete form
under the aegis of the United Nations, with the support
and understanding
of all our Member States, including
every principal country concerned, and as they .develdp
1Mr. Fujiyama spoke in Japanese. The English version of
his statement was supplied by the delegation.

Special

Session-Plenary

Meetings

in the future, these efforts will, I am sure, contribute
immeasurably to peace in the Middle East and, further,
to the peace of the world.
47. In the belief that to be adopted by this emergency special session a draft resolution should be agreed
upon by all the countries concerned, I have hope that
unanimity will be achieved, and I have made every
effort within my power towards this end. The draft
resolution before us truly meets that hope and condition. I confidently believe that it will facilitate the
early withdrawal of American and British forces and
that it will open the way for a permanent solution of
the problems of the Middle East.
68. That agreement on such a draft resolution is
about to be readhed here today is a happy consummation for my Government, too, for since the recent
meetings of the Security Council we h&e worked for
a solution such as this draft resolution represents.
69. On behalf of the Government and people of Japan,
I express here our support for the present draft resolution. While its adoption signifies but the first step
towards a permanent settlement, I am sure that, by
the exercise of the statesmanship and spirit of mutual
accommodation displayed by the representatives at this
emergency special session, such a settlement may be
expected.
70. I wish. at this time to express my respect and
appreciation to the representative of Norway and other
representatives of the countries concerned for their
consistent and dedicated efforts, which made possible
the draft resolution upon which we are soon to vote,
I also wish to express my delegation’s sincere wishes
for success to the Secretary-General,
to whom the
draft resolution entrusts an important task, and to
assure him that my Government will co-operate in
the realization of the purposes of that proposal.
71. Mr. LLOYD
(United Kingdom) : At the beginning of the speech which I made on 14 August I referred to the role of the United Nations in a diplomacy
of reconciliation. I said that I had high hopes that at
this emergency special session we should “succeed in
reconciling our points of view and achieving some
constructive results”. [73&h meeting, para. 21
72. I wish to acknowledge the spirit that has permeated ,our discussions, both formal and informal, and
the tone of the speeches which have been made this
afternook Even the Minister of Foreign Affairs of
the Soviet Union, if I may say so, although he did
not state correctly the purpose of this Assembly, seemed
willing to confdrm to some extent to its spirit.
73. In my speech the other day, I gave the reasons
for the presence’of our troops in Jordan, Their presence
is in reply to the request of the Government of Jordan.
I stated my belief that it should be possible to devise
suitabIe United Nations arrangements, with the consent
of the Government of Jordan and the co-operation of
other Governments concerned, to secure conditions of
stability and to give Jordan confidence in its continuing
right to exercise without interference from outside the
normal attributes of a sovereign State. I said that SO
far as the United Kingdom Government was concerned
the sooner such arrangements were made the better,
and fh? quicker it would be possible for us to, with:
draw OUT troops.
74. I believe that the presence of our troops has in
fact reduced tension. But we have never .considered

746th

meeting-21

their presence as more than a short-term expedient.
Nor, to be quite frank, have we ever thought that the
United Nations presence in Jordan, by itself, however
careful and intricate the arrangements made, would
ensure stability. What we had hoped for was a dktelzte
between the Arab States concerned, which would
provide the basis- in our view the essential basis-for
successful United Nations operation and also for the
withdrawal of our troops.
7.5. I believe that this draft resolution is a constructive
first step. In fact, it makes more progress than I had
thought would be possible in the course of this emergency special session in that, by its terms, it not only
recognizes the necessity for such a c&&e, but, of itself,
constitutes a first step towards that end, Because if
Lebanon and Jordan and their Arab neighbours can
develop their relations on the basis of respect for their
independence and sovereignty, that will be an important
contribution
towards the relief of tension. If they can,
each of them, regard the system of government that
is established in a neighbouring State as the exclusive
concern of that State, that will add to stability. And if
each country honours the pledge, which is set out in
this draft resolution, “to abstain from any action calculated to change established systems of government” in
other countries, then real progress will be made. The
form of the draft resolution not only recognizes the
necessity for such a pledge between the Arab States,
but calls upon all Members, of the United Nations,
including all Arab States, “to act strictly in accordance
with the principles of mutual respect for each other’s
territorial
integrity and sovereignty”. If that proposition is accepted in deed as well as in word, then, in
the words of the Charter, which are also set out in
the draft resolution, all States will “practise tolerance
and live together in peace with one another as good
neighbours”.
76. I notice that this draft resolution has the full and
freely given support of the Government of Jordan.
Indeed the Government of Jordan as well as the
Government
of Lebanon are sponsors of this draft
resolution. We in the United Kingdom shall therefore
vote for it. We hope that it will receive overwhelming
support from this Assembly. We hope that the
Secretary-General
will undertake the task laid Itpan
him in section II and thereby facilitate the early withdrawal of foreign troops from Lebanon and Jordan. I
offer him our sincere good wishes and I promise him
our sincere co-operation. I repeat that the quicker
these arrangements are made on a practical and realistic basis and the quicker effect is given in practice
to the ddtente to which I have already referred, the
sooner it wiIl be possible for us to withdraw oui troops.
77. I therefore welcome this draft resolution. I welcome the fact that it is an Arab draft resolution. If
the sentiments expressed in speeches and in this draft
resolution are translated into deeds-and I believe that
they will be-then
we will indeed have clone a fine
work here together at this emergency special session
of the Assembly. I believe that we will have opened a
new chapter full of promise politically, economically
and socially.
78. Mr, SCHURMANN
(Netherlands) : Looking
back on the general debate during this emergency
special session, my delegation cannot but feel satisfaction that, the General Assembly has not followed the
counsel of those who would have had us take the deadend road of a mere discussion of the withdrawal of

August

1958

175

the troops which the Governments
of the United
Kingdom and the United States have sent to Jordan
and Lebanon. If we had entered that blind alley, we
would have disregarded the signpost put up by the
Security Council, which indicated that the subject of
our debate should be the one which that body itself
had examined and on which it had tried in vain to
reach a conclusion, namely the complaints of two
Member States of the United Nations concerning outside threats to their independence and territorial integrity. An incursion into that czj.l-de-snc would also have
prevented us from obtaining a clear view of the wider
problem, which is that created by the present unsettled
conditions in the Near East.
79. It would seem appropriate, and perhaps especially
so after the speech that was just made by the Foreign
Minister of the Soviet Union, to recall that the Security
Council did not meet during the month of July to
consider the withdrawal of American and British troops
from the Near East but was called upon to take action
at the request of Lebanon, later joined by Jordan,
because the Governments of these two co,untries were
convinced that their independence was in serious
danger.
80. Now it Appears to my delegation that the question of whether a Government feels threatened is one
which only that Government can answer. It may be
that producing unassailable evidence is difficult or even
impossible, but who among us would or could deny
that his own Government is the sole arbiter in matters
of its national ‘security? Who is there who would or
could deny that every single legally constituted Government in the world has the exclusive right of determining
what outside dangers confront it and what lawful
measures should be taken in the face of those dangers?
81. The Government of Lebanon, having decided that
it was seriously threatened, called upon the United
Nations for assistance after it had failed in its attempt
to obtain from the competent regional organization the
assurances necessary for its security. When, unfortunately, the United Nations also fell short of providing
Lebanon with the required protection-and
it would
seem neither fair nor justified to blame only the United
Nations Observation Group in Lebanon for this failure
-the Lebanese Government invoked the assistance of
its friends abroad. Finding itself in the same position
as Lebanon, the Government of Jordan did likewise.
82. If it is conceded that a Government is entitled
to apply to an ally or friend for aid to ward off an
external menace which both regional and United
Nations actions have proved incapable of. removing,
then the question still remains whether the Government to which the application is directed has the right
to comply with this request. To the mind of my delegation there is no doubt whatsoever that such a right
exists and that it should be recognised by all States.
The authority to grant mutual aid and to provide the
means for collective self-defence is the natural corollary
of the inherent right of a threatened country to ask
for such safeguards of its continued existence. Consequently, my delegation holds the view that the actions
of the United States and United Kingdom Governments were fully justified. Indeed, if they had not
responded to the call for help from the Governments
of two weak States, this could have been interpreted
as a bad omen for all small countries which might
one day find themselves in the same position as
Lebanon and Jordan.

RI.76

General

Assembly--Third

Emergency

83. The statements made by the Secretary of State
of the United States of America [A/3876] and the
Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs of the United
in their identical letters to you,
Kingdom [A/3877]
Mr. President, of 18 August 1958 contain complete and
unambiguous assurances that the Western forces will
be withdrawn whenever this is requested by the duly
constituted Governments of the countries to which they
have been dispatched, or whenever as a result of the
further action of the United Nations, or otherwise,
their presence is no longer required. Moreover, the
two heads of department have undertaken, on behalf
of their Governments, to abide in any event by a
determination of the United Nations General Assembly
that action taken or assistancefurnished by the United
Nations makes the continued presence of their forces
unnecessary for the maintenance of international peace
and security.
84. These two letters confirm the statements previously made by the representatives of the United States
and the United Kingdom in the Security Council and
in this Assembly ; they also confirm my delegation in
its opinion that the presence of British and American
troops in Jordan aud Lebanon is not contrary to any
prescription contained in the Charter of the United
Nations or to any rule of international law.
85. In the beginning of my statement I said that the
question of the withdrawal of American and British
troops from the Near East is not the real issue befare
the Assembly, Reading the letters which Mr. Dulles
and Mr. Lloyd addressed to you, Sir, one obtains the
conviction that for the United States, and for the
United Kingdom too, withdrawal comes high on their
list of desired actions. However, here is the real, essential
difference: whereas some delegations would limit our
discussion and our decisions to this question of withdrawal, many others, including my o.wn, feel that such,
withdrawal should take place only under conditions
that will guarantee that it is not followed by a return
to the situation which gave rise to the dispatch of
troops to the area.
86. Such a guarantee can be found in a number of
measures. It is obviously desirable that the purposes
and principles of our Charter should be upheld in
relation to Lebanon and Jordan, and no, Member State
of our ,Organization, having accepted the obligations
contained in the Charter, is entitled to act in a way
contrary to this objective, On the other hand, the
knowledge at our disposal does not at present enable
US to determine what practical arrangements will best
serve this purpose, The choice of means can only be
made after consultation with the Governments concerned, and this Assembly will therefore have to leave
that consultation and that choice to the SecretaryGeneral, whose function and personality make him
eminently fitted for this delicate and responsible task.
87. That all States Members of the United Nations
should refrain from any threats or acts, direct or
indirect, aimed at impairing the freedom, independence,
or integrity of any State, or at fomenting civil strife
and subverting the will of the people of any State,
is a rule of international conduct which has already
been laid down and approved by the General Assembly.
88. My delegation considers it timely that all Member
States should be called upon strictly to observe these
obligations and to ensure that their conduct, by word
and deed, conforms to this policy.

Special

Session-Plenary

Meetings

89. Having to face the critical situation which now
exists in the Near East, the General Assembly would,
in my opinion, be ill advised to ignore one of the
most vital problems of that region, namely, economic
development. In his statement on 13 August, the
President of the United States made various suggestions concerning the manner in which this problem
could be tackled [733rd ms&g] . I should like to pay
homage to these suggestions, which would seem to
be the starting point for a venture the success of
which would be of real advantage for the people
of the area and also thereby for the rest of the world.
President Eisenhower has stressed that any economic
plan for the Near East must be carried out by the
peoples of the area and be the complete responsibility
of the Arab countries concerned. My delegation ‘finds
itself in whole-hearted agreement with this approach.
We hold that an Arab development institution designed
to further economic growth in the Arab countries may
contribute to attaining conditions which will promote
the well-being of those countries and thereby bring
nearer the possibility of achieving a lasting peaceful
settlement for the Near East. The pre-condition for
the successof any such plan is that there should be
agreement among the Arab States on its contents.
90. If we may assume that such a project for economic development reflects the hopes. and wishes of
all Arab States in the Near East, we should decide
to have the United Nations Secretariat place its experience iu this field at their disposal, and if the assistance
of Member States is required, such assistance should
be rendered so far as conditions allow.
91. Finally, I should like to refer to what has already
been said previously in the debate in connexion with
the establishment of a stand-by United Nations peace
force. The events in the Near East with which we
are here concerned have demonstrated with full clarity
the urgent need for such a force, It is the sincere hope
of my delegation that the thirteenth session of the
General Assembly, when it discussesthe feasibility of
such establishment, will reach positive conclusions based
on the studies of this subject which the SecretaryGeneral will present to it,
92. From these brief remarks, it will be clear that
my delegation would have been happy to vote for the
seven-Power draft resolution. Meanwhile, the Arab
States have introduced a differently worded draft resolution which, nevertheless, embodies similar principles.
We welcome this new development which augurs well
for the future co-operation among the Arab States.
As we read it, the Arab draft resolution takes into
account, especially in section I, paragraph 2, the peace
and security not only of the Arab countries, but of
all States in *the Near East.
93. We shall, therefore, cast our vote in favour of it,
convinced that its adoption will constitute a worthy
end to the labours of this emergency special session.
94. Mr. LALL
(India) : The African-Asian
Members of this IOrganizatiou expressed their views today
on the very happy developments which are before us
through the representative of Sudan. I felt, however,
that the occasion was such that it was impossible not
to join the voice of India to those which have already
been heard and to those which will be heard after mine.
95. It was a unanimous decision of the Security
Council that led to the convening of this emergency
special sessionof the Assembly, And it is most befitting
that it should be a unanimous decision of the General

-i

co-q

;! then,
We
4

b worlj
and
97.
: out
Seer1
tary
dom
and
I forei
r be V,
; also
j repr’i

3

fj f&j
‘i whit
whit
oper
of t
SW
on 1
this
that
now
the
the:
as t
98.
tion
real
whit:
rescl
sem
that
imp

dra:
recc
poit
any
of :
to 8
refcl
99.
as ,I
t0

thtil
COI1

As::
’ res:l
iy
’ this
-? side
I lQ(
Ud

dra
the

746th

meeting-21

Assembly
which closes this emergency special session.
I ,WQuld
like to say very briefly that it is not only
with jay but with pride that we have seen our Arab
colleagues
come together in a unanimous decision in
the draft resolution which is before us under today’s
date.
96. We see in this the beginning of a new era of
co-operation
and prosperity, a new era of peace in
the Middle East in which we, as a neighbour, will share.
We have friendship for all the peoples of the Arab
world
and for all of their States, Their prosperity
and their peace is ours.
97. We would also like to say a brief word arising
out of the statements which have been made by the
Secretary
of State of the United States and’the Secretary od State for Foreign Affairs of the United Kingdom. This is an Arab draft resolution. It asks for peace
and prosperity
in the Arab world. It asks that the
foreign troops now in Lebanon and in Jordan should
be withdrawn
at an early date. I think it is a matter
&SO for great gratification
in this Assembly that the
representatives
of the United States and the United
Kingdom
have said that they will fully support this
draft resolution. We are grateful for this as a country
which wishes to see peace in this world of ours and
whiclz
realizes that this peace depends on the cooperation
of all countries. We are sure that the action
of the United
States and the United Kingdom in
supporting
this draft resolution is a reaction based
on their
desire to co-operate fully with the terms of
this draft resolution. We have no doubt whatsoever
that there will be an early withdrawal of the troops
now in Lebanon and Jordan. We can only interpret
the support
of this draft resolution by the representatives of the United States and the United Kingdom
as meaning
precisely that.
98.
1 think it is also necessary to say that our delegation, for one, and several other delegations did have
real clifficulties
of principle with the draft resolution
which has been clescribed today as the Norwegian draft
resolution-although
from reading the text I would
say the draft resolution sponsored by Canada and six
other countries-and,
as is widely known in this Assa&~ly,
we had suggested along with friends informally
that that draft resolution required emendation in three
important
points. We are glad to see that the Arab
draft
resolution,
which will soon be the ttnanimous
recommendation
of this Assembly, covers all those three
points. It would not have been possible for us to give
ally endorsement,
direct or indirect, to the movement
of forces into Lebanon and Jordan; and we are glad
to see that there is no noting of the declarations which
referred
in terms to those actions.
99.
We are also glad to see that it has been decided
as the wiser course that, if consideration is to be given
to the creation of a United Nations stand-by force,
that matter will come to the Assembly in the normal
course and not be slipped in by a side door at this
Assembly,
which is not considering that issue. In that
respect
too, this draft resolution saves an important
point of principle ; that is to say it saves the point
of principle that important issues must be brought to
this Organization
by the front door and not by the
side door.
Finally,
100.

the seven-Power draft resolution was
ullfortunately
not explicit on the ,questiol? of the withdrawal
of forces. This draft resolution is explicit on
the question of the hithdrawal of forces ; in terms it

August

177

1958

asks for the early withdrawal of the foreign troops now
in Lebanon and Jordan.
101. These were the three points on which we would
have asked for the emendation of the seven-Power
draft resolution, and we are very happy to see that
the Arab draft resolution, with the expected statesmanship of our Arab colleagues, did what we expected
it would do on these three matters.
102. As I said, it is with great joy and pride that
we commend the people of the Arab world, who are
our close neighbours, for having brought this draft
resolution to the General Assembly. We will vote for
it and we wish the Secretary-General
godspeed in
his new venture.
103. In that connexion, I am sure that the Assembly
will bear with me if I say that a distinguished part
has been played in this situatian by the grot~p of persons
of various ranks which has now come to be known
as UNOGIL
[United Nations Observation Group in
Lebanon]. At this moment I do want to place on
record the appreciation of the delegation of India for
the work which has been done by the UNOGIL
organization so far. I do not want to go into the question
of their reports at this juncture, If necessary, that
could be done later.
104. With these few brief remarks, I should like to
repeat that the delegation of India will vote for the
draft resolution which has been put before us by our
ten Arab colleagues.
105. Mr. ROMUUO
(Philippines)
: We have before
us
the draft resolution proposed by the Arab States.
[ A/3893/Rev.l.

]

106. Since the Philippines did not participate in the
general debate, it is my privilege now to bring to
our Arab friends the cordial salutations of the peopIe
of the Philippines. We Filipinos believe in their legitimate right to achieve by themselves and with their
own devices, free from any foreign intervention, the
genius of their race. May I also assure them that in
their present travail they have the Filipino people’s
understanding sympathy and prayers, and for their
ideals and aspirations our abiding admiration
and
wholehearted support.
1.07. Resurgent in the Arab countries today is the
flaming spirit of nationalism. In our current discussions
of the Middle Eastern situation, nationalism is in fact
the crux of the whole matter. This is the new nationalism that must sweep away the heritage of a past in
which one nation or group of nations dominated others.
We are, many of us in this Assembly, the products of
this new history of our century, old peoples reestablishing themseIves as new nations, long submerged
now rising to the surface of visible human affairs,
bringing the conquerors of the past to a new realization
that all peoples, one way or another, must express their
own genius, make their own history, destroy or grow,
for better or worse, on an earth struggling its way
toward some ultimate coherence, some approximation
of the dream of brotherhood which we all, through our
different doctrines, codes, religions, believe we are
striving to achieve. They err, and err grievously, who
confuse this regnant nationalism
with Communist
imperialism.
108. I speak for a country which is small in its military and ,economic power among the giants of the
earth. With other small nations, we share the same
vulnerability,
the same exposures to danger arising

178

General

Assembly-Third

Emergency

from the clash and conflicts of the giants. We share
with other small nations the same love and attachment
to our own independence and nationhood. Nothing is
more precious to my people than our national sovereignty and the dignity of independence.
109. Twenty-three years ago today, less a few weeks,
the Assembly of a preceding international
organization, the League of Nations, convened in Geneva, at
the height of the power and prestige of that organization. It was on 9 September 1935, to be exact. The
failures of that session spelled the doom of that
organization.
110. The principal subject-matter which that session
of the Assembly of the League was called upon to
deal was the impending conflict which vitally affected
Ethiopia. At the time, the question was fully as complicated, with quite as many international cross-currents
as those which face us today. That session of the Assembly came to some correct conclusions, but the
conclusions were lost in the boundless sea of greatPowers politics. The will to action was paralysed by
the false hope of forestalling major conflicts by expedient sacrifices of principle, involving a small uation.
The question of whether Ethiopia at that time had a
modern and responsible Government was allowed to
becloud the issue of whether a dictatorship had the
right to serve its own ambition, purpose and need at
the expense of a small and weak nation.
111. History records how that issue was settled and
he consequences of that settlement. History records,
unong other things, the decline and ultimate death of
the League of Nations from the date of that settlement.
112. There had been, of course, previous crises in
the life of the League of Nations and the cause of
peace. There was, first of all, in the autumn of 1931,
the rape of Manchuria.
Then there was in 1933 the
disarmament
crisis climased by the withdrawal of
Germany from the League. In 1934 there was the
Hungarian-Yugoslav
crisis, and then the Saar plebiscite
and the rearmament of Germany. Is history so transient
that all these developments have been forgotten, and
the light they might cast on the present totally invisible ?
113, In one measure or another all these crises sapped
away at the League, although the League was not
without its successes during this period. Indeed some
of the snccesses were sufficiently notable to maintain
in great sections of mankind the faith that in the
League lay great hopes for peace and order in the
world. The crisis over Ethiopia, as the climax of all
other crises, destroyed that faith, and thus destroyed
the League of Nations.
114. We have come today to an equally historic
crossroads, an equally great crisis, in the existence
of the United Nations and in the faith which plain
people everywhere have in the United Nations. We can
proudly say that the United Nations, with the draft resolution as proposed by the Arab States, has once more
justified the confidence and trust that mankind has reposed in it as the safeguard of peace.
115. The Philippines
will vote for the draft resolution proposed by the Arab States, not because it will
solve all the problems before us, nor because we think
it is a perfect draft resolution for even the purposes
of the moment, but rather because it is the least com.mon denominatpr
of what is practical, feasible, and
possible of pasSage. This draft resolution is no more
and no less than a necessary beginning to an effort

Special

Session-Plenary

Meetings

to preserve the peace and save the United Nations,
The greatest merit of the draft resolution is that it is
proposed by the countries directly affected. It is the
product of a meeting of minds among them. It is what
they, not outsiders, believe is best for them.
116. It is in this spirit that the Philippines supports
the Arab draft resolution. We are here is search of a
common ground. We are here seeking an accommodation, Both are offered to us in this draft resolution.
117, It is one of the great paradoxes of history that
the achievement of nationhood by so much of our world
has been postponed to a time when nationhood has
ceased by itself to be enough to ensure human progress.
Here is a basic and fundamental fact of our time: that
we have had to try to achieve nationhood and a coherent world at the same time, and this is a heavy
task that may indeed lie beyond us. This we do not
know. But we must try our best to cope with the
history to which we are heir. As nations we must
somehow strive to be more than nations. This is our
task here.
118. The draft resolution before us, in the opinion
of my delegation, is a constructive proposal which will
break through the senseless aggravation of conflict
which we now face in the Middle East. We believe this
draft resolution offers a beginning to the achievement
of this task. We call upon all to meet the problem in
a comparably constructive spirit. To our competent
Secretary-General,
unobtrusively
efficient, we wish
godspeed in the great labour that awaits him for
humanity and for peace.
119. Mr. WALKER
(Australia) : The Assembly is
moving to a vote on a draft resolution proposed by
the Arab States, including those States whose complaints of indirect aggression and interference in their
domestic affairs led to the calling of this session, as
well as the States whose actions were the subject of
complaint. This draft resolution calls upon all Member
States to act in a manner which, if it had been consistently followed in the past, would have dispensed
with the need for this special Assembly and many
other discussions in the United Nations. We have the
assurance of the Arab States that they wil1 avoid
actions directed at changing the form of Government
in other Arab States., a policy in such complete conformity with the prmciples of the Charter that we
would wish to see it followed not only by the Arab
States in relation to each other but also by all States
in relation to all other States.
120. The draft resolution entrusts to the Secretary
General a mission which is essentially one of conciliation as well as the negotiation of practical arrangements for United Nations assistance in the protection
of the security and independence of Lebanon and.
Jordan. I do not see how the Assembly can fail to
accept a draft resolution which establishes a framework agreed to by all the Arab States within which
the Secretary-General can make an immediate start
on the next phase of his efforts to strengthen the
precarious security situation in the Middle East.
121. Speaking in the general debate, I referred to
proposals advanced by the Australian
Government,
including the establishment of a commission by this
Assembly. Although encouraged by a number &de&+tions to submit a definite pro sal along these lines
to this session of the Assem r ly, we have refrained
kom doivig So aS %e ‘have seen the gradual emergence
& a widely agreed formula for action by the Assembly.

746th

rts
:a
lalat
rld
las
:ss.
lat
:oIVY
lot
the
ust
nrr
on
rill
.ict
his
tnt
in
:nt
ish
for
i;
m.eir
as
Of

Xr
>njed
3Y
:he
$d
:nt
xlwe
rab
tes
KYiageion
nd’
to
neich
art
the
to
mt,
his
EC?
nes
led
nie
,Iy*

meeting-21

122. We share the hope that the Secretary-General’s
efforts will receive such co-operation by the Governments of the area that they will be crowned with success, and we are therefore holding our own proposals
jn reserve.
123. Mr. President, in response to your indication
that you wish to move rapidly to the conclusion of
our business, I merely make three short points regarding the actual text of the draft resolution. It will be
noted that the reference in the draft resoIution to
the Pact of the League of Arab States, while it bears
upon the differences existing between certain Arab
States, is silent on the attitude of the Arab States towards other States in the Middle East. W.e attach
great importance, therefore, to the all-embracing nature
of the call in section I, paragraph 2 of the draft resolution to Member States to act strictly in accordance with
the principles of mutual respect for each other’s territorial integrity and sovereignty. We note that the
General Assembly will not be able in this present
special session to make further progress in laying the
foundations for that great co-operative programme of
peaceful development in the Middle East which we
believe is urgently called for. ‘The draft resolution
encourages the Secretary-General to continue his
studies in relation to economic development with a
view to possible assistance, regarding an Arab development institution, and we support this modest step in
the hope that it is the preliminary
to substantial
developments.
124. The Australian delegation regrets that the draft
resolution, as proposed by the Arab States, has
dropped the reference to the Secretary-General’s studies
of a stand-by peace force which was in the draft
resolution introduced by Norway and others, We trust
that those studies wilI continue aud will be discussed
at the regular session of the General Assembly.
125. In conclusion, I wish on behalf of the Australian
delegation to extend to the Secretary-General our best
wishes for the success of his latest important mission
on behalf of the General Assembly.
126. Mr.
NISOT
(Belgium)
(trat&ted
fro%
French) : We now have a new draft resolution
before us [A/3893]. The fact that such a resolution
could be drawn up, and drawn up so promptly, is
evidence both of the ability of the members of the
Arab community to agree among the&elves on a common course that is so much in their interests and also
of the felicitous influence exercised by United Nations
procedures.
127. The ‘spirit of co-operation, the desire for peace
and the feeling of mutual dependence which inspire
the Arab delegations have been recalled here to good
purpose. The draft resolution is based both on the
Charter of the United Nations and on the Pact of
the League of Arab States and thus relies on the
duality of means permitted by the Charter, It recalls
certain prfnciples which are common to these treaties
ancl which certainly include those set forth in General
Assembly resolution 290 (IV), which was adopted
in 1949.
128. Dedicated as it is to these principles, my Government is desirous of. seeing them prevail in the implemeritation
of the resolution. The resolution also
.. .
assfgns a pre-eminent
role: to ‘the’ SecretaryGeneral ,of the ,United Nations. It requests him to
make’ forthwith, ‘in consultation with the Governments
concerned, such practical arrangements as, having

August

1958

due regard for the purposes of the Charter and
the principles in question, will make possible an early
withdrawal of the foreign troops now stationed in
Lebanon and Jordan, My Government hopes that this
purpose will be achieved, The draft resolution further
relies on the Secretary-General to carry out, again in
consultation with the Arab countries of the Middle
East, such studies as will elucidate the possibilities of
granting aid and assistance to those countries through
an Arab development institution.
My Government,
which wishes once again to assure the SecretaryGeneral of its confidence in him, believes that the
objectives in view must not be confined to ensuring
the external security and internal tranquillity
of
Lebanon and Jordan but must also make provision
for a longer-term plan that will enable the peoples
of the Middle East to work towards full economic
and social development in conformity with their own
views and, in each case, to determine their own future
in freedom and peace.
129. My Government rejoices in the fact that the
draft resolution makes use of the machinery of the
United Nations, of’ which it has always been a staunch
supporter. It is pleased to see in this action, the credit
for which belongs to the Arab delegations, the beginning of a process which should conduce to the final
result which the Belgian people, it is certain, sincerely
desire.
130. My Government will be happy to be among
those voting for the draft resolution.
131. Mr. URQUIA
(El Salvador) (translated from
Spanish) : In the opinion of my delegation, two important conclusions are to be drawn from this discussion
of the Middle East crisis, which was the reason for calling
this emergency special .session of the General Assembly.
The first is that all the States represented here have once
more unequivocably. reaffirmed the right of selfdetermination of peoples and the principle of nonintervention by one State in the affairs of another. The
second is that, in an extraordinarily complex and difficult situation, the ,General Assembly is endeavouring
to prepare the way for a lasting solution based on a productive spirit of harmony and understanding among those
directly involved in the present situation in the Middle
East.
132. I say this because, as we know, in the atmosphere
of moderation and good sense which has fortunately prevailed in our discussions no voice has been raised to dispute or deny or question the ration d’8tre of Arab nationalism or the right of the Arabs to adopt for themselves the political system and form of government best
suited to their traditions and customs and to their aspirations and characteristics, provided that in the exercise of
that legitimate right they do not resort to force or violence
and do not harm or jeopardize the existence of other
peoples who have an equal right to establish themselves
and develop freely within the international community.
133. What unquestionably does arouse disagreement
and disapproval on the part of States not involved in the
crisis in that area is the possibility that unlawful methods
may be restored to, methods which are prohibited by the
United Nations Charter, as is any form of direct or indirect aggression or illegal intervention for, the purpose
of realizing uationalistic aspirations, however justified
and praiseworthy those aspirations may be in themselves.
134. This. form ‘of intervention or aggression gives rise
to extremely serious situations, particularly when behind
it there may or in fact does lie a very real danger of 9

General

Assembly-Third

Emergency

war the consequencesof which would be catastrophic,
for in these times in which we live a tremendous gulf
separates the most powerful States of the world, which
have in their hands <andcan decide at will the destiny of
mankind,
13.5. There has been discussionhere of illegal intervention not only in relation to the central and primary item
which the Assembly has before it, namely, the dispute
between certain Arab States, but also in relation to an
event which has taken place as a consequence of that
dispute: the introduction of foreign military forces into
Lebanon and Jordan. It has been interesting to note, however, that the majority of the speakers have kept themselves above the battle and maintained admirable calm
in referring to both these matters and have refrained
from either condemning or condoning the conduct of any
particular ,Government in the present situation. To judge
by the attitude of many delegations, it is the consensus
that, in view of the very unusual circumstances surrounding this problem, it would not be advisable for the
General Assembly to passa categorical judgement.
136 This, in our view, is an advantage becauseit does
nothing to aggravate the present situation or to make more
difficult the restoration, of normal conditions in the area.
This in turn produces another very noteworthy advantage.
This is that as the General Assembly has not passed
judgement concerning the events which it is examining,
no precedent can later be invoked, and what has been
said here cannot be held up as a doctrine or as an internationally recognizecl principle explaining or justifying
such events.
137. The change which has taken place since yesterday
with regard to the draft resolutions before us makes it
unnecessaryfor me to refer to those which the Assembly
had under consideration for several days. The new draft
submitted this afternoon by the ten Arab delegations incorporates on the whole the ideas and principles already
embodied in the seven-Power draft submitted by ‘Canada,
Colombia, Denmark, Liberia, Norway, Panamaand Paraguay and also includes important references to the international ties and commitments which link the Arab countries. All this, together with the fact that the draft is the
result of an agreement between those countries, gives us
reason to hope that it will be unanimously adopted and
that the mission which it entrusts to the SecretaryGeneral will be productive in the sense that he
will, in consultation with the Governments concerned and in accordance with the United Nations
Charter, proceed forthwith to make such practical arrangements as will adequately help in upholding the
purposesand principles of the Charter in relation to Lebanon and Jordan in the present circumstancesand thereby
facilitate the early withdrawa of the foreign troops from
the two countries.
13s. An equally encouraging feature of the draft resolution submitted by the A.rab countries is the exhortation
to States Members of the United Nations to act strictly
in accordance with the principles of mutual respect for
each ‘other’s territorial integrity and sovereignty, of nonaggression, of strict non-interference in each other’s internal affairs, and of equal and mutual benefit, and to
ensure that their conduct by word and deed conforms
to these principles. The same may be said of the rer
,quest to the Secretary-General to continue his studies
now under way and in this context to consult as appropriate with the &rab countries of the Near East wit& a
view to possible assistanceregarding an Arab development
institution desigqed to further economic growth in these

Special

Session-Plenary

Meetings

countries, a request which clearly embodiesthe most
important of the proposals put before this emergency
,4ssemblyby the Secretary-General [73&d WW&Z~] and
secondedby President Eisenhower [ 733yd ~&eet$zy],
139. In conclusion let me say that our delegation welcomesthis draft resolution and will vote in favour of it,
becauseit is convinced that if the resolution is applied
and carried out in good faith, as is to be expected, it can
bring incalculable benefits to the area about which so
much has been said and can serve the peace and wellbeing of the world as a whole.
140. Mr. VIDIC (Yugoslavia) : After ten days of a
generally constructive debate, and after many meritorious
efforts towards ali agreed solution, the Assemblynow’has
before it a draft resolution submitted by the parties most
directly concerned-by the delegations of all the Arab
States. This is a heartening conclusion to this emergency
special session.
141. We have before us a solution which meetsthe most
urgent requirements of the situation which we have been
convenedto consider by providing for the removal of the
immediate causesof the present tension, and accurately
reflects the general consensuswhich has emerged from
onr deliberations.
142. In giving its wholehearted support to the draft
resolution submitted by the Arab delegations, as I am
confident it will, the Assembly will end on a note of confidence and of hope. It will indeed be able to assertthat
its efforts have not been in vain. It will have shown a
salutary awarenessof the gravity of the problem with
which it was confronted, and probably come out with a
clearer grasp of the essentialsof that problem. By its efforts the General Assembly has helped create conditions
in which the Arab delegations have now come forward
with their own answer to the problem confronting us,
and thus, in their turn, contributed to an improved international climate.
143. Much still remains to be done. Many arduous efforts still lie ahead. Many difficulties, largely the legacy
of past errors, must still be overcome. There is strong
reason to hope, however, that we have accomplishecl
a step-a significant step-in the right direction.
144. Mr. DAVID
(Czechoslovakia) (translated from
X&W)
: As the ,Czechoslovak delegation pointed out
in its statement during the general debate [735th nzeeti?tg’j, the armed intervention of United States anclUnited
Kingdom forces in Lebanon and Jordan has created in
the Near and Middle East a danger point which has
brought the peoples of the world face to face with the
threat of military conflict. Accordingly, the ‘Czechoslovak
delegation, together with other delgations, has requested
that the emergencyspecialsessionof the General Assembly should take effective measures without delay to
avert this threat. In this connexion, the Czechoslovak
delegation urged the adoption of the draft resolution submitted by the USSR delegation, which called for the immediate withdrawal of the interventionist troops from
Lebanon and Tordan. as a realistic and effective method
of settling th; dangerous situation in the Near and
Middle East.
145. As the course of the general debate has shown,
this appeal has been widely echoedand supported by the
majority of delegations to this session,which realized
the extent of the threat to peace that has arisen in the
year and Middle East as a result of United States and
united Kingdom intervention in Lebanon and Jordan.
Only a small group of delegationsclosely connectedwith

746th

meeting-21

the United States and the United Kingdom and the interventionists themselves have attempted, by means of
various manceuvres, to divert the attention of world
public opinion and of this sessionfrom the solution of its
rlJain task, which is the immediate withdrawal of the interventionist forces of the United States ancl the United
Iangdom from Lebanon and Jordan.
14-6. But the attempts of the United States and the
Uuited Kingdom to justify their intervention in Lebanon
and Jordan were unsuccessful, owing to the rebuff they
received from the overwhelming majority of delegations
at this session, which called for the withdrawal of
foreign forces from Lebanon and Jordan.
147, The demand that the interventionist forces should
IX withdrawn from both these coulitries has now been
formulated in another draft resolution, submitted by
the Arab States. Although this proposal has certain
shortcomings, the Czechoslovak delegation will vote for
it, in the hope that the proposed activities of the
Secretary-General will be successful, that the interventionist forces of the United States and the United
Kingdom will be withdrawn from Lebanon and Jordan
at an early date and that the armed intervention of
the United States and the United Kingdom will thus
be brought to an end.
148. The statements of the majority of delegations
during this emergency special session have confirmed
that colonialism is doomed to extinction and that there
is no force in the world which can arrest the rapid
disintegration of the imperialist colonial system or
suppress the struggle of the colonia1and dependent peoples for their freedom and independence. Until the imperialists take this fact into account and until they desist
from their shamelessinterference in the domestic affairs
of the countries of the Arab East, apply the principles
of peaceful co-existence to these countries and deal with
them on a footing of equality, new threats to peaceand
security in the Near and Middle East and throughout
the world will continue to arise.
149. In the opinion of the Czechoslovak delegation,
that is the real reason for the tension in the Near and
Middle East, which the Western Powers have not succeeded in masking by their references to “indirect
aggression” and to the United Nations Charter, or by
any of the other manoeuvreswhich they have attempted
to execute.
150. We would be concealing the true state of affairs
if we were to assert that this emergency special session
of the United Nations General Assembly has fully met
all the expectations and hopes which the peace-loving
peoples of the world, especially the peoples of the coun.
tries of the Arab East, had placed in it. Nevertheless,
we regard it as a favourable development that the interventionists have not succeeded in justifying their
armed intervention in Lebanon and Jordan and that
their aggressive action against the Arab countries has
been censured, both at this sessionand by world public
opinion at large.
1.51, The Czechmlovak delegation, therefore, considers
that the results of this session of the United Nations
General Assembly should be regarded as positive, since
they may lead to a relaxation of international tension
in the Near and Middle East and throughout the world.
152. Mr. PALAMAS
(Greece) : As the unanimous
adoption of the dr;lft resolution sponsored by the ten
Arab States is in sight, I wish to join the colleagues
who have spoken before me from this rostrum in

August

1958

181

expressing the deep gratification of the Greek delegation at the happy outcome of our work and deliberations.
1.53. If the General Assembly at this emergency special
session was able to induce the members of the Arab
family to stand together and to pave the way to a better
understanding and co-operation, it had the satisfaction
of a, prompt response on their part and it reaped the
benefit of the creation of an example of mutual concessionsand conciliation establishing a happy precedent.
We fervently hope that, following the adoption of this
draft: resolution, the situation in the Middle East will
constantly improve and that peace and security in that
area will be consolidated. Our hope is based mainly
on the deep confidence we have in our SecretaryGeneral, on the continued wisdom of the Arab States
immediately concerned and on the spirit of constructive
co-operation displayed by the big Powers directly
involved.
1.54. We think that the example which was set today
by our Arab friends shows the way to the solution, in
the same spirit, of other problems of interest to the
United Nations and of potential danger to the peace
and security of the world.
155.
Mr. EBAN (Israel) : I had extensive opportunity last night [744tk nzeetivtg] of conveying to the
General Assembly the views of the Government of Israel
on the problems now lying before this emergency
special session. The draft resolution presented by ten
delegations [A/3893/Rev.l]
encounters certain profound and serious reservations in my Government’s
mind.
156. A reference is made to an inter-State organization which has unhappily not been universal and comprehensive in the application of its principles to the
States of the region as a whole. The history of the past
decade is unhappily full of turbulent events and disturbances which would have been avoided if the obligatiou to strengthen relations between States and to
stabilize their links on a basis of respect for mutual
sovereignty and integrity had been applied without
selectivity and discrimination. The future policy of this
organization also arouses concern in my Government’s
mind.
1.57. In section I, paragraph 2 of this draft resolution, the General Assembly
“Calls upon all States Members of the United
Nations to act strictly in accordance with the principles of mutual respect for each other’s territorial
integrity and sovereignty, of non-aggression, of strict
non-interference in each other’s internal affairs, and
of equal and mutual benefit, and to ensure that their
conduct by word and deed conforms to these
principles.”
158. The universal application of these principles to
all the States of our region and to each and every conflict and dispute that has arisen or that may arise between them would certainly do much to promote the
fulfilment of the Charter’s principles in the tormented
life of the IMiddle East. The Government of Israel has
serious cause to doubt whether in fact all Member
States, without exception, understand the applicability
of these fundamental provisions to their relations with
all their neighbours without exception. We have, however, listened with care to the ‘words in which the
representative of the Sudan presented and interpreted
this draft resolution in introducing it before the General Assembly, We have listened to the statements

182

General

Assembly-Third

Emergency

by the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of the great Powers
permanent members of the Security Council and have
found in their words a clear emphasis of the absolute
and unconditional
universality
with which in their
view the General Assembly must apply the principle
of respect for the territorial integrity and sovereignty
of each of its Members.
159. We believe that ‘when this draft resolution is
adopted its interepretation will be determined not by the
particular reservations of any Member State but by
the views and principles of the overwhelming majority
of our membership. The delegation of Israel has the
clear sentiment that the overwhelming majority of the
members of the General Assembly will understand
by these words that all Member States including all
Member States in the Middle East-Arab
States and
non-Arab States-will
fall under the clear applicability
of these principles.
160. Notwithstanding
the reservations which I have
frankly expressed, and fully comprehending
the importance of unanimity in international
issues of such
grave moment and scope, I should like to convey the
intention of my delegation, with the reservations which
I have expressed, to join its voice among those wtio
will vote for this draft resolution.
161. The PRESIDENT:
There are no further
speakers on my list, and I shall now request the Assembly to proceed to the vote. I said earlier that it
was in my opinion desirable and in the interests of the
Assembly that the draft resolution submitted by the
ten Arab States Members of the United Nations be
put to the vote first. The representatives of the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics and of Norway, the latter
speaking on behalf of co-sponsors, have stated that
they would not press for priority in the voting with
regard to the draft resolutions submitted by them.
Consequently I shall now ask the Assembly to vote on
the draft resolution proposed by Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon,
Libya, ,Morocco, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Tunisia, United
Arab Republic and Yemen, which is contained in
document A/3893.
The draft resolution was adopted una&noztsEy.
162. The PRESIDENT:
In view of this unanimous
vote by which the Assembly has adopted the resolution,
and in the light of the statements made by the representatives of the Soviet Union and of Norway, to which I
have just referred, it does not seem necessary to take
a vote on the other draft resolutions which have been
submitted.
163. Several representatives wish to explain their
votes and I call upon the first of these, the representative of Uruguay.
164. Mr. RODRIGUEZ
FAl3REGAT
(Uruguay)
(translated from Spanish) : After this very satisfactory
vote let me just say two words, which this time will
not be three.
165,. As has been noted, my delegation cast its vote
in favour of the draft resolution submitted by our Arab
colleagues at this emergency special session of the
General Assembly. Let me make it clear that all the
points of principle which my delegation set forth this
morning and which in a general sense it expressed with
regard to the draft resolution submitted by Norway and
with regard to all the provisions of that draft
resolution are equally applicable to the draft that
has just. been adopted. In particular,
the provi-

Special

Session-Plenary

Meetings

sions of section I, paragraph 2, embody our viewpoint in that they apply without exception to all the
countries of that part of the world, of the Near East,
Arab and non-Arab, so that we shall soon be able to
celebrate the establishment of peace and solidarity
among those peoples to the advantage of one and all.
166. It therefore seems to us that the outlook for peace
is favourable, and my delegation hopes that the mission
which this Assembly has so rightly entrusted to the
Secretary-General of the United Nations will be equally
successful.
167. Mr. ESIN (Turkey) : My delegation was happy
to support the joint resolution presented by the ten
Arab States Members of this Organization.
168. I wish to express our gratification at seeing that
a solution to the immediate problems before the Assembly has been found through the common effort of
the countries directly concerned.
169. At the beginning of our deliberations the Foreign
Minister of my country in his statement to the General
Assembly referred to divergencies of a fraternal nature
which might temporarily exist among our Arab neighbours and he used in this connexion the following
words : “We would have preferred to see these disputes
find their solution within the Arab League as has often
been the case, thus excluding any interferences from
foreign States”. [ 736th wzeeting, pm-a. 15.3
170. The fact that, in the resolution that has just been
adopted unanimously, the General Assembly welcomes
the renewed assurances given by the Arab States to
observe the provisions of the Pact of the League of
Arab States is therefore a matter causing particular
satisfaction to my delegation.
171. I should like to add that we are in complete
agreement with the principles which are reaffirmed in
this resolution and with the methods which are set
forth for bringing about a satisfactory solution. For
these reasons my delegation has voted in favour of this
resolution and hopes that its implementation
will
strengthen confidence, security and peace, as well as
the maintenance of friendly relations among the countries of the area, based on mutual respect for the independence and sovereignty of all.
172. In concluding my remarks, ‘Mr. President, I
wish to pay tribute to the wise guidance with which
you have conducted our deliberations and which has
certainly played a most prominent part in the achievement of this auspicious solution.
173. My delegation also wishes to, reiterate its confidence in our Secretary-General,
who, we are sure,
will fully succeed in his new and important task as he
has done in the past.
174. Mr. l?ICCIONI
(Italy) :2 The resolution qon
which we have just been called to vote appears to me
to answer the constructive intentions increasingly revealed in this Assembly. It is only appropriate to
recognize that tribute for this result should be paid
first of all, Mr. Pyesident, to you, for it is you who
at the beginning of this session expressed the hope that
such a constructive spirit would prevail. The Italian
delegation is indeed pleased to note that the appeal to
all Arab States that I made at the conclusion of my
earlier statement [739th we&g]
did not go unheeded.,
2 Mr, Piccioni spoke in ‘Italian. The English version of his
statement was supplied by the delegation.

7%th

meeting-21

175. We are specially pleased tonight that all Arab
States have met and have agreed on a formula that
responds to such a general expectation. In the draft
resolution we see that some of the essential principles
of the Charter of our ‘Organization have been embodied.
The general respect for the Charter is an indispensable
prerequisite to the peaceful development of international reIations. Together with these provisions, freely
adopted, we can see reflected in the draft resolution
ideas that the Italian Government had upheld even before
the convening of this session and that I repeated in my
statement to the Assembly on 18 August. I refer specifically to the economic co-operation of the Arab countries of the Near East through the setting up of a
regional institution.
176. The words spoken by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Sudan when submitting his draft resolution unquestionably afford encouragement to all of us.
Undoubtedly it is, in the first place, up to those States
to decide the form which they wish this co-operation to
take. For my own part, I would like to assure Mr.
Mahgoub that the Italian Government would view with
favour any idea taken in this direction, convinced as
WCare that this would be the best possible premise for
a far-sighted enterprise for the benefit of the populations of the region and for the peaceful evolution of
their institutions.
177. The Italian delegation is firmly convinced that
concrete deeds such as this would obtain general agreement and support and would demonstrate that the
important hopes raised by this i2ssembly were not
unfounded.
178. I wish to conclude my brief remarks with our
lnost sincere wishes to the Secretary-General for the
success of his mission of peace and conciliation.
179. The PRESIDENT:
Before we tnrn to our remaining business, may I in my capacity as President
express to the delegations my sincere thanks for the
co-operation and considerate spirit which they have in
a most generous measure displayed in bringing the
substantive and greatly significant part of this Assembly’s work to the present satisfactory con.clusion.
180. It will, I am sure, be a matter throughout the
world of general and genuine relief and gratification
that by patience and good will, and in full awareness of
the difficulties still to be resolved, this Assembly ,has
been able to make such substantial progress in reconciling differences among its members and adopting recommendations capable of attracting unanimous support.
181. Let us all hope with undivided strength, and let
none of us waver in the determination to realize that
hope, that the deeds-and
I emphasize the word
“deeds”- which will flow from this draft resolution
will help to make more effective in the Middle East
the principles of our Charter.
182. May the labours we have just completed build
up a better understanding among neighbours and give
to the peoples of that great region a stronger promise
of security and freedom from fear.
183. May I in conclusion-and
I feel I am speaking
for the whole Assembly-express
my unswerving conficlence in the great abilities of our distinguiphed
Secretary-General and wish him well in the discharge
of the responsibilities which the Assembly has now
entrusted to him.

August

1958

183
AGENDA

Credentials
REPORT

OF THE

ITEM

3

Committee

CREDENTIALS

COMMITTEE

(A/3891)

1%. Mr. THORS
(Iceland}, Chairman of the Credentials Committee: After this great decision of the
General Assembly and after the President’s eloquent
words, my report is very simple.
185. The Credentials Committee was composed of
the same members who served during the twelfth
General Assembly, and it unanimously
adopted the
same report as it did at that time.
186. I present the report and ask the President to put
it to the vote for the General Assembly’s approval.
187. Mr. LALL
(India) : The delegation of India
accepts the report of the Credentials Committee subject
to a reservation regarding the credentials of China and
also subject to a reservation regarding the report on
the validity of the credentials of the representatives of
the Government of the Hungarian People’s Republic.
188. I do not wish to make any remarks about these
matters. ,Our views on them are well known.
189. Mr. SIK (Hungary) : The Credentials Committee has again submitted a report to the General
Assembly which makes reservations concerning the
mandate of the Hungarian delegation which is entirely
legal and in compliance with the stipulations of the
Hungarian Constitution, and which was issued in due
form according to the formal discussion of this matter
in the United Nations.
190. The Hungarian delegation categorically protests
against this procedure and the report of the Committee.
The Committee’s proposal that the General Assembly
reach no decision on the credentials of the Hungarian
delegation is a completely unjustified attempt to interfere in the domestic affairs of the Hungarian People’s
Republic. The Hungarian delegation received its mandate from the supreme organ of the Hungarian People’s
Republic, from the Presidential Council which is vested
with the rights of the Head of State, which it has been
exercising without interruption since 1953. The present
Government of Hungary was also elected by the Presidential Council of the People’s Republic. During the
events of 1956, and since then, Hungary has continued
to maintain diplomatic relations with the majority of
the States Members of the United Nations, and none
of these diplomatic relations has been severed.
191. Hungary’s position internationally
is normal in
all other respects, and our contacts are continuing to
expand. The Hungarian Government is fulfilling its
obligations as far as concerns Hungary’s membership
contribution to the United Nations and other international organizatiolls. Since 1956, Hungary has become
a party to a mxnber of international conventions under
the aegis of the United Nations.
192. The Hungarian Government is receiving invitations to participate in international
conferences. By
trying to cast doubt on the Hungarian
credentials,
although aware of all these facts, the Credentials Con)mittee is overstepping its own terms of reference and 1s
creating a dangerous precedent in the United Nations,
particularly
with regard to small countries. Support
for the Committee in this matter means support for
the forces which axe trying to spread the cold war by
these nieans.

184

General

Assembly-Third

Emergency

193. The Hungarian delegation protested against and
also voted against the report of the Credentials Committee of the twelfth session of the General Assembly
because of the unfounded discriminatory
character of
the proposal concerning the credentials of the Hungarian delegation.
194. As the Credentials Committee of the emergency
special session of the General Assembly has now submitted a similar proposal, the Hungarian delegation is
not in a position to accept this report either.
195. Mr. SOBOLEV
(Union
of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (tmanslnted from Russian) : In connexion
with consideration of the report of the Credentials Committee, the Soviet Union delegation feels it must once
again draw the Assembly’s attention to the question
of the credentials of the persons occupying China’s
place in the United Nations General Assembly illegally
and in contravention of the <Charter.
196. It has long been cIear to everyone that these
private individuals
who occupy China’s place in the
United Nations ia no way represent the great country
of China, but are merely agents of a clique of political
bankrupts, who are ending their clays under the protection of United States forces.
197. Their claims to speak as the representatives of
China, whose people threw them out nine years ago,
are so obviously absurd that there is no need to dwell
on the matter.
198. Under the United Nations Charter, China may
be represented in the General Assembly and in other
United Nations organs only by representatives appointed by the Government of the People’s R.epublic
of China, which is the only lawful Chinese Government.
199. The Chinese people unanimously supports this
Government, which was set up as .a result of the victory
of the national liberation movement. China has never
before had a government which so fully represented the
interests of the masses,
200. The appearance of the People’s Republic of
China on the international
scene was an important
factor in stabilizing the international
situation and in
strengthening peace and security in the Far East and
throughout the world. ‘The tireless efforts of the Chinese
Government to apply the principles of peaceful coexistence, which it proclaimed jointly with the Indian
Government, have helped it to establish friendly relations with many countries of Asia, Europe and Africa,
The number of States maintaining diplomatic relations
with the People’s Republic China is growing every
year. The People’s Republic of China also maintains
commercial and cultural ties with the overwhelming
majority of the countries of the world.
201. In view of these facts, it is particularly scandalous that for nine years the representatives of the
People’s Republic of China have been deprived of the
opportunity
to participate in the work of the United
Nations. The absence of the representatives of China,
a great Power which is one of the five permanent members of the Security Council, cannot fail to undermine
the authority and prestige of the United Nations, which
is called upon
to unite the efforts of all peace-loving
peoples in the struggle to establish a stable and lasting
peace.
202, The reasons for such an abnormal situation with
regard to the representation of China are cIear to everyone. The Government of the United States does not
conceal the fact that its attitude towards the People’s

Special

Session-Plenary

Meetings

Republic of China is the only obstacle to the iestoration of the rightful representation of China in the
United Nations. The various procedural ‘tricks and
devices used each year by the United States delegation
to the United Nations to prevent even the discussion
of the question of the representation of China provide
eloquent evidence of the absolute unfoundedness of the
United States position in this matter.
203. It is time the General Assembly put an end to
the practice of subordinating the United Nations to
the narrow interests of individual States and abolished
the abnormal situation with regard to the representation of China by reinstating the lawful representatives
of the People’s Republic of China.
204. With regard to the persons occupying China’s
seat, the Assembly has no grounds for recognizing their
credentials as valid, since they represent no one but
themselves and have no right to speak as the representatives of China.
205. The other question relating to the report of the
Credentials Committee to which the Soviet delegation
feels it must draw the Assembly’s attention is the Committee’s decision, also inspired by the United
States,
tending to cast doubt on the validity of the credentials
issued to the Hungarian People’s Republic by its lawful
Government.
206. The Soviet delegation has categorically protested
and continues to protest against this decision, which is
particularly harmful to our Organization, and further
poisons the business-like atmosphere which is SO necessary for the success of the General Assembly’s work.
207. For nearly two years, the United States has
imposed upon
the General Assembly, in one form or
another, illegal decisions, aimed at interference in the
domestic affairs of the Hungarian people.
208. These machinations by United States representatives show that that country is unwilling to refrain
from attempts to use the United Nations as a cover
for its own interference in the domestic affairs of other
countries.
209. It is clear to everyone that the provocative hue.
and cry raised by the United States over the credentials
of the Hungarian delegation is yet another manifestation of the subversive activities of the United States
against the lawful Government of the Hungarian
People’s Republic. I need not remind you, in this connexion, that subversive activity and interference in the
domestic affairs of other countries are contrary to the
United Nations Charter.
210. We feel obliged ‘to draw attention to the fact
that the United States Government maintains
diplomatic relations with the Government of the Hungarian
People’s Republic and that these countries are represented by diplomatic missions in each other’s capitals.
And yet, with no justification whatsoever, the representatives of the United States and of a number of
other countries in the United Nations raise the question
of the credentials of the Hungarian delegation.
211. This United States position can only be regarded
as two-faced. The activities o’f that country leave no
doubt as to who is really using indirect aggression as
an instrument of State foreign policy.
212. It is characteristic that neither in the Credentials
Committee nor in the General Assembly did anyone in
fact .dispute the validity of the Hungarian delegation’s
credentials. Moreover, it could not be otherwise, since
the Hungarian delegation submitted, in the form pre-

746th

meeting-21

scribed by the rules of procedure, the credentials issued
to it by the only lawful Government of Hungary. This
Government
has been formed and operates in strict
conformity with the Constitution
and internal legislation of Hungary.
It enjoys the unanimous support of
the Hungarian people. The Government of the Hungarian People’s Republic conducts a peaceful foreign
policy and maintains diplomatic relations with the
majority of States Members of the United Nations.
213. The Credentials Committee had no grounds for
casting doubt on the credentials of the delegation of
the Hungarian
People’s Republic. The decision imposed upon the Committee is incorrect and harmful,
for it is prejudicial to the United Nations and contrary
to its Charter.
214. The Soviet delegation felt it necessary to explain
its position to the members of the General Assembly in
order to leave no doubt that its vote in favour of the
report of the Credentials Committee involves no change
in its position with regard to the representation of China
in the United Nations or with regard to the credentials
of the delegation of the Hungarian
People’s Republic.
215. Mr, LODGE
(United
States of America) : I
think it is a great pity, really, that after the General
Assembly
has just made this inspiring showing of
unanimity on the Arab resolution for the Near East,
the Soviet Union should see fit to raise these contentious questions and once again to attack the United
States. As you all know, I have never started an attack
on the Soviet Union in all the years that I have been
here, but I am obliged, of course, to respond to an
attack that is made upon my Government, just the way
any other member here present would be obliged to
respond if an attack were made on the Government
which he represented.
Therefore, with a degree of
reluctance, I shall reply very briefly to the strictures
which ,Mr. Sobolev has seen fit to make against the
United States.
216. The position of the United States on the Chinese
representation
question can be stated as follows. The
Chinese Communist
iCgime stands branded as an
aggressor. This was the decision of the General Assembly. This decision has not been repealed. Consequently, there can be no justification for inviting the
aggressor to sit here among us as if it were a lawabiding, peace-loving Member. The Charter does not
take the view of the so-called realists that the General
Assembly should be a mere cockpit in which the lawabiding and the criminal are indiscriminately
scrambled
up. The Charter contains a moral standard and it is
up to us to uphold it. The United States therefore continues to oppose any move or moves designed to exclude
the representatives of the Government of the Republic
o,f China or to seat representatives
of the Chinese Communist regime. So much for the Chinese representation
question.
217. The United
States believes that the General
Assembly should approve the report of its Credentials
Committee [A/3891],
which includes the motion “that
the Committee take no decision regarding the credentials submitted on behalf of the representatives
of
Hungary”.
This motion was approved in the Credentials Committee by a vote of 6 to 1, with 2 abstentions, and it is in accord with previous decisions of the
Credentials Committee both at the eleventh and at the
twelfth sessions of the General Assembly.
218. The General Assembly at its 677th plenary meeting on 14 September 1957 adopted a resolution by

August

1958

185

which it found that “the present Hungarian
rkgime has
been imposed on the Hungarian
people by the armed
intervention of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics”.
Those are not my words; I have quoted directly from
resolution 1153 (XI), paragraph 4 (6).
219. In the view of the United States, there have been
no subsequent actions either by the Hungarian
authorities or by the Soviet Union to justify any different
judgement today. *On the contrary, recent events have
confirmed the validity of this view. The revolting
spectacle of secret trials and secret executions has
served to remind humanity of the brutal measures which
Soviet and Hungarian
authorities
depend upon to
ensure their control of the Hungarian
people, The
world also noted how closely the announcement of the
executicms of Premier Nagy and his associates followed
upon Mr. Khrushchev’s
visit to that unhappy country, during which he stated his disapproval
of the
“leniency”
exercised by Hungarian
courts. It is little
wonder that many suspect that the executions took
place not in Hungary but in Moscow.
220. Similarly, we recall Mr. K&c&r’s statement of 11
November 1956 in which he said: “I, who have myself
been a member of Nagy’s Government,
hereby state
that, according to the best of my knowledge,
neither
Imre Nagy nor his political group has willingly supported the counter-revolution.”
We also recall Mr.
Kgdir’s
statement of 27 November
1956 in which he
said : “We have promised not to start any punitive
proceedings against Imre Nagy, and we shall keep our
word.” How good was that word?
221. These facts were most recently brought to our
attention by the special report dated 14 July 1958, just
a little more than a montli ago, of the Special Committee on the Problem of Hungary,
document A/3849,
which confirmed “the continued policy of repression
carried out at the present time in Hungary”.
Although
the Hungarian rCgime claimed in June that these executions closed the book on the 1956 counter-revolution,
reports continue to reach us of trials which are under
way today, particularly
large number of trials of students, of young people, who are accused of having
participated in the uprising.
222. In these conditions, the United States believes
that the General Assembly should not take a decision
regarding the credentials submitted on behalf of the
representatives
of Hungary.
223. U THANT
(Burma) : While my delegation will
vote for the adoption of the report of the Credentials
Committee, I would be failing in my duty if I did not
make a few observations on the credentials of the representatives of China, My delegation does not recognize
as valid the credentials of the present representatives
of the Government of China. Let there be no misunderstanding about our attitude. Our advocacy of China’s
admission to this world Organization
is in no way
prompted by political or ideological considerations.
In
fact, Burma and China have very different political and
ideological backgro,unds, but this difference is no reason
why Burma should stand in the way of China’s aclmission to the United Nations.
224. There is one paramount reason why Burma has
consistently supported any move from any quarter for
China’s admission to the United Nations. The main
job of the United Nations is to settle disputes without
war. The more countries disapprove of one another, the
more important it is that their accusations and counteraccusations should take place within this Organization ;

186

General

Assembly-Third

Emergency

otherwise they may settle their disputes only on the
battlefield. The United
Nations exists precisely to
prevent this from happening. By excluding the People’s Republic of China, one damages not Peking but
the United Nations, which is thereby ruled out as an
effective instrument of international
conciliation.
225. With these few reservations, my delegation will
vote for the adoption of this report.
226. Mr. TSIANG
(China) : The statement made by
the Soviet Union representative is unworthy of this
Assembly in both substance and language, unworthy in
that part which relates to China as well as in that part
which reIates to Hungary. If the Soviet representative
could have his own way I am sure that he would have
not only the seat of China but the seats of all countries
in this hall occupied by his comrades. We have not
reached that point yet. At this hour, I do not wish to
prolong or to start a controversy.
227. I should like to state the following for the record :
First of all, all patriotic and freedom-loving Chinese
regard the Communist rCgime in Peiping as un-Chinese in origin, un-Chinese in nature and un-Chinese in
purpose. If the Soviet Union should wish to have moee
power and more votes in the Assembly, it could have,
say, the Republic of Katakhstan come here. But if
China is to be Chinese, then it could not be the rCgime
sitting in Peiping. Then, of course, in the second place,
the members of the Assembly are fully aware of the fact
that that rCgime was branded by this Assembly as an
aggressor. It is not only unrepresentative
of China,
but it is unworthy of a seat in this Assembly.
228. The remarks of the representative of Burma are
quite painful to me. He has stated his views several
times, and I would not wish at this hour to take up his
statements at any length, We, in China, are struggling
for our freedom. We expect no help from Burma, but
we certainly hope that the Government and the people
of Burma will adopt towards the great struggle in my
country the minimum stand of neutrality. The stand
that the Burmese representative has taken here is not
that of a neutralist State. However, in my opinion,
there is much involved in this great struggle in China,
not only the future of the Chinese, but perhaps the
future of all countries in Asia. I hope the Burmese
people and the Burmese Government will reconsider
their stand. They might yet find that the struggle
that we are making in China is also indirectly for the
good of Burma.
229. In this special Assembly I exercised much
restraint because I did not wish to make it controversial; therefore, my statement was brief and I did
not touch on any controversial questions. But it was
very painful to me to see a delegation which represents
a Government that defies the resolutions of the General
Assembly and keeps troops in Hungary come here to
demand that foreign troops be withdrawn from Lebanon
and Jordan.
230. I think the report of the Credentials Committee,
so far as the delegation of Hungary is concerned, is too
much of a compromise. I feel that the ,Committee should
have recommended that the present so-called Hungarian delegation should be unseated. Certainly a regime
which has slaughtered its own people with the aid of
a foreign army has no right to take a seat in our midst.
231. Mr. SHASHA
(Nepal) : In view of the lateness
of the hour, I will just say a word with regard to the

Special

Session-Plenary

Meetings

attitude of my Government towards the approval of the
report of the Credentials Committee.
232. We would vote for the approval of the report of
the Credentials Committee with the reservation that our
affirmative vote or our vote in favour of the report will
not in any way modify our position with regard to the
recognition of the People’s Republic of China, the real
Government of China. I do not wish to enlarge on the
subject because our views are too well known to need
any reiteration here at the moment.
233, Mr. SASTROAMIDJOJO
(Indonesia) : The
delegation of Indonesia will vote for the report but our
vote in favour of it is in no way to be interpreted as
a change in my Government’s policy towards the representation of China in this Organization. The position
of the Indonesian Government with regard to the representation of China is well known to members of this
Assembly. It is the considered opinion of my Government that the only Government having the right to
speak on behalf of the Chinese people is the ,Central
Government of the People’s Republic of China with
its capital in Peking. It is for this reason that the
Indonesian delegation considers that the representatives
appointed by this Government are the only legitimate
representatives entitled to speak on behalf of China.
234. With this reservation, my delegation will vote
for the report of the Credentials Committee.
235. Mr, VOUTOV
(Bulgaria) : We have just
heard the report of the Credentials Committee. Accepting the report as a whole, the Bulgarian delegation
considers it necessary to voice its disagreement with
two points therein; the first regarding the proposal
of the Committee for recognizing the credentials of the
persons who have usurped for themselves the right
to represent China, and the second regarding the failure
to take a decision on the credentials of the delegation
of the Hungarian People’s Republic,
236. The delegation of the People’s ‘Republic of
Bulgaria holds the view that by recognizing as valid
the credentials of the self-appointed representatives of
China a serious insult is being inflicted on, and an act
of great injustice being done against the great Chinese
people, which constitutes the world’s largest population.
237. It is common knowledge that owing to the hostile
policy of some Western countries, and in particular of
the United States, towards it the Chinese People’s
Republic is not represented in the United Nations.
Here there are representatives of the handful of
Kuomintang men who have succeeded temporarily in
staying on Taiwan. But here there are no representatives of the 600 million strong Chinese people who
have liberated themselves from a centuries-old yoke
and who have taken their destinies into their own hands.
Ever since 1949 it has sounded strange to call the
Chiang Kai-shek representatives the representatives
of the Chinese people in the United Nations. But it
is impermissible and outrageous now in 19%--when
the Chinese People’s Republic has been recognized by
thirty-three countries comprising a population of over
l,ooO million people and when, without that great country, no solution is possible of any great international
problem-to
continue this abnormal and harmful situation. But if certain circles in countries like the United
States are interested in conducting a hostile policy
towards the Chinese people, why should the United
Nations become an instrument of such a policy? If
some United States representatives close their eyes
to the world’s map and do not want to admit that there

I

‘~
‘~
1

I

4

7

~
j

746th meeting-21

is a vast Chinese land, with one fourth of the world’s
population, why should the United Nations feel obliged
to follow m the footsteps of the blind?
238. The Chinese People’s Republic exists and it will
go on existing and flourishing, its consolidation will go
on as it goes along the road to socialism, despite the
non-recognition
of its existence by certain circles, The
continuation of this attitude, insulting to the Chinese
people, will not make them abandon their road-the
road of ever-greater successes in all spheres of their development. It will not prevent them from taking an
active part in international life as a great Power, fighting for peace and co-operation among the nations. It
is not so much the Chinese People’s Republic that loses
by its not being represented in the United Nations due
to the pressure of the United States. It is the United
Nations, above all, that loses by this because the representatives of such a great country are absent from the
consideration of all important international
questions.
It becomes ever clearer that no solution of a number
of international questions is at all possible without the
participation of the Chinese People’s Republic.
239. On the other hand, it should be stressed once
again that the United Nations is no~t an organization of
countries with identical rkgimes, that its membership
cannot be dictated by the likes of this or that country,
that it is an organization of peoples which have the
right to elect their own representatives and to establish
their own rCgimes. If this is so, why is the continuation
of this abnormal situation aIlowed? It is imperative that
an end be put once and for all to this abnormal state
of affairs and that the Chinese people take their legitimate place in the United Nations. The Bulgarian delegation declares once more that it cannot accept as
representatives of the Chinese People’s Republic anybody but the representatives of the Chinese People’s
Government. That is why our delegation does not approve the report of the Committee on Credentials concerning the representation of China.
240, The delegation of the People’s Republic of Bulgaria cannot agree to the proposal for not taking a
decision on the credentials of the Hungarian People’s
Republic. We consider that there are absolutely no
grounds for voicing any doubts over the legitimacy of
the credentials of the Hungarian delegation. The aims
of the proposal made in the report are entirely transparent. These are the aims of certain interested circles
in some Western countries, as regards the Hungarian
People’s Republic, which use every opportunity to
slander the people’s Government
of the Hungarian
People’s Republic, to keep up the spirit of the enemies
of the Hungarian people. The dreams of the enemies
of the Hungarian people about restoring the old capitalist rCgime in Hungary have been completely shattered. But in this case the question arises, why should
the United Nations be put in the service of the interests of such circles? Now that the whole world knows
who were the inspirers of the anti-peoples jutsch in
Hungary in 1956, after the legitimacy of today’s Parliament has been repeatedly and clearly proved in the
United Nations, as well as that of the Presidium of
the Parliament
and of the Government appointed by
it, why are the credentials of the Hungarian People’s
Republic being questioned ? We consider that the aim
of raising this question, that is to say doubts as to the
credentials of the Hungarian delegation, is to poison the
creative atmosphere in the United Nations gn’d to divert
the attention of the United Nations and world public

August

1958

187

opinion from the vital international
problems like the
one we have been considering at the third emergency
special session.
241. Having all this in mind, the Bulgarian delegation cannot approve the report of the Committee on
Credentials concerning the delegation of the Hungarian People’s Republic. We consider that the credentials of the Hungarian delegation to the third emergency special session of the United Nations Assembly
are legitimate and perfectly in order,
242. Mr. MICHALOWSKI
(Poland) : In accepting
the report of the Credentials Committee, my delegation
cannot agree with the reservations included in this
report. It seems to me superfluous at present to recall
here, once more, all the legal arguments calling for the
restoration of the rightful representation of the Chinese
people in the organs of the United Nations. They have
been recalled here frequently, and their validity has
never been undermined. But the political reality, the
position of the Republic of China in international relations, its power and role, should not be underestimated
either. The People’s Republic of China does not cease
to be one of the major Powers merely because certain
Governments prevent it from taking its legitimate place
in the United Nations. We consider that a speedy solution of the question of the representation of China, and
seating it in the United Nations, will help us considerably in the work of the United Nations,
243. It is our strongest desire to make the work of
the United Nations more effective. Therefore we consider that the presence of the representatives of China
in the United Nations is of particular importance. The
great Chinese nation should be given the opportunity
to play fully in this Assembly the part due to it in
world affairs, the role which it has already played in the
past and is playing now outside this Organization.
This will fully comply with the principle of coexistence
which we confirmed today in our work.
244. We also find in this report a remark concerning
the credentials of the Hungarian delegation. We consider unjust the questioning of these credentials by
the Committee. The credentials were issued by a legal
Government in compliance with established United
Nations procedure. To question them amounts to interference in the internal affairs of Hungary-and
we
have heard this from this tribune tonight. Therefore
we consider the reservation in the report concerning
Hungary fully unfounded.
245. Mr. KENAWI
(United Arab Republic) : My
delegation has on several occasions’ made its position
clear on the question under discussion. That is why
I will be very brief at this late hour.
246. My delegation wishes merely to state that it
accepts the report of the Credentials Committee, while
reserving our position on the credentials of ,China and
Hungary.
247. Mr. MAGHERU
(Romania)
(tralzslated from
French) : It is the intention of my delegation to take
a stand on the question of the representation of China.
During the twelfth regular session and also at earlier
sessions of the Assembly, it explained in detail why it
believed that only the Central People’s Government of
the People’s Republic of China, which alone represents
the great Chinese people and exercises legal authority
over the territory of China, could appoint the lawful
representative of China. As my delegation has already
stated, there is no argument of law or fact that can be

188

General

Assembly-Third

Emergency

advanced to justify the presence of representatives
of
the group of refugees from Taiwan at the deliberations
of the United Nations. That is why my delegation is
in no wise able to agree with the conclusions of the
majority of members of the Credentials Committee on
the question of the representation
of China in the
General Assembly.
248. My delegation also wishes to express its disapproval of the fact that the question of the representation
of the Hungarian
People’s Republic has again been
raised, We wish to state categorically that the validity
of the credentials of the Hungarian
delegation and its
right, in accordance with the Charter, to a seat in the
General Assembly can in no way be questioned. There
is absolutely no justification
for contending that this
delegation does not represent the Hungarian
Government, which has its mandate from the people and alone
exercises authority
in the country,
a fact which is
moreover recognized by all those countries which maintain diplomatic
relations
with it. The insinuations
repeatedly made from this rostrum can in no way alter
the rights of the Hungarian
delegation. In my delegation’s opinion it is high time for the General Assembly
to put an end to these persistent attempts by certain
countries to interfere in the internal affairs of Hungary
and to poison the international
climate. Subject to
these reservations,
my delegation will vote in favour
of the report of the Credentials Committee.
249. Mr. VID*XC
(Yugoslavia)
: I wish it to be
placed on record on this occasion also that my delegation’s vote in favour of the report of the Credentials
Committee does not imply agreement with those parts
of the report concerning China and Hungary.
250. Mr.
MALILE
(Albania)
(tranluted
front
French) : My delegation, while voting in favour of the
report of the Credentials
Committee, feels compelled
to state that it does not recognize the credentials of the
self-styled representative
of China. We must point out
that the great Chinese people are still without
representatio’n in the United Nations. Among the delegations
represented at this Assembly, China’s seat is occupied
by the representative
of a clique long since turned out
by the Chinese people. The ,Central People’s Government of the People’s Republic of China is the only
lawful Government of the Chinese people. It represents
the Chinese people by all the standards of international
law, and it exercises authority
throughout
the country, with the exception of the island of Formosa, which
is occupied by the United States. Only the Government
of the People’s Republic of China can represent the Chinese people in the United Nations and all its organs.
The People’s Republic of China is a great world Power.
No one is unaware of its efforts to strengthen peace
and security ii1 the world. Its policy is one of peace
based on the principles of peaceful coexistence, and it
supports all proposals designed to reduce international
tension. Whatever the United States may do to prevent
the People’s .Republic of China from occupying its seat
in the United Nations, those efforts will never succeed,
and sooner or later the People’s Republic of China will
occupy the seat to which it is legally entitled,. This
irregular
state of affairs,’ the purpose of which is to
deny the rights of approximately
one-quarter
of the
world’s population to take part in deliberations of the
United Nations,
cannot fail to have a negative effeCt
and to reflect on the authority of this Organization.
251. As regards paragraph
9 of the report of the
Credentials Committee, which concerns the credentials

Special

Session-Plenary

Meetings

of the delegation of the Hungarian
People’s Republic,
it is the view of my delegation that there are no grounds
for questioning the validity of those credentials because
they are absolutely in order and in accordance with
rule 27 of the General Assembly’s
rule of procedure.
The baseless challenge put forward
by the United
States delegation and the slanderous attack just made
by the United States representative
are designed to
revive the cold-war
campaign and to camouflage the
armed intervention in the Near and Middle East.
252. All the peoples of the world earnestly request
the United States and the United Kingdom to cease
interfering in the internal affairs of the Arab and other
States, Any scheme to divert attention from these
righful requests will certainly not mislead the peoples
of the world. Such attempts are useless and doomed
to failure.
253. Mr, SUBASINGHE
(Ceylon) : The delegation
of ,Ceylon accepts the report of the ICredentials Comtnittee, subject to reservations regarding the representation of
China and the credentials of the representatives
of
Hungary.
254. The Government of Ceylon has recognized the
People’s Republic of China and maintains diplomatic relations with it. It is the view of the Government of Ceylon
that the Government of the People’s Republic is the only
effective Govermnent of China. We consider that to
ignore the Government of the People’s Republic of China
is to &ore a very important historical fact.
255. Mr. DAVID
(Czechoslovakia)
(translated front
X7,ssitr.n) : The delegation of Czechoslovakia
strongly protestsagainst the fact that, at this emergency specialsession
of the United Nations General Assembly, the place of
China, which belongsto the representativesof the People’s
Republic of China, has been unlawfully occupiedby agents
of the bankrupt Chiang Kai-shek regime. The decision
adopted by the majority of the Credentials Committee
infringes the principle of universality on which our Organization is based, is detrimental to its prestige and
weakens the force of its decisions.
2.56. The absence of representatives of the Government of the People’s Republic of China seriously impairs
the eflectiveness of our Organization’s work. Without
the participation of that Republic, no international problem either in the Far East or in any other area of the
world can find a sound and lasting solution. This is fully
relevant to the present special emergency sessionof the
General Assembly, the purpose of which is to take effective stepsto avert the danger of a military conflict in the
Near and Middle East arising out of the military intervention of the United States in Lebanon and the United
Kingdom in Jordan,
257. From the date of its establishment,the Government
of the People’sRepublic of China has consistently pursued
a peaceful foreign policy directed towards a reduction of
international tension both in the Far East and throughout the world. This is borne out by that Government’s
decision to withdraw all #Chinese
people’svolunteers from
Korea by the end of this year by agreement with the
po;;nment
of the Democratic People’s Republic of
258. The peaceful foreign policy pursued by the Government of the People’s Republic of China, as was also
noted in the co?vzln&qud of 3 August 1958 on the SovietChinesenegotiations at Peking, finds ever-increasing support and sympathy among the peoples of a11countries.
Thirty countries to date have recognized the Government

(
i
$ --

1 at i

1 Assl
1 263.
1 agai
i Con
i $ii;

4 patiil
,\ 264..
‘j are
and
to d
lem!
and1
!I mar
’ matl
peri
sior
scre
Fra
1 265
mar
1 callli
in 1

746th

meeting-21

of the People’s Republic of China and have established
diplomatic relations with it.
259. In addition, the People’s Republic of China maintains broad political, economic and cultural relations with
many countries throughout the world. China’s economy
and industry are being built up with unbelievable speed.
The gigantic task which the ‘Chinese people have set themselves-to catch up with and overtake the United Kingdom during the next fifteen years in the production of the
most important consumer goods-will in some branches
be fulfilled in the coming year.
260. As a result of its peaceful foreign policy and its
rapid economic expansion, the authority and international status of the People’s Republic of China are constantly being strengthened and enhanced.
261. It is an abnormal situation that the only lawful
representatives of the Great ,Chinese nation, which numbers 600 million peopIe, should continue to be excluded
from the work of our Organization. As a result of the intrigues of the United States, the agents of the discredited
Chiang Kai-shek cli’que from Taiwan continue to be
seated in the United Nations.
262. The majority of the Credentials Committee questioned the credentials of the delegation of the Hungarian
People’s Republic. This is a new act of provocation directed against that country in line with similar attempts
at previous sessions of the United Nations General
Assembly.
263. The Czechoslovak delegation strongly protests
against this action by the majority of the Credentials
Committee. The attitude adopted by that majority constitutes gross interference in the domestic affairs of a State
%lember of the United Nations and is completely incom.patible with the United Nations *Charter.
2fj4. It would seem that the delegations of some States
are again trying to bring up the old, thread-bare slander
and to attack the Hungarian People’s Republic in order
to divert attention from a settlement of the pressing problems raised by the intervention of the United States
and the United Kingdom in Lebanon and Jordan. Such
manoeuvres are by no means new. Mention need only be
made of the events of the autumn of 1956, when the imperialist Powers attempted to use the illegitimate discussion of the so-called “Hungarian ,question” as a smokescreen for the armed aggression of tht United Kingdom,
France and Israel against Egypt.
265. As in 1956, so also on this occasion, no such
manceuvre will deceive world opinion, which is resolutely
calling for an immediate end to the imperialist intervention
iti the Near and Middle East.
266. The credentials of the delegation of the Hungarian
People’s Republic were issued by the lawful Hungarian
Government, which enjoys the full confidence of the Hungarian people, in the manner prescribed by the constitution
of the Hungarian People’s Republic. The Czechoslovak

Printed in U.S.A.

August

1958

189

delegation, therefore, does not concur in the position of
the majority of the ‘Credentials Committee as outlined
in document A/3891.
267. The Czechoslovak delegation will vote in favour
of approving the report of the Credentials Committee ;
its favourable vote may not, however, in any circumstances
be interpreted as implying recognition of the Iegititnacy
of the credeutials of the ,Chiang Kai-shek representative.
26s. I must repeat that only a representative whose
credentials have been issued by the Government of the
People’s Republic of China can represent #China in the
United Nations.
269. The Czechoslovak delegation also considers that
the credentials of the Hungariau delegation are in order,
since they were issued by the lawful Government of the
Hungarian People’s Republic.
270. Mr. CAIMEROM
MEASKETH
(Cambodia)
(Cranskated froq~z &-en&) : My delegation will vote in
favour of the report of the Credentials Committee but
wishes to make reservations on the ,question of the representation of aChina.
271. The PRESIDENT:
I call on the representative
of Hungary, who wishes to use the right of reply in
respect of the statement of the representative of the
United States.
272. Mr. SIK (Hungary} : The Hungarian delegation
has already made clear its point of view concerning the
discrimination against the credentials of the Hungarian
delegation. As far as the speech of the representative of
the United States is concerned, I have only to say that
the so-called Hungarian question is not on the agenda
and that the arguments of Mr. Lodge are not new. They
have been refuted by the Hungarian delegation several
times, and they will be refuted again when the question
is unde; discussion.
273. The PRESIDENT:
The Assembly will now vote
on the draft resolution which appears in paragraph 15 of
document A/3891.
The dwjt resolzctz’onW(IS adopted by 71 votes to 1.
AGENDA

Minute

ITEM

of silent prayer

2

or meditation

274. The PRESIDENT:
We have now reached the
end of the session, Befdre, closing this session, and in accordance with rule 64 of the rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives to stand and observe one minute of
silence dedicated to prayer or meditation.
The representatives
stood
in dmce.
Closing of the session

275. The PRESIDENT
: I declare the third emergency
special session of the General ‘Assembly closed.
The meeting rose at 8.5 pm

S-22841-December

1958-2,200
