S/PV.8356

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8356th meeting

Tuesday, 18 September 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Cohen. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Amde
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Almunayekh
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Tenya
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Orrenius Skau
Mr. Allen

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on South Sudan (covering the period from
4 June to 1 September 2018) (S/2018/831)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-28880 (E)
*1828880*

S/PV.8356

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on South
Sudan (covering the period from 4 June to
1 September 2018) (S/2018/831)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of South Sudan to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations; Mr. Nicholas Haysom, Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for the Sudan and South Sudan;
His Excellency Mr. Ismail Wais, Intergovernmental
Authority on Development Special Envoy for South
Sudan; and Ms. Grace John, Governance and
Peace Manager for Community Empowerment for
Progress Organization.
Mr. Wais and Ms. John are joining today’s meeting
via video tele-conference from Addis Ababa and
Kampala, respectively.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2018/831, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on South Sudan, covering the period
from 4 June to 1 September 2018.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lacroix.
Mr. Lacroix: I thank you, Mr. President, for
this opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
situation in South Sudan and the ongoing peace process
since the publication of the Secretary-General’s 90-day
progress report (S/2018/831), on 11 September.
As the Council is aware, there have been several
developments, most important the signing, on
12 September, of a revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan. The revitalized peace Agreement is the result of
2/24

18/09/2018

recent intensive engagement by leaders of the immediate
region, supported by the international community, to
bring about an inclusive and comprehensive resolution
to the crisis in the country.
I commend the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), supported by the African Union
(AU) and its international partners, for its sustained
efforts to restore peace in South Sudan. The unity
of purpose demonstrated by that collective group is
indeed what contributed to that progress, including
by impressing upon the parties that a military solution
will not deliver sustainable peace. While Special
Representative Haysom and Special Envoy Wais
will provide a detailed assessment of the revitalized
Agreement, let me just say that its signing is an
important milestone in a crisis that is now entering its
fifth year.
Much like the 2015 Agreement, the revitalized
Agreement, by and large, provides a road map for peace
through reform, political transformation, security, social
and economic development and national reconciliation.
All the ingredients for success are present. However,
there are legitimate questions and concerns about the
commitment of the parties, and many practical aspects
related to the implementation of the Agreement still
require clarification. Despite those concerns, the need
for peace in South Sudan is so urgent that we must
seize this opportunity and work together to make the
Agreement a basis for lasting peace.
Moving forward, the onus of ensuring the
implementation of the Agreement will, of course, be on
the parties. It will be crucial for the parties, notably
the Government of South Sudan and the Sudan People’s
Liberation Movement/Army in Opposition, to build
trust and muster the political will to work together to
ensure a more protective environment that will allow
all South Sudanese stakeholders, including women,
to meaningfully engage in the full implementation
of the Agreement. A full and immediate cessation of
hostilities is an imperative first step.
In that regard, it is of great concern that, within
days of the signing of the Agreement, there have been
reports of fighting in Central Equatoria and Unity states.
In particular, on 16 September in Central Equatoria,
heavy clashes are said to have taken place in Jamula
Centre and Mbudu in Kopera county. Hostilities were
also reported in Kendiri and Mangalatore in Kajo-Kaji,
on 13 September. Reports indicate that those hostilities
18-28880

18/09/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

are in response to alleged Government attempts to
install local authorities in opposition-controlled areas.
Both sides appear to have mobilized reinforcements to
support those operations to secure territory.
On 15 September, small-scale clashes were also
reported around Nying, in Guit county in Unity state,
between Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA)
in Opposition forces and Taban Deng Gai-aligned
forces. Those incidents are reportedly associated with
a push by Taban Deng to consolidate influence in his
stronghold of Guit county. We remain concerned about
the potential for further clashes where Government and
opposition forces are in close proximity, particularly
in parts of Central and Western Equatoria, Unity and
Western Bahr el-Ghazal. In advance of the integration
of Taban Deng’s forces into the SPLA, we also
understand that there is a scramble to assemble fighters,
including children, while we have yet to confirm
any disengagement of forces, in accordance with the
timelines of the revised Agreement.

S/PV. 8356

Sudan to turn a new page. Recognizing that the road
ahead will be difficult, I cannot emphasize enough the
critical role that IGAD must continue to play at this
critical juncture in the search for peace in South Sudan.
IGAD must continue to bring its influence to bear on
the parties to the conflict to meet their obligations
under the Agreement, including by ensuring that those
responsible for violating the Agreement are promptly
identified and held to account.
For our part, the United Nations stands ready
to assist South Sudan to achieve the goals of the
Agreement. UNMISS will continue to perform the
tasks required by its current mandate, with the required
emphasis on the protection of civilians, which remains a
priority for the Mission. The Regional Protection Force,
an integral part of UNMISS, will also continue to play
its role, according to its existing mandate. Should the
Security Council deem it necessary and appropriate to
amend the terms of the UNMISS mandate, we stand
ready to support accordingly.

The continued fighting has worsened the already
dire humanitarian and human rights situation in the
country. Five years on, approximately 1.8 million
persons are displaced within South Sudan, another
2.5 million are living in neighbouring countries.
Extreme violence, including conflict-related sexual
violence, threats and harassment experienced by
civilians continues to be a key hallmark of the conflict.
We must therefore send a strong message to the parties
that, with the conclusion of the revitalized political
Agreement, there is no justification for the continuation
of violence, which continues to exact a heavy toll on
the civilian population. We must once more call upon
them to demonstrate leadership by taking the necessary
steps to silence the guns, disengage forces, facilitate the
free and unhindered movement of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) and humanitarian
partners and reverse the massive humanitarian and
human toll of the conflict.

Several considerations of principle and practicality,
however, must continue to guide these deliberations,
including: first, the need for the protection of civilians
to remain a key priority within the broader framework
of the four pillars of the UNMISS mandate; secondly,
the requirement to preserve a single, unified force,
including a unified command and control structure, to
ensure the continued effectiveness of the peacekeeping
operation; and, finally, while UNMISS can contribute
to a secure environment conducive to progress in
implementing the Agreement, any further role in
support of the envisioned security arrangements must
be consistent with the principles of United Nations
peacekeeping, as well as the standards to which we hold
all troop- and police-contributing countries. At the same
time, we must ensure that any further tasks are subject
to the clear and detailed agreement of the parties to the
conflict, as well as the United Nations. That will ensure
that each task can be effectively carried out.

With regard to taking measures to address the
human rights and protection situation in the country, I
wish to note the recent finding of a military court that
10 soldiers were guilty of committing violence against
civilians at the Terrain Hotel in Juba, in July 2016. That
verdict is a first step towards delivering justice to the
victims of this war and curbing the culture of impunity.

Finally, we look forward to working with the
Council, IGAD, the AU Peace and Security Council, the
parties and all stakeholders to support the Agreement.

Let me end by reiterating that the signing of the
revitalized Agreement offers an opportunity for South

The President: I thank Mr. Lacroix for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Haysom.
Mr. Haysom: I thank you, Mr. President, for
this opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict

18-288803/24

S/PV.8356

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

in the Republic of South Sudan, which was signed by a
broad spectrum of political parties on 12 September in
Addis Ababa.
When I took up my present assignment, two years
ago, South Sudan was attempting to implement the
Agreement. As I prepare to leave, in two weeks’ time,
South Sudan is preparing to implement a revitalized
version of that same Agreement, but only after an
intervening two years of civil war and devastating
conflict. The important question that faces us is how
the international community and, notably, the United
Nations should assess, support or otherwise respond to
this important development.
At the outset, we need to acknowledge the
achievement of the Republic of Sudan, supported by
Uganda, in mediating the Agreement. Through the
Agreement the gap has narrowed among the parties
on a number of governance and security issues
that had previously seemed unbridgeable. Their
combined leverage, the presence of a hitherto absent
protagonist — Mr. Riek Machar — and energetic
diplomacy resulted in a signed agreement that
contemplates a pre-transition period of eight months and
a comprehensive transitional road map of three years.
There are nonetheless a number of gaps, issues whose
finalization remains unfinished and other reasons to
assert that the process will need the continuing attention
of the region and the international community.
Before dealing with those, let me emphasize that
in our approach we recognize that we should not make
the perfect the enemy of the good. We recognize that,
even where the Agreement can be considered flawed,
it could still be an effective platform for peace if the
parties demonstrate the political will to implement
it, deal collaboratively with the need to face down its
challenges and avoid the impulse to seek political, tribal
or regional advantage. In that regard, I have advised the
parties that the support of the international community
for the Agreement will follow an assessment of its
sustainability, and not simply the signatures to the text.
That now raises the question as to what sustainability
might mean with regard to the newly finalized text.
Fundamentally, our concerns relate to the following
six issues.
First, notwithstanding the efforts of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
facilitation team, we note that there are still a few, but
potentially significant, parties that continue to express
4/24

18/09/2018

reservations about the text. In addition, there are some
substantive governance issues that the text contemplates
will be resolved in due course. One such issue relates to
the number of sub-national states. That issue concerns
the very geography of the tribal authority and control.
The other issue concerns the way in which the South
Sudanese will make their national constitution — their
new, embracing social contract. Those issues are
indeed central, but not insurmountable if approached
in a spirit of inclusivity. That goes beyond a number
count of parties signing the Agreement, with a real
effort needed to ensure that no group or significant
community is left behind.
We have also alerted the parties of the need to
address the enforceability of the Agreement. We have
already noted the numerous cessation-of-hostility
agreements that have been violated within hours of the
parties recommitting to peace. No agreement can last
in the face of continuing violations for which there is
no penalty or consequence. That risks a response by the
South Sudanese as to what is different in this Agreement
from the previous failed agreements. In our view, the
Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements
Monitoring Mechanism for investigating, monitoring
and reporting violations is not the problem. It is what
happens to those reports that constitutes 80 per cent
of the system of accountability. If nothing happens to
the reports, the system simply does not work. In that
regard, we believe that the region must demonstrate
a commitment to make the Agreement effective,
including by confronting spoilers, even if those spoilers
include the Government of South Sudan.
With regard to the parties’ responsibilities, we
have pointed out that the first step is to demonstrate
their political intent by making the guns fall
silent — immediately and everywhere. Without such a
sign, the international community will be reluctant to
provide financial support.
That brings me to the third requirement for
sustainability, namely, financial resources, not least
to provide for the immediate cantonment of the
various forces. From my engagement with significant
potential donors, they have shown no or little appetite
to fund the process unless there is a clear provision
to ensure transparency and propriety in financial
transactions, including accountability for past
misappropriation of public funds.
18-28880

18/09/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV. 8356

The very low levels of trust among the parties
constitute one of the hurdles facing the implementation
of the Agreement. The prevalent spirit of rivalry will
be imported into the Government by virtue of the
fact that the parties and their leaders will likely be
competing candidates at the elections, which will be the
culmination of the transition. The Council should urge
the parties to undertake confidence-building measures
to build faith in the peace process and ameliorate the
bitterness and hostility, which is the legacy of the past
four years of horrible intercommunal violence. Such
measures do not require financial resources.

community, and the United Nations in particular, will
need to keep South Sudan and the implementation of its
latest peace Agreement under close watch.

Finally, detailed security arrangements and a
mutual meeting of the minds on such arrangements are
critical. In that regard, the parties may have a different
understanding on how the unification of forces will
take place. With regard to cantonment sites, there is
no agreement on where such sites will be, how many
will be established, who will be eligible or who will
be responsible for sustaining them. That is despite
the fact that today marks D-day plus six; cantonment
is contemplated to be completed by D-day plus 30. In
addition, there is no treatment, as of yet, of the security
gap or who will fill it when the men under arms
are cantoned.

Almost one and a half years ago, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) Assembly of Heads
of State and Government mandated the High-level
Revitalization Forum of the South Sudanese parties and
stakeholders to discuss concrete measures for achieving
a permanent ceasefire and the full and inclusive
implementation of the Agreement, as well as to develop
a revised and realistic timeline and implementation
schedule towards democratic elections at the end of the
transition period. The Assembly further mandated the
IGAD Council of Ministers to convene and facilitate
that process and instructed the Chairperson of the Joint
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission, the IGAD
secretariat and my Office to support the Council of
Ministers. I am happy to inform the Council today
that IGAD member States, together with the support
of Council members and the international community,
have successfully completed that noble process, with
all the South Sudanese parties and stakeholders signing
the revitalized Agreement.

Until the very last moment there was little or no
mention of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS), the fate of its mandate or changes to it in the
documents produced during the negotiations. Over the
past few days, a proposal to have the Sudan and Uganda
fill that gap transformed into a proposal for Uganda,
the Sudan, Djibouti and Somalia to be incorporated
into the UNMISS Regional Protection Force. What
arises from that is the need, referred to in the latest
IGAD summit communiqué and underscored by UnderSecretary-General Lacroix, for IGAD to engage with
the Council. Only the Council can determine the size
and composition of United Nation peacekeeping forces.
Such engagement would allow the Council to engage
on the security architecture, including the provision
of specialist, very important person protection
personnel, as well as the geography of disengagement
and separation, which would provide a more conducive
environment for a peacekeeping intervention.
Those issues do not prevent the revitalized
Agreement from being welcomed as a real step forward.
They can be resolved if the parties share and show a real
commitment to bring peace to South Sudan. On that, the
jury is still out. What is clear is that the international

The President: I thank Mr. Haysom for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Wais.
Mr. Wais: I very much welcome the opportunity to
address the Security Council today on the successful
recent conclusion of the High-level Revitalization
Forum on the Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan.

I would like to take this opportunity to very
briefly highlight our achievements and outcomes to
the Council. I will highlight some key progress made
following the decision of the IGAD Assembly at its
thirty-second extraordinary session, held in Addis
Ababa on 12 June, during which the Assembly, inter
alia, mandated His Excellency President Omer Hassan
Al-Bashir to facilitate the second round of face-to-face
discussions between President Salva Kiir and Mr. Riek
Machar to discuss and resolve the outstanding issues
on governance and security arrangements, including
measures proposed in the revised bridging proposal of
the IGAD Council of Ministers.
In accordance with the decision of the Assembly,
the Khartoum round of talks was launched on 25 June
as a continuation of the two phases of the High-level
Revitalization Forum and the face-to-face talks held in

18-288805/24

S/PV.8356

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Addis Ababa. The Khartoum talks followed the signing
of the Agreement on Cessation of Hostilities, Protection
of Civilians and Humanitarian Access, on 21 December
2017, and the initialling of several agreed governance
and security issues here in Addis Ababa. The Khartoum
talks, including a round of face-to-face meetings held in
Entebbe, Uganda, quickly produced results, including
an agreement between the two principals, namely,
President Kiir and former Vice-President Machar, to
work together to end the conflict.
Prior to the current revitalized Agreement, the
South Sudanese parties and stakeholders concluded the
following agreements: first, the Khartoum declaration
of agreement among the parties of the conflict of South
Sudan, signed on 27 June; secondly, the agreement on
the outstanding transitional security arrangements,
signed on 6 July; thirdly, the agreement on outstanding
governance issues for the transitional period, signed
on 25 July; and, lastly, the agreement on outstanding
issues of governance, signed on 5 August.
I am pleased to inform the Council that most
contentious issues were amicably resolved, and
the parties signed the revitalized Agreement on
12 September. The signing ceremony was witnessed by
IGAD Heads of State and Government. The signing of the
July text of the revitalized Agreement on the Resolution
of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan is a
milestone and marks the end of formal negotiations at
the High-level Revitalization Forum. However, the task
ahead of implementing the Agreement requires us all to
join hands and mobilize the requisite resources — both
political and financial — to make peace sustainable and
rejuvenate the rebuilding of the new South Sudan. The
signing of the revitalized Agreement was followed by
the development of a comprehensive implementation
matrix, initialled on 2 September. A permanent
transitional security arrangement workshop was
convened from 3 to 5 September, the outcome of which
the parties initialled.
The High-level Revitalization Forum was allinclusive process that enabled all parties to the
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in
the Republic of South Sudan, including estranged
groups and other South Sudanese stakeholders, faithbased groups, South Sudanese refugees, civil society
organizations and women and youth, to participate.
Allow me now briefly to update the Council on
some of the IGAD Assembly decisions. The Assembly
6/24

18/09/2018

decided that, until his final status is determined at the
upcoming Ordinary Summit of the IGAD Assembly,
the leader of the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement/
Army in Opposition Mr. Machar Teny, shall be allowed
to stay in a country of his choice in the region. The
Assembly also resolved that IGAD shall engage the
Security Council to ensure that the Regional Protection
Force (RPF) is fully deployed to execute its mandate
in accordance with resolutions 2304 (2016) and
2406 (2018), and shall request a further review of its
mandate to allow the Sudan, Uganda, Djibouti and
Somalia, as guarantors, to contribute forces to enhance
protection and security throughout the implementation
of the revitalized Agreement. The Assembly further
mandated the IGAD Chiefs of Staff to assess the
operational needs and elaborate the necessary tasks
of the RPF in the light of the current situation on the
ground, and the prospected expansion, as a basis for
a securing endorsement from the African Union Peace
and Security Council and the Security Council.
As I conclude, allow me to congratulate all the
South Sudanese parties on this historic occasion. The
determination and resilience has paid off. I thank the
Chairperson of the IGAD Council of Ministers, Council
members, the high-level facilitators, the Chairperson of
the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission and
the Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements
Monitoring Mechanism and members of the task force
for the enormous support to the process, without which
we would not have come this far. My special thanks
also go to the Government of the Sudan, which hosted
the process for the past three months. The Government
spared no time, effort or resources to lead the process
to success. The role of His Excellency Mr. Eldirdiri
Mohamed Ahmed, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Sudan, was outstanding. I wholeheartedly thank the
African Union Commission, the United Nations, the
European Union, the troika on South Sudan, China,
Japan and members of the IGAD Partners Forum for
their contribution to the process.
Finally, I want again to express my sincere
appreciation and gratitude to you, Mr. President, for
this opportunity to brief the Security Council. I look
forward to closely working with you in implementing
the revitalized Agreement. Security challenges, the
dark humanitarian situation in and the rebuilding of
South Sudan requires our collective action.
The President: I thank Mr. Wais for his briefing.
18-28880

18/09/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

I now give the floor to Ms. John.
Ms. John: I would like to thank the United
States presidency for this opportunity to speak to the
Security Council today on behalf of the Community
Empowerment for Progress Organization. I also speak
on behalf of the South Sudan Civil Society Forum, a
coalition of over 200 groups working to promote peace,
freedom and respect for human dignity.
On 12 September, the people of South Sudan
welcomed the news that the Government and opposition
groups had signed the revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan. After close to five years of war, we desperately
cling to the hope that the commitment of the parties is
genuine and that they will implement the Agreement in
a timely manner.
We know that whatever peace the Agreement
brings about will be very fragile. On 14 September,
the ceasefire monitoring body announced that it would
conduct investigations into an alleged breach of the
agreement in the Yei area. On 15 September, the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) announced
that a peacekeeper had been shot by a Government
soldier in the same area. Those are worrying signs. The
Security Council must continue to insist on respect for
the ceasefire.
Our peace is fragile because some opposition
groups declined to sign the Peace Agreement, and
others were not party to the negotiations. The Security
Council should call for the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) to support continued outreach
to, and engagement with, those groups, so that they
also join hands to support the Peace Agreement. Even
among the parties that did sign, there must be continued
efforts to build trust and confidence among them\ and
to ensure that they can effectively work together in the
same Government, towards a common goal.
This peace is fragile because there is complete
impunity within my country. Violations of human
rights and humanitarian law rarely result in criminal
prosecution. We believe that there must be some
effective and reliable deterrent to prevent rampant rape,
extrajudicial killings and obstruction of humanitarian
access, which have become all too normal in South
Sudan. We urge the Security Council to insist on the
immediate establishment of a hybrid court for South
Sudan and to support efforts to strengthen the national
criminal justice system.

S/PV. 8356

Competition over resources and cattle raiding
regularly trigger local violence in South Sudan. The
divisions among ethnic communities have grown so
deep that it is sometimes difficult for us to coexist with
each other. My organization is supporting communities
to engage in dialogue and resolve differences without
violence. We urge the Security Council to call for
increased support to local peace initiatives and for
the timely establishment of the commission for truth,
reconciliation and healing that is provided for in the
Peace Agreement.
The South Sudanese people are concerned about
reports that Ugandan and Sudanese forces entered
the country over the past month. While Presidents
Museveni and Al-Bashir played a role in helping parties
reach the revitalized Agreement, we are concerned
that the presence of their forces could have negative
security implications, since they are not yet under a
United Nations mandate. The Council must urge South
Sudan’s neighbours to respect the Security Council
arms embargo and insist that any forces entering under
the pretext of the Peace Agreement come only as part of
the Security Council-mandated peacekeeping mission.
We urge the Security Council to help ensure that
our peace does not fall apart. Peace requires that we
South Sudanese be honest with ourselves. We must be
free to openly deliberate and debate the governance
challenges we face, including corruption and impunity.
The Peace Agreement provides specific roles for civil
society and women and youth representatives in many
of the bodies it sets up. They will join bodies tasked
with planning security-sector reforms, monitoring the
ceasefire, ensuring reconstruction in conflict-affected
areas and providing reparations to those most affected
by violence. But, in a context where critical voices
are silent, where peace, human rights and political
activists — such as Dong Samuel Luak, Aggrey Idri,
Peter Biar Ajak, Bashir Ahmed and many others — are
disappeared or arbitrarily detained, no one will be free
to contribute effectively to those bodies or to speak up
when the Agreement is not being implemented. I ask
the Council to please continue its calls for respect for
the freedom of expression and for the release of those
who are arbitrarily detained.
South Sudanese women participated in the
negotiation of the revitalized Agreement, and one of
their major achievements is the increase of required
women’s participation in Government from 25 per cent
to 35 per cent. That is something to celebrate, but it

18-288807/24

S/PV.8356

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

is also a call to action: to ensure that it is effectively
implemented and that women are able to participate
equally in decision-making. The Security Council
should call for all parties to uphold their commitment to
women’s full and meaningful participation in the Peace
Agreement. The implementation and monitoring of the
South Sudan national action plan on resolution 1325
(2000) can also contribute towards achieving that goal.
We urge the Security Council to pressure the parties
to the Agreement to honour the ceasefire and implement
it in a timely manner; ensure that humanitarian access
and the safety of humanitarian workers remain a top
priority; accelerate efforts to ensure transitional
justice in South Sudan; call on the Secretary-General
and his Special Representative on Sexual Violence in
Conflict to formally launch the implementation plan for
the signed joint communiqué of October 2014 on the
prevention of conflict-related sexual violence; remain
committed to the protection of civic space and the
freedom of expression; ensure that any involvement by
the Sudan and Uganda in South Sudan’s internal security
is supported by the United Nations; call for UNMISS to
prioritize issues related to accountability in all support
to the military and security forces, including in reform
efforts; and call for support from the international
community in facilitating the reconciliation process
among the political elites in South Sudan.
Finally, we urge the Security Council to continue
engaging with civil society in country-specific
briefings, in particular concerning Syria, Burundi,
Yemen, Uganda and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, as well as in its future discussions on
South Sudan.
The President: I thank Ms. John for her briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the United States of America.
We would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Lacroix for his update on the implementation of the
mandate of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS), as well as to thank to him and Mr. Wais for
the discussion of political dynamics and developments
in South Sudan. We are thankful to be able to take
advantage of Special Envoy Haysom’s knowledge with
only a few days left in his assignment, and we thank him
for being here. We sincerely appreciate that Ms. Grace
John joined us at such a late hour, as her perspective
helps us understand the situation on the ground in
South Sudan and is critical to our discussion here today.
8/24

18/09/2018

The United States continues to support the people
of South Sudan and their aspirations for freedom,
peace and prosperity. We welcome the commitment of
the region to come together to address common peace
and security priorities for the benefit of its citizens.
We want to see that commitment translated into lasting
peace for the people of South Sudan.
The United States acknowledges the revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in
the Republic of South Sudan, but past failures
make us concerned about the sustainability of the
Agreement — for example, how should we interpret
the fact that military offensives have been undertaken
in violation of numerous ceasefire agreements, even
during recent negotiations? How can we reconcile
continued blockages to humanitarian access and the
killing of 13 humanitarian workers since January?
How can we explain the ongoing detention of political
prisoners, including Peter Biar Ajak? There has to be a
radical change in the behaviour of South Sudan’s leaders
and a demonstrated commitment to peace, inclusivity,
financial accountability and good governance before
we, as the Security Council, should welcome any
agreement. Otherwise, we are turning a blind eye to
past failures.
The implementation of the latest Agreement must
begin with the greatest confidence-building measure of
all — an end to fighting. It must be broadly inclusive
of ordinary people across South Sudan: civil society,
religious communities, ethnic minorities and other
groups. The Kiir Government needs to ensure greater
and more representative power-sharing. There must be
meaningful checks on executive and majority power.
The United States supports the continued
engagement of the region to facilitate the implementation
of the Agreement and acknowledges the role of the
Sudan and Ethiopia in hosting recent negotiations. We
urge the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) member States and the African Union (AU)
to intensify their involvement in monitoring progress
on implementation and to hold the parties to account.
Violations of the Agreement should be highlighted, and
those responsible need to face consequences.
The United States calls on all nations to implement
the United Nations arms embargo that the Security
Council adopted just over two months ago. We must
continue to demonstrate that we will take action against
individuals or entities who threaten the peace, security
18-28880

18/09/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

or stability of South Sudan, if these agreements are to
have any chance of successful implementation.
The United States will also prepare sanctions on
additional individuals or entities who engage in corrupt
activity. We call on regional leaders and financial
institutions to ensure the proceeds from corrupt activity
do not flow through their jurisdictions and to freeze
assets connected to illicit transactions. There must also
be accountability for the crimes of recent years. The
establishment and activation of the AU hybrid court for
South Sudan is long past due. That is an urgent priority.
We call our AU partners to make the court a reality, as
called for in the latest Agreement.
The United Nations Mission in South Sudan
has played, and will continue to play, a vital role in
keeping the peace in South Sudan. In this fragile and
uncertain transition to peace, it is important that the
UNMISS mandate continue to focus on the protection
of civilians, while properly configuring the Mission to
address evolving risks and realities on the ground.
The United States notes with deep appreciation and
deep concern the dire conflict-induced humanitarian
situation in South Sudan. An estimated 7 million
people currently require humanitarian assistance, and
over 4 million of them are children.
For the third year running, South Sudan remains one
of the most dangerous environments — if not the most
dangerous environment — for aid workers in the world.
We need urgent actions to address the egregious access
denials, rent-seeking impediments by the Government
and the violence that endangers humanitarians.
Refugees and internally displaced persons must not be
forced to return if they feel unsafe. The end of fighting
must not mean a call for forced repatriation.
Above all, we support the aspirations of the people
of South Sudan to lead lives unburdened by fear and to
experience peace, pluralism and prosperity. In a recent
interview, the Archbishop of South Sudan, Justin Badi
Arama, put it best: “peace is not something on paper;
peace is something which is deeper”. It is now time for
the leaders of South Sudan to demonstrate that their
commitments on paper can lead to a genuine peace and
a prosperous future for the people of South Sudan.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.

S/PV. 8356

Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): We thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Lacroix and Special Envoy Haysom for their
respective briefings. As this is likely to be the last
time that Mr. Haysom briefs the Security Council in
his current capacity, let me express our appreciation to
him for all his dedicated efforts as Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Sudan and South Sudan. We
congratulate him on his appointment as the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia
and we look forward to continue working with him in
his new capacity.
We are pleased to have Special Envoy Ambassador
Wais via video tele-conference from Addis Ababa.
His briefing on developments regarding the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development-led
(IGAD) South Sudanese peace process is, as always,
exceptionally valuable. We in the region are indeed
very grateful to him and his team for their efforts
during this difficult peace process. They greatly
facilitated the successful completion of the High-level
Revitalization Forum.
I also thank Grace John for her remarks, and
welcome Ambassador Malwal of South Sudan to the
United Nations today.
We are now presented with a historic opportunity
to end the cycle of vicious violence in South Sudan
and bring about tangible results for the people of
South Sudan, who have suffered for far too long. The
South Sudanese parties should be commended for
demonstrating the necessary flexibility in order to sign
the final revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of
the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan, done at
Addis Ababa in the presence of IGAD Heads of State
and Government. Efforts by the countries of the region
in helping the parties bridge their differences should
also be recognized. They really worked in unison to
ensure the successful completion of the IGAD Highlevel Revitalization Forum.
What makes this final revised Agreement unique
is that, unlike its predecessor, all the parties signed it
without trying to add any reservations. Furthermore,
the peace process was conducted in an all-inclusive
and transparent manner. All political organizations,
including estranged groups, were fully involved in
the consultations and negotiations. Civil society
organizations, faith leaders, women’s and youth groups
and eminent persons all participated actively. We hope

18-288809/24

S/PV.8356

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

that will provide a firm and realistic foundation for the
full implementation of the Agreement.
We are of course aware of the divisions within the
ranks of the South Sudan Opposition Alliance over
the Peace Agreement. However, most of the member
groups of that umbrella organization signed the Peace
Agreement. We are optimistic that the holdout groups
will decide to embrace the Agreement and continue
to play a positive role in ensuring that South Sudan
remains on a positive trajectory.
We know very well that a difficult task lies
ahead. The full implementation of the revised Peace
Agreement must now be our priority, and that demands
the concerted efforts of all. We must ensure the full and
continued commitment of all parties; they are the first
and foremost guarantors of the implementation of the
Agreement. Given the actions by some parties in the
past, we can understand why members of the Council
have concerns about this. However, that cannot be an
excuse to ignore the significance of the revised Peace
agreement for peace and security — not only in terms
of its impact on South Sudan but on the whole region.
The parties themselves are aware of those concerns. We
believe they will do their utmost to demonstrate their
commitment to the full and effective implementation of
the revised Peace Agreement.
Throughout the long-drawn-out High-level
Revitalization Forum process, the support and assistance
of the African Union (AU), the United Nations, IGAD
partners and the wider international community were
indispensable. It is critically important that that support
now be extended during the implementation phase.
Maintaining unity of purpose among IGAD, the AU
and the United Nations in the search for lasting peace,
security and stability in South Sudan is necessary today
more than ever.
We believe that the Security Council has a
particular role to play in ensuring the implementation
of the revised Peace Agreement. The IGAD Summit
requested the support of the Council in ensuring the
full deployment of the Regional Protection Force and
a further review of its mandate so that it will be in a
better position to support the implementation of the
revised Peace Agreement. We hope the Council will
respond positively to that request. We will work closely
with the penholder and members of the Council to look
for the appropriate way to accommodate the request of
the IGAD Summit.
10/24

18/09/2018

Humanitarian and economic conditions in South
Sudan remain dire. Therefore, we must remain
concerned about the fragile security situation. The
immediate cessation of all hostilities is absolutely
necessary to deal with such challenges. Last week,
the IGAD Summit called upon the Government and
opposition groups to prioritize the implementation of
the permanent ceasefire on the cessation of hostilities,
the protection of civilians and humanitarian access.
The restoration of a permanent ceasefire is essential
for unhindered access to the affected population
and for the safety of humanitarian personnel and
assistance delivery.
The continuous support of the international
community is also critical. It has done a great deal,
but the 50 per cent funding gap to the humanitarian
response plan for South Sudan means that the collective
ability of humanitarian actors to meet people’s needs
is seriously constrained. We would hope that the
international community will step up its efforts in
providing the much-needed humanitarian assistance to
the affected population of South Sudan.
Let me repeat that we now have a real prospect
for responding effectively to provide solutions to the
problems in South Sudan. Now is the time to act. We
cannot afford to lose this opportunity.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): First, let
me express our thanks to Mr. Lacroix, Mr. Haysom,
Mr. Wais and Ms. John for their informative briefings.
I would like to take a moment to thank Nicholas
Haysom for his service as Special Envoy for the Sudan
and South Sudan and congratulate him on his new
position as Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia. We look forward to continuing our
close cooperation with him.
Today’s briefing on South Sudan comes at a
decisive time in the country’s history, as its leaders
signed a new Peace Agreement last week. As leaders
in South Sudan show their willingness for a renewed
commitment to peace in South Sudan, it is imperative
that the Council remain engaged. We must continue to
ensure that the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) can support the people of South Sudan in
achieving sustainable peace. In that context, I will focus
on three issues: the political process, accountability
and UNMISS.
18-28880

18/09/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

First, with regard to the importance of an inclusive
and genuine political process, we express appreciation
to all of the parties involved in the signing of the Peace
Agreement on 12 September. Let me especially thank
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development. This
is another chance at peace for South Sudan, and we call
upon all signatories to ensure that the Agreement is
respected and implemented. President Salva Kiir and
Riek Machar have a great and grave responsibility. It is
imperative that the peace process be inclusive. We must
not be naive — reaching an agreement on power-sharing
and security will not automatically lead to sustainable
peace. Building and sustaining peace in South Sudan
will require addressing the root causes of the conflict
and the commitment and inclusion of all actors.
Let me also stress the important role that the region
plays in ensuring a political process with concrete
results. Following unrelenting violence in South Sudan,
the Security Council imposed targeted sanctions and
an arms embargo in July of this year. Such measures
must be implemented and adhered to, especially by the
region. We consider the action taken on the ground to
be tentative steps in the right direction. For such steps
to endure, we must continue the targeted sanctions and
arms embargo, as they are crucial for ensuring peace in
South Sudan. The steps are indicative of the Council’s
resolve to end the violence and protect civilians.
Secondly, concerning the need to ensure the
accountability of all actors in the conflict, we would
like to express our appreciation to the Government
of South Sudan for convicting 10 military officials
for the murders and rapes committed at the Terrain
Hotel in Juba. The Government of South Sudan
must build upon that important first step to ensuring
accountability. Once again, the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2018/831) paints a horrifying picture. Sexual
violence in South Sudan is brutal, widespread and
systematic. It is despicable. We call upon the South
Sudanese Government to investigate all crimes. All
perpetrators of violence must be brought to justice,
in particular those responsible for the despicable acts
of sexual violence against women and girls. Impunity
must end. Accountability is key for building sustainable
peace. We firmly believe that the hybrid court for South
Sudan is a key instrument in ensuring accountability
for perpetrators. We call upon the Government of
South Sudan to sign the memorandum of understanding
with the African Union to finally establish that
necessary court.

S/PV. 8356

Thirdly, with regard to the role of UNMISS, in
order to adequately protect civilians, UNMISS and
other United Nations staff and humanitarian workers
must have unrestricted access to all parts of South
Sudan. Freedom of movement for both UNMISS and
the Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements
Monitoring Mechanism is absolutely imperative. The
maintenance and implementation of the Monitoring
Mechanism is crucial, especially following the
signing of the new Peace Agreement. The Council
must strongly condemn all violations of the status-offorces agreement and ensure that they are adequately
addressed. On that note, we condemn the recent attacks
against peacekeepers and humanitarian workers. There
have been two incidents, which resulted in either the
death or serious injury of peacekeepers. On 26 June, a
Bangladeshi Blue Helmet lost his life. On 15 September,
three days after the signing of the Peace Agreement, a
Nepalese Blue Helmet was injured. Our thoughts are
with the families and friends of those peacekeepers.
The attacks must end. Furthermore, we are increasingly
concerned about rising tensions in protection-of-civilian
camps. We encourage the voluntary return of internally
displaced persons from protection-of-civilian sites.
We believe that UNMISS should develop plans and
strategies to ensure that the Mission is able to protect
civilians at protection-of-civilian camps. It must do so
in close coordination with other humanitarian actors.
The protection of civilians is one of the most important
tasks in the UNMISS mandate.
In conclusion, we are committed to building
sustainable peace in South Sudan. We look forward
to continuing to support the South Sudanese people in
building a more hopeful future for themselves — one in
which they are not plagued by the scourge of war and
hunger, but, rather, can live together in peace.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I join
others in thanking our briefers.
The signing of the revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan of 2015 is encouraging, and I welcome it on
behalf of France. I also commend the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development and the countries of the
region, as well as its Special Envoy Ismail Wais,
who contributed to the finalization of the revitalized
Agreement. France will continue to support the efforts
of all partners. Such efforts must be inclusive in order
to find a solution to the crisis and end the violence.
We hope that the Agreement will enable us to move

18-2888011/24

S/PV.8356

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

towards lasting peace in South Sudan. It is our hope and
that of millions of South Sudanese who long for peace
and a better life.
Ms. Grace John, from whom we have just heard,
is the face of a fledgling South Sudanese civil society
that wishes to start a new chapter. But we know that
hopes have already been dashed several times in
South Sudan, and we must therefore collectively be
vigilant and determined. We must be vigilant, first
of all, because it is on the actions taken that we will
judge the progress made. The Agreement reached
must be effectively implemented on the ground. No
one — neither the South Sudanese nor the international
community — wants peace on paper alone. We will
therefore be vigilant in ensuring compliance with the
ceasefire and in protecting civilians, which is at the
heart of the mandate of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS), as Under-Secretary-General
Jean-Pierre Lacroix has just reminded us, and is at the
heart of the Security Council’s concerns. As Special
Envoy Haysom has just pointed out, it will also be
necessary to specify the mechanisms for monitoring
compliance with the commitments made.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/831)
refers to the progress on the ground in recent months.
But that progress is still far too modest. Several violent
and deadly incidents have occurred. And, as early
as Friday, a few hours after the signing of the Peace
Agreement, the ceasefire was violated in the Central
Equatoria region. The next day, Saturday, 15 September,
an UNMISS soldier was wounded by a soldier of the
South Sudanese Army in the town of Yei, which is an
unacceptable attack for which those responsible will
have to face justice. In that context, I would like to
express France’s solidarity with UNMISS personnel.
France will equally be, and we must all be,
extremely vigilant about humanitarian access and the
protection of humanitarian workers who go to the aid of
populations to the point of risking their lives. France’s
unwavering commitment on that subject is well known.
The humanitarian challenge is huge. Indeed,
on this point, the report of the Secretary-General is
edifying: 1.8 million displaced persons, 2.5 million
refugees in neighbouring countries, 60 per cent of the
population in a situation of severe food insecurity and
2.4 million children unable to go to school. Behind
the litany of numbers, an entire generation is being
sacrificed. Dangerous intercommunity tensions are also
12/24

18/09/2018

being rekindled by poverty. In addition to this tragic
humanitarian situation, there have been serious human
rights violations, some of which may constitute crimes
against humanity and war crimes. That is a cause of
major concern for France. It is high time that the hybrid
court be established and made operational.
In addition to the necessary vigilance, we must
also demonstrate determination and perseverance. We
must collectively respond to humanitarian challenges.
We must also stand firm with regard to those who
bear responsibility for this situation, which is the
meaning of the sanctions adopted by the Council. And
we are determined to continue along this path as long
as necessary.
The Council can therefore count on France’s
determination. It is the same determination that
leads us to give our full support to the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendations to alleviate the suffering
of the people, silence the weapons and move forward
towards peace.
In conclusion, I would like to warmly thank Special
Envoy Haysom for his outstanding work over the past
two years and wish him every success in his new
responsibilities as the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Somalia.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Allow me to begin by
thanking Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
Special Envoy Nicholas Haysom, Special Envoy Ismail
Wais and Ms. Grace John, for their informative and
thought-provoking briefings.
Poland welcomes the recent positive developments
in the peace process and the signing of the revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in
South Sudan. We commend the regional efforts
that led to the Agreement, in particular the role of
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
Ethiopia and the Sudan. Nevertheless we are cautiously
optimistic. We have seen South Sudanese parties sign
many agreements only to violate them later. We truly
believe this time all signatories will demonstrate real
commitment and determination to bring durable peace
and stability to South Sudan.
Unfortunately, despite those positive developments,
the Agreement seems yet to have an impact on the
situation of the people of South Sudan. The security,
humanitarian and economic situations remain dire.
Targeted attacks on civilians, including women and
18-28880

18/09/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

children, continue. Serious human rights violations
and abuses and violations of humanitarian law persist,
and their perpetrators enjoy impunity. Millions of
South Sudanese are displaced, and more than half of
the population is suffering food insecurity. It all has
to come to an end. There is no doubt that the people
of South Sudan critically need stability and State
institutions that care for citizens and provide basic
services. It is high time the political leaders of South
Sudan put aside their differences and put the people of
South Sudan first.
In that context, I would like to stress the importance
of political inclusiveness and ensuring women’s and
young people’s participation in political and peace
processes in South Sudan. It is our strong belief
that South Sudanese women can play a vital role in
peacebuilding and reconciliation efforts, as well as in
forging resilience.
I would like to express our appreciation to the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) for
its tireless efforts in extremely difficult circumstances.
We praise the Mission’s role in the protection of
civilians and in ensuring an environment conducive for
humanitarian actors to deliver their assistance. We pay
tribute to its members who have paid the highest price
during their service in South Sudan.
We condemn in the strongest terms the attacks on
UNMISS forces and reiterate that such crimes must
not go unpunished. We also remind the Government of
South Sudan of all its obligations under the status-offorces agreement.
Let me conclude by thanking Special Envoy Haysom
for his hard work, tireless efforts and commitment
to supporting the peace process in South Sudan. We
congratulate him on his new appointment as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia
and wish him every success in his new endeavour.
Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): We thank UnderSecretary-General Lacroix, Special Envoy Haysom and
Special Envoy Wais for their comprehensive updates
on the latest developments in South Sudan. We also
commend Grace John, civil society representative, for
her valuable insights.
My country welcomes the recent report of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/831) and would like
concentrate on three key issues, as follows.

S/PV. 8356

First of all, our delegation would like to congratulate
the people and the Government of South Sudan
for finalizing the revitalized Peace Agreement on
12 September. We highly commend the concerted work
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), the African Union and the United Nations, as
well as the mediation efforts of Prime Minister Abiy
Ahmed of Ethiopia, and of Presidents Omar Al-Bashir
of the Sudan and Yoweri Museveni of Uganda, which
helped to secure the peace deal. The Agreement has
become a great example of the cherished notion of
African solutions for African problems.
Secondly, we hope that this historic Agreement,
signed after five years of fighting, will lay the foundation
for durable peace and stability in the country and
finally end the suffering of the South Sudanese people.
To achieve that, the Security Council needs to remain
united in support of IGAD, the African Union and the
parties in South Sudan in implementing the provisions
of the Agreement. The international community
should make every effort to build trust and confidence
among the parties and provide adequate and sustained
funding for humanitarian assistance, peacebuilding
and economic development. For their part, the South
Sudanese parties need to demonstrate genuine political
will in order to implement the Agreement, stop the
ongoing violence by bringing their forces under control
and strictly comply with international humanitarian
law. Civil society, especially women and youth
groups, also have an important role in assisting with
intercommunal reconciliation and confidence-building
among local populations.
Thirdly, we strongly condemn the recent attack on
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
in Yei and call on the Government to investigate
the attack and hold the perpetrators accountable.
Accordingly, we support the African Union’s Silencing
the Guns by 2020 programme, as underlined today
by Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and Special
Envoy Haysom. We also endorse the recommendation
of Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Haysom to undertake confidence-building measures.
We thank him for his exemplary work and cordially
congratulate him on his new appointment. We wish
him all the best and look forward to dialogue and trust
being restored throughout the Horn of Africa region,
which will have been made possible by his noble and
tireless efforts.

18-2888013/24

S/PV.8356

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

18/09/2018

In conclusion, we would like to thank UNMISS for
implementing its mandated tasks under very difficult
circumstances, and commend Under-Secretary-General
Lacroix, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Shearer and Special Envoys Haysom and Wais,
as well as civil society and international, regional
and subregional organizations and other stakeholders,
for their tireless efforts and commitment to seeking a
solution to the crisis in the country.

Secondly, with regard to the humanitarian situation,
the continued displacement of 1.8 million inhabitants of
South Sudan and 2.5 million refugees in neighbouring
countries is a great source of concern for all of us. In
addition, large segments of the population suffer from
food insecurity. In that regard, we recall resolution
2417 (2018), on hunger and conflict, whose paragraph 7
urges the protection of infrastructure in order to deliver
humanitarian assistance, including nutrition.

Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General to the Sudan and South Sudan, the
Special Envoy of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) and the representative of
the Organization for Community Empowerment for
Progress in South Sudan for their valuable briefings.

Peace will be incomplete without improving the
living conditions of the population. We hope that the
signing of the Peace Agreement will be an opportunity
to prepare areas for the refugees and displaced persons
in South Sudan so as to be an integral part of the society.
We express our appreciation for the role of Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
in securing the safety of refugees before their return,
and we emphasize the need to not target humanitarian
workers, while also condemning every impediment to
their noble task.

I would like to address four aspects of the topic
we are discussing today: the political developments,
the humanitarian situation, the mandate of the United
Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan
(UNMISS) and the security situation.
First, with regard to the political developments,
the Security Council is meeting today after the signing
of the revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan, and after
tireless efforts by members of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development and international partners
to revitalize the Agreement for the Resolution of the
Conflict in South Sudan. We express our appreciation
to the signatories of the Agreement and hope that the
non-signatories will join the peace process soon. We
also express our appreciation for the constructive
participation of the Government of South Sudan in the
peace process.
We would also like to welcome the role of the
Republic of the Sudan in supporting the negotiations.
In that regard, we refer to the resolution of the Council
of Ministers of the League of Arab States adopted at its
hundred and fiftieth session, at which the significant
role of the Sudan was appreciated in hosting and
facilitating the peace negotiations in South Sudan.
We would like as well to express our appreciation
for the significant role of IGAD members in pursuing
and promoting peace. We look forward to the result
of the revitalized Agreement in resolving the conflict
in South Sudan so as to turn a new page based on
reconciliation, justice, reconstruction and development.
14/24

Thirdly, with regard to the Mission’s mandate,
UNMISS should continue its work without obstructions
while respecting the laws and charters that govern its
operation. We welcome the military court’s verdict
against the perpetrators of the Terrain Hotel incident.
We look forward to accountability being applied to
all criminals. We also recall the attack suffered by
the Mission while escorting a humanitarian convoy in
Central Equatoria state. We welcome the news of the
arrest of the person responsible for that disgraceful act.
We thank the Mission and express our appreciation
for its work through the implementation of its mandate
in line with resolution 2406 (2018), including simple
matters that the Mission has implemented, such
as presenting gifts to Al-Sabah Hospital and Juba
Teaching Hospital.
Fourthly, with regard to the security situation,
we are concerned by the violations of the Ceasefire
Agreement and the reciprocal accusations, in particular
in Central Equatoria state, despite the progress
achieved in the peace process. We would also like to
applaud the operation of the Ceasefire and Transition
Security Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism and
the transparency with which it publishes its reports.
We thank His Excellency Mr. Festus Mogae for his
effective and active role in chairing the Joint Monitoring
and Evaluation Commission. We look forward to
continued unity among the Security Council, IGAD
18-28880

18/09/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV. 8356

and the international community in order to support
and protect the work of the Joint Committee and the
Monitoring Mechanism.

of human rights and international humanitarian law,
including sexual violence and the recruitment of
children for conflict.

Finally, we thank Mr. Nicholas Haysom for his
efforts as the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
and we wish him every success in his new position as
Representative of the Secretary-General in Somalia.

The parties’ commitment to building sustainable
peace must also lead to strengthening the cooperation
and national capacities required to meet the urgent
needs of the people and to promote the sustainable
development of the country, in particular in the areas
of health care, nutrition and education. To that end, we
believe that the recent visit of Deputy Secretary-General
Amina Mohammed and the emphasis placed on the
participation of women in the political life of the country
are important, as is the need to take specific measures
to address sexual and gender-based violence. The
withdrawal of armed and security forces who are alleged
perpetrators of crimes is one of the recommendations
put forward by the Special Representative on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, which will be important to
consider for the purposes of preventing and punishing
conflict-related sexual violence.

Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful
for the convening of this meeting and for the important
briefings by Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Mr. Nicholas
Haysom, Mr. Ismail Wais and Ms. Grace John.
Peru welcomes the signing of the revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in South
Sudan. We would like to highlight the good offices
deployed for that purpose by the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) and the Governments
of the subregion.
However, we must recall the repeated violations
of the Ceasefire Agreement and other commitments
undertaken by the parties, which clearly have
undermined their credibility. South Sudan is the most
violent country in terms of providing humanitarian
assistance, despite the status-of-forces agreement
signed by the Government in connection with the
United Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan
(UNMISS).

We also believe that it is necessary that the Council
remain united in its support for the South Sudanese
peace process and maintain close coordination with
the African Union and IGAD. We hope that the recent
Peace Agreement and the winds of change in the Horn
of Africa subregion will be the start of a new era for the
people of South Sudan.

We would like to stress the importance of the
South Sudanese parties remaining committed to the
implementation of the new Peace Agreement. The
people of the country and the international community
need to see a substantive change in their actions in
order to be able to support sustainable peace.

In conclusion, we would like to make mention of
the crucial role and efforts of Mr. Nicholas Haysom
as Special Envoy for the Sudan and South Sudan and
wish him every success in his new and sensitive post as
Special Representative and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia.

In that regard, we express our regret with regard to
the high number of fatalities caused by clashes between
communities. The Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights and UNMISS have documented the
magnitude of forced displacements, attacks against
civilians and the particular vulnerability of women and
children. Against that background, we would like to
highlight the important initiatives involving traditional
leaders that have been promoted by UNMISS in order
to promote social cohesion, dialogue and reconciliation,
as well as the efforts of UNMISS to protect civilians,
especially the most vulnerable.

Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, for
his briefing on the report of the Secretary-General on
South Sudan (S/2018/831), which provides an update on
developments in South Sudan and on the extent of the
challenges to peace and stability faced by the country
since the start of the conflict in 2013. We also thank
Mr. Nicholas Haysom, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for the Sudan and South Sudan; Ambassador
Ismail Wais, Special Envoy of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development for South Sudan, and
Ms. Grace John, Governance and Peace Manager for
Community Empowerment for Progress Organization,
for their excellent briefings. We congratulate

We underscore the need for the Government of South
Sudan to develop capacities to investigate, prosecute
and punish serious allegations of violations and abuses

18-2888015/24

S/PV.8356

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Mr. Haysom on his outstanding work as Special Envoy
for the Sudan and South Sudan and wish him every
success in his new post and efforts to achieve peace
in Somalia.
My delegation’s remarks on the report of the
Secretary-General will focus on political and security
issues, the humanitarian situation, human rights and the
operational environment of the United Nations Mission
in Southern Sudan (UNMISS).
On the political front, like those who spoke before,
my delegation welcomes the signing, on 12 September,
by the parties to the conflict of the revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in South
Sudan. We commend the tireless mediation efforts of
the region’s leaders, who made a major contribution
to the signing of the Agreement. It is now up to the
authorities of South Sudan to commit to its full and
inclusive implementation so that the South Sudanese
people can enjoy the peace and stability for which they
have longed for more than five years.
Côte d’Ivoire encourages the South Sudanese
parties to take full advantage of the positive regional
dynamic and fully commit to working to restore
peace and stability to their country, by refraining
from unilateral acts that could disrupt a smooth peace
process. To that end, it is essential that the authorities
of South Sudan receive technical and financial support
from the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
the African Union, the United Nations and other
partners. In addition, measures must be taken to restore
trust among the parties and create a climate conducive
to constructive dialogue, which is a prerequisite for the
effective and efficient implementation of the Agreement.
On the security front, my delegation is deeply
dismayed about the ongoing intercommunity conflicts
and criminal acts in the country. Furthermore,
continuing clashes in several parts of the country, in
particular in Upper Nile, Bahr el-Ghazal and Equatoria,
and their tragic consequences on the population, are
also a source of concern. Given the situation, Côte
d’Ivoire would like to urge the Government of South
Sudan to step up efforts to protect civilians, who,
under international law, are its primary responsibility.
It also calls on South Sudanese parties to put the
best interests of the people first and end the clashes
throughout the country so that there is a chance for
the Peace Agreement to be effectively implemented
16/24

18/09/2018

and for security arrangements to be operationalized, in
accordance with the voluntary commitments made.
Recurring violations of international humanitarian
law in South Sudan are widespread; ending them must
be an absolute priority. With approximately 1.8 million
internally displaced persons, 2.5 million refugees and
high food insecurity risks, the humanitarian situation in
South Sudan remains one of the most unpredictable in
the world. According to the Secretary General’s report,
approximately 2.4 million children receive no education,
which poses a threat not only for the next generation
but also to the building of a viable State. In addition,
deliberate challenges to humanitarian assistance are on
the rise. Despite constant calls from the international
community, humanitarian workers continue to work
in an environment of extreme violence. Côte d’Ivoire
condemns all acts of violence committed against
humanitarian personnel and equipment. We call on the
leaders of South Sudan to create a security environment
conducive to the provision of humanitarian assistance
and the safe and dignified return of displaced persons
to their homes.
With regard to the human rights situation, my
country notes with deep concern the persistence of
sexual violence, violence against children and the
destruction of property and people’s livelihoods. It is
therefore imperative to ensure the implementation of
the principle of accountability, so that the perpetrators
of human rights violations are held accountable for their
actions before the competent international courts. In
that regard, my country welcomes the conviction of 10
Government soldiers for rape and other crimes against
civilians. We call on political and judicial authorities
to make greater efforts to establish the rule of law in
South Sudan.
With regard to the operational environment, Côte
d’Ivoire commends UNMISS on the work it carries out
in extremely difficult conditions, marked by an increase
in the number of violent acts committed against its
personnel. The presence of UNMISS in South Sudan is
essential for the protection of South Sudan’s people and
of humanitarian workers. It is therefore important that
the Mission be able to operate in the right environment.
My country also calls on the authorities of South
Sudan to ensure strict compliance with the status-offorces agreement and eliminate all obstacles to the
implementation of the UNMISS mandate.
18-28880

18/09/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

In conclusion, the signing of the revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in South
Sudan heralds an improvement in the situation. The
return of stability in the country will require not only
the political will of the country’s leaders but also the
support of all international partners. Côte d’Ivoire
therefore calls for concerted efforts to help restore
peace and stability in South Sudan.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): May I also join others
in thanking our briefers — Under-Secretary-General
Lacroix; Special Envoy Nicholas Haysom, to whom
we bid farewell and look forward to seeing very soon;
Special Envoy of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) for South Sudan Ismail Wais, who
I know has been working on this dossier so tirelessly
and for so long; and Ms. Grace Jones for the valuable
human perspective she offered the Security Council.
The Peace Agreement signed last week gives us
all hope, none more so than the 12 million people of
South Sudan. We very much welcome the commitment
shown by the region on the important issue of peace
and security. We have been consistent in the Council
in supporting IGAD and its work. Although the Peace
Agreement signed is a significant achievement, it is the
first step on a long journey. We must continue to strive
for progress. The people of South Sudan will continue
to suffer if peace is not achieved and sustained.
The conflict has already killed thousands
and forced a third of the population to flee their
homes — 2.5 million to neighbouring countries. Half of
the population is food-insecure. Of the 7 million people
in need of humanitarian assistance, more than half are
children. Following years of conflict, displacement
and economic collapse, those children are less likely
to receive an education than any other children in the
world. At times, South Sudan’s leaders have seemed
indifferent to the suffering of their people. It is not the
result of a natural disaster or an unavoidable situation,
it is man-made, and therefore the solution must also be
man-made, starting with political stability. The Peace
Agreement must create the conditions for a lasting
end to the violence. As I said, the region played a vital
role in bringing parties to the conflict together, and I
commend the much-needed commitment and energy
that they invested, including States around this table.
Now is the time to build on that momentum. A peace
agreement on its own will not deliver and sustain
peace for South Sudan. We need to see the continued

S/PV. 8356

engagement by all parties and ensure that words are
turned into meaningful and sustainable actions.
Those of us who have been saying those things have
picked up some irritation and frustration at those sorts
of comments. It has been said that we are not being
positive enough, or that we are undermining a peace
process. I believe that no one will be more positive than
those of us around this table — if the process really
means an end to the violence and a determination to put
the needs of the people first.
Similarly, those of us around this table have a special
responsibility to bring the experience and lessons that
we have from other conflicts, other peace processes and
indeed from our experience of the South Sudan conflict
and peace process, to bear. It does not serve the parties
to the Peace Agreement, or the people of South Sudan,
if we do not use our experience and our knowledge
from other peacebuilding situations. It is therefore vital
that we adapt and use those lessons. In countries such
as Libya, we have seen how political agreements can
unravel and enable a relapse into violence. From our
experience in Colombia, we have seen that the ongoing
commitment from the parties is the key factor for the
successful implementation of peace agreements. We
have also seen that implementation needs support from
the region and sustained, determined engagement from
the Council. We need to draw from all those experiences
when we consider the situation in South Sudan, as well
as understanding why previous peace processes have
not worked in that country, and focus all of our efforts
on successful implementation.
We must ensure that the revitalized Agreement
does not repeat past mistakes. The continued violence,
even following the most recent ceasefire agreement,
is extremely concerning. Nineteen violations were
reported by the Secretary-General between June
and September. The increase in humanitarian access
incidents and violence against humanitarian workers
are gravely concerning. Thirteen humanitarian workers
have been killed in South Sudan this year alone.
In addition to that, we are deeply concerned that
United Nations Mission in South Sudan peacekeepers
have been repeatedly denied access to key areas to
allow them to perform their mandated responsibilities.
That is unacceptable, and it must end. The region and
the international community must closely monitor
violations and ensure that those responsible are held to

18-2888017/24

S/PV.8356

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

account. I very much support Ms. John in calling for
the establishment of the hybrid court for South Sudan.
As the international community, we must not stand
by and allow individuals to undermine peace. The
targeted sanctions we imposed in July are an important
tool, and are just as important now that the Agreement
has been signed. They can be used to maintain pressure
on all the parties to keep the promises that they have
made. The arms embargo signalled that the international
community will not tolerate attempts to impose military
solutions. I urge the region and the wider international
community to continue to support those measures.
The United Kingdom remains committed to peace
in South Sudan, but in order to be convinced of the
parties’ commitment, we need to see significant change
in the approach by the parties to the conflict. They
must silence their guns, allow humanitarian workers
to deliver life-saving assistance and release political
prisoners. They must show a genuine commitment for
the effective and accountable implementation of the
Peace Agreement and must demonstrate that they are
willing to work for the benefit of all South Sudanese,
including through checks on executive majority power
and the transparent use of resources.
Today the peace process stands at a crossroads. To
overcome the challenges ahead, we need unity across
the international community. We urge the region
to continue to drive forward constructive progress,
especially on security arrangements, in step with
the United Nations and the international community.
Above all, we urge the leaders of South Sudan to put
aside personal interests to work together for a better
future for their people.
Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General Nicholas Haysom and
Special Envoy Ismail Wais for their briefings today. Let
me also extend a particular word of thanks to Ms. Grace
John for her briefing. We heard her loud and clear,
including her call to urgently enforce the ceasefire,
put an end to impunity and ensure accountability and
continue promoting women’s meaningful participation.
I can assure her that we will do our utmost to follow
through on her calls.
I would like to start by commending the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
and the facilitators of the High-level Revitalization
Forum process, in particular the Government of the
18/24

18/09/2018

Sudan and Special Envoy Wais. Their tireless efforts
over recent months, with the backing of a coherent
region, were instrumental for reaching the revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan. I also acknowledge the
efforts of the South Sudanese for the progress made
and for having demonstrated the necessary flexibility
and willingness to compromise. But the Agreement is
only a first step. What is now needed is a clear political
will of the parties to implement what has been agreed
to in an inclusive manner and to engage in genuine
peacebuilding and reconciliation activities.
While we welcome reduced levels of fighting in
recent weeks, we are also deeply concerned about reports
of continued military operations. A complete cessation
of hostilities by all parties, the Government and armed
groups alike, is urgent and must be unconditional.
There must be consequences for violations of the
Cessation of Hostilities Agreement, as well as against
those who stand in the way of the full implementation
of the Peace Agreement.
We encourage the region, supported by the
international community, to maintain its active
engagement and continue to play a proactive role. The
region’s involvement in monitoring the implementation
of the Agreement and holding the parties to account
will now be especially important. It is also vital that
the Council continue to support those regional efforts,
making sure that we speak with one voice.
The spirit of inclusivity, which was a crucial element
of the High-level Revitalization Forum, must now be
maintained in the coming implementation phase. The
quest for peace will be viable only if it includes all
stakeholders. We must continue to assure the effective
participation of youth, women and civil society. Gender
equality is central to peace and security, and we
should support further efforts to increase the political
representation of women.
An important aspect as we move forward will
advancing accountability and transitional justice
mechanisms, including by establishing the envisaged
hybrid court for South Sudan without further delay.
Impunity for human rights violations and abuses and
violations of international humanitarian law, not
least are acts of sexual violence targeting women and
girls, cannot be accepted. The continued high level
of conflict-related sexual violence, as highlighted by
the Secretary-Generals report (S/2018/831), is truly
18-28880

18/09/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

appalling. The continued monitoring and reporting of
such crimes will remain important.
We also remain deeply concerned about the
humanitarian situation, which results directly and
indirectly from the conflict. The rapid, safe and
unhindered delivery of humanitarian relief across
South Sudan must be ensured. In that context, we
again commend the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS) for its efforts to reach areas
critical to addressing protection concerns, as well as
its preparedness to now support the parties in taking
further steps on the path towards peace. It is worrisome
that violations of the status-of-forces agreement
continue. The denial of access and restrictions of
movement remain unacceptable. UNMISS has to
be able to carry out its mandated tasks, including to
monitor and investigate the human rights situation and
to protect civilians.
The millions of South Sudanese caught up in this
brutal and futile war have waited for over four years
for an end to the conflict and an opportunity to start
rebuilding their lives and country. The Agreement
reached last week provides a unique opportunity for
peace, reconciliation and recovery. This is not the time
for euphemisms, but we cannot afford an attitude of
cynicism either. As Mr. Haysom said, we cannot allow
the perfect to become the enemy of the good. We must
remain focused, and all parties must stay the course and
seize this opportunity. The continuous efforts of IGAD
and the African Union will need our full support. The
current momentum must not be lost.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): We
wish to thank Mr. Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations; Mr. Haysom, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sudan and South
Sudan; and Mr. Wais, Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) Special Envoy to South Sudan,
for their respective briefings. We thank them for all the
efforts made to promote peace and stability in South
Sudan. Mr. Haysom has been appointed to a new post,
and China commends him for all the work he has carried
out in his current capacity as Special Envoy for the
Sudan and South Sudan. We also note the intervention
of Ms. Grace John.
South Sudan is an important country in Africa.
Maintaining peace and stability in South Sudan has
a bearing on the prosperity and development of the
region. Thanks to recent joint efforts by the various

S/PV. 8356

South Sudanese parties and regional organizations,
the peace process in South Sudan has made important
progress. Last week at the Extraordinary Summit of the
IGAD Assembly of Heads of State and Government, the
South Sudanese parties formally signed the revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan and its implementation
documents, thereby laying an important foundation
for South Sudan to end the conflict and move towards
peace. We welcome that development, and we commend
the steadfast efforts, mediation and good offices of
such regional organizations as IGAD and the African
Union, as well as of Ethiopia, the Sudan, Kenya and
Uganda. We also applaud the cooperation and flexibility
demonstrated by the various parties in South Sudan.
At the same time, it must be recognized that the
overall situation in South Sudan remains very fragile.
There is a plethora of challenges to achieving enduring
peace and sustainable development. The United Nations
and the international community need to continue to
pay attention and provide the necessary assistance to
South Sudan. It is imperative to push the various parties
in South Sudan to effectively implement the series of
peace agreements signed so far, ensure a comprehensive
ceasefire and cessation of violence as soon as possible
and restore and increase mutual trust so as to achieve
lasting peace. The international community should
focus on the following tasks in the next phase.
First, it should continue to fully support the
good offices and efforts by regional organizations
and countries. The international community should
respect South Sudan’s leadership in handling its
domestic affairs; realize the full potential of regional
organizations, such as IGAD, and countres as the main
channel for mediation; support South Sudan’s national
dialogue process; and push the various parties in South
Sudan to resolve their differences through peaceful
means, such as inclusive dialogue, and to build mutual
trust. As the primary institution for the maintenance
of international peace and security, the Security
Council should send out positive messages and play an
important role in promoting the political peace process
by working together.
Secondly, the international community should
continue to help South Sudan maintain domestic peace
and security. For a long time, the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan has actively supported the
implementation of peace agreements, in that way
contributing positively to the maintenance of peace and

18-2888019/24

S/PV.8356

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

stability in South Sudan. China commends the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan for its efforts and
supports its continued implementation of its mandate
in accordance with the Security Council resolutions.
We hope the Secretariat and the Mission will continue
to enhance communication with the Government of
South Sudan, help to build the security capacity of
the country and support South Sudan in advancing its
political peace process.
Thirdly, the international community should scale
up humanitarian assistance and economic support
for South Sudan. The protracted conflict has caused
large-scale displacement and a high number of refugees,
thereby stalling economic and social development in
some areas. According to the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2018/831), only 50 per cent of the funding
for the humanitarian response plan for South Sudan is
in place, leaving a huge gap yet to be filled. China calls
upon the international community to actively support
South Sudan in addressing the humanitarian difficulties
and tackling both the symptoms and root causes with
an integrated approach and increased investment in
agriculture, energy, infrastructure, education and
health care, thereby assisting South Sudan in rapidly
advancing its State-building process and relaunching
its economic and social development.
China has consistently attached great importance to
peace and stability in Africa, and has always supported
African countries in solving African problems in
African ways. China will continue as always to actively
support and constructively participate in the peace
process in South Sudan and to play a constructive role
in achieving lasting peace and sustainable development
in South Sudan.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Pluinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We should like to express
our gratitude for the briefings given by the UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Jean-Pierre LaCroix, the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Sudan and South Sudan,
Mr. Nicolas Haysom, and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) Special Envoy
to South Sudan, Ambassador Ismail Wais, whom we
acknowledge and thank for his commitment and great
work carried out during the negotiation process in South
Sudan. We also thank Ms. Grace John for her briefing.
I begin by paying tribute to the fundamental role
that IGAD played in establishing dialogue between
20/24

18/09/2018

the parties in South Sudan. It was a long and difficult
process with several ups and downs that, thanks to the
determination of the countries of the region and the
will of the parties, led to the signing of the revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan on 12 September. The
Agreement was carefully prepared and represents a
significant step forward that contributes to ending the
conflict in that country, something that everyone in this
Chamber seeks.
While we commend this moment in the political
situation, the current situation in South Sudan remains
one of the most critical in the world. The difficult
humanitarian, economic and security situation still
affects most of the South Sudanese population. The
Agreement is an encouraging step forward, but it
needs genuine commitment and strong political on
the part of the South Sudanese leaders for its proper
implementation, which can be the most difficult phase
in a peace process. The ongoing collaboration of the
Transitional Government and the opposition with the
countries of the region and the United Nations should
be further strengthened at this stage.
In that regard, it is very important that the Security
Council maintain unity and work in harmony with the
African Union and IGAD, among other things, mainly
in restoring trust among the parties. As such, a neutral
and constructive position must be maintained. For that,
it is imperative to coordinate our actions with those of
the region.
We urge the parties to implement expeditiously
the second chapter of the Agreement, regarding the
permanent ceasefire. We hope that the ongoing ceasefire
and transitional security arrangements workshops can
bring about short-term results and that progress can be
made, among other urgent matters, on planning for the
unification of the forces of South Sudan.
In relation to the humanitarian situation, we
express concern for the more than 6 million people in
need of some kind of humanitarian assistance, which
represents more than half of the population. Likewise,
the almost 4 million internally displaced persons and
refugees in neighbouring countries face a lack of basic
services, education and health care, as well as serious
food insecurity. Unfortunately, those who suffer most
from the consequences of displacement are children
and women. We must pay attention to the number of
children who do not receive schooling and mobilize
18-28880

18/09/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the international community to work with them and
reclaim a generation that is growing up in precarious
conditions as a result of the conflict.
Similarly, we are concerned about the high number
of victims of sexual violence, which mainly affects
women and girls. To that is added the fact that South
Sudan remains one of the most dangerous places in the
world for humanitarian workers. While we welcome the
recent ruling of a national military court condemning
10 soldiers for their participation in the murder, rape,
sexual harassment and armed robbery of humanitarian
workers, we believe that it is necessary to step up efforts
to fight impunity with greater rigour and effectiveness.
Both the Government and the opposition must
ensure an optimal operating environment for the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
and humanitarian workers, in compliance with
international law and international humanitarian law.
We also commend the efforts of the United Nations
Mine Action Service, which, together with UNMISS,
works to remove and destroy explosive devices. That
work will contribute to the resettlement of displaced
persons, the return of displaced persons and refugees
and the establishment of favourable conditions for the
provision of humanitarian assistance.
In conclusion, we reiterate our gratitude to the
countries of the region for the leadership demonstrated,
which made significant progress in the political process
possible. Likewise, we thank UNMISS for the work it
is doing, and Mr. Nicholas Haysom for his important
work over the past few years. We wish him the greatest
success in his future role as Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Somalia.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Under-Secretary-General JeanPierre Lacroix and Special Envoy Nicholas Haysom
for the detailed information on the situation in South
Sudan and the progress in the South Sudanese political
settlement. I would like to take this opportunity to
thank Mr. Haysom for the work that he has done and
congratulate him on his recent appointment. I wish
him every success in his work at his new post. We also
listened with interest to the briefings by Special Envoy
Ismail Wais and Ms. Grace John.
The Russian Federation’s consistent position arises
from the premise that a sustainable ceasefire and the
launch of an inclusive process of national reconciliation
are the key to stabilization in South Sudan. We

S/PV. 8356

therefore welcome the signing of the revitalized Peace
Agreement by the parties to the conflict in South Sudan
on 12 September. We hope that the breakthrough nature
of the agreements reached in Addis Ababa will not be
questioned. We agree that they still require substantial
detail, but that does not detract from their significance.
It is important that the South Sudanese parties
demonstrated their readiness to reach a compromise, as
well as their desire to resolve their existing differences
by peaceful means.
We pay tribute to the effective coordinated efforts
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), which enabled the successful completion of
the South Sudanese Peace Agreement revitalization
process. We note that regional actors painstakingly
spent over a year bringing the positions of the parties
together. It was indeed the countries of the region that
were able to start the negotiation process from scratch
at a time when South Sudan’s leaders could not even be
seated at the same negotiating table. It was IGAD that
forged ahead in its efforts when many of those in this
very chamber had lost hope and written off the process
of revitalization.
We note the unity demonstrated by the region’s
leaders in their approach to the South Sudan settlement,
and we call on them to maintain that approach in their
continued support for the peace process. We also
welcome the efforts of the guarantors to facilitate the
implementation of the Peace Agreement by providing
national contingents from the Sudan, Uganda, Djibouti
and Somalia as part of the Regional Protection Force.
We see this process as a practical manifestation of
the principle of African solutions to African problems,
as well as an opportunity for effective cooperation
between the United Nations and the Security Council
and regional organizations. We are ready to consider
substantive proposals by IGAD regarding the Regional
Protection Force. We encourage South Sudanese
politicians to show goodwill when implementing the
revised Agreement.
Despite clear positive trends, we also note calls
for broadening sanctions on South Sudan, including
in this Chamber. I would therefore once again like to
recall our position on that issue. As before, we think
that excessive pressure applied through sanctions might
entrench the positions of the South Sudanese parties and
may give them the wrong signals. The result might be
the reverse of what is desired, with the parties turning

18-2888021/24

S/PV.8356

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

to a military solution rather than a negotiation process.
That would certainly make it more difficult to achieve
a peace settlement. Finally, in principle, we do not
accept a situation where attempts are made to use the
sanctions regime of the Security Council as a substitute
for serious political and diplomatic work.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): This afternoon’s debate on the situation in
South Sudan is most timely, especially after the recent
developments that have taken place in the political
context of this brother country. I therefore thank you,
Mr. President, for including this issue on the agenda for
this meeting.
As usual, the report (S/2018/831) presented by the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Jean Pierre Lacroix — whom we sincerely
thank — has been most comprehensive and illustrative
regarding the current situation on the ground.
We thank Mr. Nicholas Haysom, Special
Representative for South Sudan and Mr. Ismail Wais,
Special Envoy of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) for South Sudan, as well as
Ms. Grace John, Governance and Peace Manager
for Community Empowerment, for their very
informative briefings.
The Government of Equatorial Guinea would like
once again to pay tribute to the hard work and efforts of
IGAD, the African Union, the United Nations and the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) to
bring the parties to the conflict closer to implementing
the signed Agreement in the quest for peace and
stability in South Sudan.
When it comes to this conflict, my country has
always advocated that the parties must respect the
ceasefire and return to the negotiating table. Today
we can say, with a high degree of optimism and some
satisfaction, that that objective has been met. All
delegations present should congratulate themselves as,
in part, this ceasefire is due to the attention given and
the pressure exerted by the Security Council.
Equatorial Guinea has closely followed the highlevel diplomacy that has, in recent months, facilitated
the evolution of the peace process that began with the
signing of an important declaration of a joint agreement.
That established a permanent ceasefire and introduced
commitments in some of the areas of greatest tension.
22/24

18/09/2018

We cannot help but applaud those steps, which
tunequivocally constitute a step in the right direction.
However, we are concerned about the latest attacks
mentioned in the report presented today, which we note
were caused by famine and a lack of employment and
schooling. We appeal to the sense of responsibility of all
parties to the conflict; we remind them of the historic
moment for which they are responsible before people
and the international community and we strongly
condemn the attacks.
We want to remind all parties involved that, in
addition to seeking peace, they have an obligation to
meet the humanitarian needs of the population, which
is dealing with poverty, food insecurity and a shortage
of basic services. The fulfilment of that obligation
will be successful only when humanitarian operations
are able to take place and when threats and risks to
humanitarian organizations and their courageous
personnel are eliminated.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea expresses
its great satisfaction at the signing of the final Peace
Agreement last week in Addis Ababa by the parties
involved in the South Sudan conflict, under the
auspices of IGAD, the African Union and countries of
the region. We offer our warmest congratulations to
all, but especially to the Government of South Sudan,
for this definitive Peace Agreement that broadens out
a new horizon of hope for the country and its people.
We may finally see lasting peace established, which
should bring with it the dividends of development in
all aspects.
However, that new horizon will become a reality
only if all of the parties to the recently signed Agreement
comply with and respect all its clauses. The commitment
of the parties to the agreement is key, as is the support
and due attention of the international community
when it comes to the effective materialization of this
significant agreement. Through it, it will be possible
to effectively achieve the peace so yearned for by the
people of South Sudan.
However, we would like to point out that the
signing of the Agreement does not complete the work
of the United Nations, or that of the regional actors,
including IGAD, the African Union and neighbouring
countries. The post-conflict period, which is extremely
complex and requires special attention, must now be
effectively managed. On the basis of what happens on
the ground, UNMISS must adjust its activities, focus on
18-28880

18/09/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

direct support for the effective implementation of the
Agreement and ensure a sense of calm in the country.
We hope that, with the signing of the revitalized
Agreement, a new phase will also give way to create
more opportunities to provide assistance to the local
population — from food assistance to the repatriation
of displaced persons to their homes of origin. As
the reports presented to us have pointed out, the
humanitarian situation in South Sudan continues to be
of great concern. The problem of famine and the issue
of human rights must be addressed urgently so that they
receive the priority attention they deserve.
The Government of the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea urges the Government of South Sudan to
continue with its consistent cooperation with UNMISS,
IGAD and the African Union so that together they can
achieve their sole objective to achieve the peace and
stability that the people of South Sudan deserve. For
Equatorial Guinea, the reports on the humanitarian
situation and human rights are a matter of concern. We
hope that there will be improvement in that regard.
In conclusion, our Government commends the
recent news of moving displaced persons from the
United Nations protection sites to new locations
within the community, as well as the conviction by a
South Sudanese military court of 10 soldiers to serve
life sentences for the commission of various atrocity
crimes. We hope that the Government of South Sudan
will continue to demand accountability for all those
guilty of heinous crimes, not just against humanitarian
personnel but also against the people of South Sudan,
who so fervently hope for peace and tranquillity.

S/PV. 8356

I would also like to acknowledge the presence
of Under-Secretary-General Lacroix, Special Envoy
Haysom, Special Envoy Ambassador Wais and Ms. John,
the latter two being in the region. We would like to thank
Ambassador Wais for his patience and perseverance. He
played a major role in what we are celebrating in South
Sudan today. We appreciate Mr. Haysom’s dedication
in the service to the people of South Sudan. The
revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict
in the Republic of South Sudan was achieved, in large
part, due to his wisdom and advice to the parties. We
wish him luck in his new assignment. We are, however,
pleased that he will remain in the region, and surely we
will continue to see him.
On behalf of the Government of South Sudan, we
would like to offer our condolences to the peace and
humanitarian workers who lost their lives in the line
of duty. Our prayers also go to the soldier who was
injured in the attack in Yei last week. We wish him a
speedy recovery.
On 12 September, South Sudanese political leaders
signed the revitalized Agreement in Addis Ababa. That
long-awaited Agreement was a result of the leaders
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), led by Mr. Abiy Ahmed, Prime Minister of
Ethiopia; President Omar Al-Bashir, President of the
Sudan; and President Yoweri Museveni, President of
Uganda, who, after many futile attempts, were wise
to think outside the box. For that, we are thankful and
grateful to them and the region.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Sudan.

As the Security Council meets today to discuss
issues regarding the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan, there are winds of peace blowing in the region,
and we are happy that South Sudan is breathing those
winds of peace and hope. The people of South Sudan are
excited that the Government and the opposition leaders
signed the revitalized Agreement. Moreover, President
Salva Kiir Mayardit’s statement on 15 September,
in which he pledged that the Government would
implement the Agreement in good faith and appealed
for forgiveness and reconciliation among the people of
South Sudan, was a call for the people of South Sudan
to unite after years of senseless war and division.

Mr. Malwal (South Sudan): Allow me, first, to
congratulate you, Mr. President, for assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
September. I would also like to welcome the Ambassador
of Ethiopia as he begins his tenure in New York.

We know that the Agreement is difficult and
complicated, and the international community has
voiced some concerns about it. However, it is important
that those concerns should not be allowed to undermine
the Agreement itself, or its implementation. Instead,

I would like to end by paying well-deserved tribute
to Mr. Haysom for the successful and noble work he
carried out in South Sudan, where he leaves with his
head held high and duties fulfilled upon the signing of
the Peace Agreement. We wish him the same success in
Somalia and hope that he can contribute to the return
of peace and stability in that sister nation in the Horn
of Africa.

18-2888023/24

S/PV.8356

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

we would like to appeal to the international community
to look at the signing of the Agreement as a positive
turn of events. It should send signs of encouragement
and support to the political leadership as it embarks on
the difficult task of implementing the Peace Agreement
and reuniting the communities in South Sudan. It is an
achievement on which the international community
should build. In the words of Mr. Haysom, we must not
allow the perfect to be the enemy of the good.

24/24

18/09/2018

At this juncture, and in conclusion, we would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2018/831) and welcome his commitment to remain
engaged during the coming years of implementation.
We urge the Council to join the Secretary-General, the
African Union and IGAD in the endeavour of making
sustainable peace a reality at long last in South Sudan.
The meeting rose at 5.10 p.m.

18-28880
