General Assembly-Forty-second Session

106

and understanding of the lcvels, effects and risks of atom1c
radiation and for fulfilling its original mandate with scientific authority and independe11ce of judgement;
2. Notes with satisfaction thc continued and growing
scientific co-opcration between the Scientific Committee
and the Unitcd Nations Environment Programme;
3. Requests the Scientific Committee to continue its
work, including its importan! co-ordinating activities, to
increase knowledge of the levels, effects and risks of ionizing radiation from ali sources;
4. Endorses the Scientific Committee's intentions and
plans for its future activities of scientific review and assessment on behalf of the General Assembly;
5. Requests the Scientific Committee to continue at its
next session the review of the important problems in the
field of radiation and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its forty-third session;
6. Requests the United Nations Environment Programme to continue providing support for the effective
conduct of the Scientific Committec's work and for the
dissemination of its findings to the General Assembly, the
scientific community and the public;
7. Expresses its appreciation for the assistance rendered
to the Scientific Committee by Member States, the specialized agencies, the International Atomic Energy Agency
and non-governmental organizatious, and invites them to
increase their co-operation in this field;
8. Invites Member States, the organizations of the
United Nations system and non-governmental organizations concerned to provide further relevant data about
doses, effects and risks from various sources of radiation,
which would greatly help in the preparation of the Scientific Committee\ future reports to the General Assembly.
X9th plenary meeting
2 December 1987
42/68.

International co-operation in the peaceful uses of
outer space

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 41.164 of 3 December 1986,
Deeply convinced of the wmmon interest of mankind in
promoting the exploration ami use of outer space for
peaceful purposes and in continuing efforts to extend to ali
States the benefits derived therefrom. and of the importance of international co-operation in this field, for which
the United Nations should continue to provide a focal
point,
Reajfirming the importance of international cooperation in developing the rule oflaw, including the relevant norms of space law and thcir important role in international co-operation for thc cxploration and use of outcr
space for pcaceful purposcs,
Commemorating the thirtidh anniversary of the first
launching into orhit of a man-made ohject. Sputnik, which
marked the beginning of the exploration ami use of outcr
space ti.ir peaceful purposes and of intcrnational cooperation in this fleld,
Commemorating a/so thc twcntieth anniversary of the
cntry into force of thc Treaty 011 Principies Governing thc
Activitics ol' Stak~ in the Fxploration and Use of Oute1
Space, including llil: Moon allll Othcr Celestial Bodies, 4
which has played and continucs to play a positivc role in
4 Rc'-oniut1011 2?//. 1X:\I), :111111•,

the implementation of the purposes and principies of the
Charter of the United Nations and in the progressive development of the law of outer space, including the elaboration and adoption of other international instruments gov
erning the outer ~pace activities of States,
Grave/y concerned al the extension of an arms race into
outer space,
Recognizing that ali States, in particular t hose with major space capabilities, should contribute actively to the
goal of preventing an arms race in outer space asan essential condition for thc promotion of international cooperation in the cxploration ami use of outer space for
peaceful purpose~.
Aware of the need to increase the benefits of space technology and its applicat10ns and to contribute toan orderly
growth of space activities favourable to the socioeconomic advancement of mankind, in particular the peoples of developing countries,
Taking note of the progress achieved in the further development of peaceful space exploration and application
as well as in various national and co-operative spacc pro_1ects, which contribute to international co-operation in
this field,
Taking note a/so of the report of the Secretary-General5
on the implementation ofthe recommendations ofthe Second United Nations Conference on the Exploration and
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, 6
Having considercd the report of the Committt>e on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space on the work of its thir1ieth
~cssion, 7
l. Endorses the report ofthe Committee 011 the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space;
2. Invites Sta te~ that have not yet become parties to the
mternational trcaties governing the uses of outer space 8 to
give consideration to ratifying or acceding to those treatie~;
3. Notes that the Legal Sub-Committee ofthe Committee on the Peaceful Uses ofOuter Space at its twenty-sixth
session, in its working groups, continued its work as mandated by the General Assembly in its resolution 41/64; 9
4. Endorses the recommendations of the Committee
on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space that the Legal SubCommittee at its twenty-seventh session, taking into account the concerns of ali countries, particularly those of
developing countries, should:
(a) Continue the elaboration of draft principies relevant to the use of nuclear power sources in outer space
through its working group;
(b) Continue, through its working group, its consideration of matters relating to the definition and delimitation
of outer space and to the character and utilization of the
geostationary orhit, including consideration of ways and
'A/42/SIS a11d Corr.1.
Sec R,•port of 1/1<• Secorui U11iled Nations Confere11c<' ,111 tlw
l-:xp!oratio11 and Pmcejiil Use, ofOuter S¡wce. Vienna. 9-21 August 191/2
( A/CONF.101/ 10 a11d ( 'orr I ami 2).
7 Ojficial R,•cord., oj' rhe General Aswmbly. flirty·-.1eco111/ Sessio11.
Su¡y,lem<'11t No. 20 (A/42/20).
Tre,tty ,llt Pri11ciplcs Go,erning lhe Activities of Statcs in the
Fxploratio11 a11d Use of Outer Spacc, i11dudi11g thc Moon and Othcr
( 'dcstial Ho<lies (resolution 2222 (XXI), anncx); Agreement 011 thc
Rescuc of Astronauls, thc Rcturn of Astro11auts a11d thc Rcturn of
Ohjects l.au11ched i11to Outer Spaee (rcsolution 2345 (XXII), annex),
Co11venl1on 011 l11tcrnal1<>11al l.iahilit) for Damagc Causcd hy Span·
( lhjel'ls (rcsolut1on 2777 (XXV 1). an11ex); ( 'onv,·1111on 011 Rcgtstration of
Ohjerls l.au11ehcd i1tltl Oull'1 Spacc (resolutio11 .1235 (XXIX), a1111cx);
Agreemcnt Go,crni11¡( t hl' Activitics of S1ate, on tlw Moo11 and Oth,•r
( 'elcstial Rodics (re,ol11t1<m 34/68, annc.,).
" ()fjicial Rernrds <>( lhe G,•11eral .4,vmnlv. For1y-se<"o11d S1•ssio11.
.\ 11¡,¡,/('1>1,•111 No. lO ( 1\ •I: 120). ,c,·t. (.
6

IV.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political Committee
-

-------- -

means to ensure the rational and equitable use of the geostationary orbit, without prejudice to the role ofthe lnternational Telecommunication Union;
5. Requests the Legal Sub-Committee to finalize the
choice ofa new item for its agenda, taking into account the
proposal made by the Group of 77 and other proposals, in
order to begin its consideration of the item at its twentyseventh session;
6. Notes that the Scientific and Technical SubCommittee of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space at its twenty-fourth session continued its
work as mandated by the General Assembly in its resolution 41/ 64; 10
7. Endorse.~ the recommendations of the Committee
on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space that the Scientific and
Technical Sub-Committee at its twenty-fifth session, taking into account the concerns of ali countries, particularly
those of developing countries, should:
(a) Consider the following items on a priority basis:
(i) United Nations Programme on Space Applications and the co-ordination of space activities
within the United Nations system:
(ii) Implementation of the recommendations of the
Second United Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space:
(iii) Matters relating to remote sensing ofthe Earth by
satellites, induding, in ter afia, applications for
developing countries;
(iv) Use of nuclear power sources in outer space;
(b) Consider the following items:
(i) Questions relating to space transportation systems and their implications for future activities in
space;
(ii) Examination of the physical nature and technical
attributes of the geostationary orbit; examination
of its utilization and applications, including, inter afia, in the field of space communications, as
well as other questions relating to space communications developments, taking particular account of the needs and interests of developing
countries;
(iii) Matters relating to life sciences, including space
medicine;
(iv) Progress in the geosphere-biosphere (global
change) programme; the Committee on Space
Research and the lnternational Astronautical
Federation should be invited to present reports
and arrange a special presentation on this subject;
(v) Matters relating to planetary cxploration;
(vi) Matters relating to astronomy;
(vii) The theme fixed for the special attention of the
1988 session of the Scientific and Technical SubCommittcc: "Microgravity experiments in space
and their applications"; the Committee on Space
Research and the lnternational Astronautical
Federation should he invited to arrange a symposium, with as wide a participation as possible,
on the theme "Microgravity Experiments in
Space and Their Applications", to be held during
the first week of the Sub-Committee·s session,
after the adjournment of it.\ meeting\, to complement discu<,\Í()!l', withi11 th<: Suh CPrnmittee:

10 /bid., scl'l. B.

107

----------8. Considers, in the context of paragraph 7 (a) (ii)
above. that it is particularly urgent to implement the following recommendations:
(a) All countries should have the opportunity to use
the techniques resulting from medica! studies in space;
(b) Data banks at the national and regional levels
should be strengthened and expanded andan international
space information service should be established to function as a centre of co-ordination;
(e) The United Nations should support the creation of
adequate training centres at the regional level, linked,
whenever possible, to institutions implementing space
programmes; necessary funding for the development of
such centres should be made available through financia!
institutions;
(d) The United Nations should organize a fellowship
programme through which selected graduates or postgraduates from developing rnuntries should get in-depth,
long-term exposure to space technology or applications; it
is also desirable to encourage the availability of opportunities for such exposures on other bilateral and multilateral
bases outside the United Nations system;
9. Endorses the recommendation of the Committee on
the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space that the Scientific and
Technical Sub-Committee should re-establish, at its
twenty-fifth session, the Working Group of the Whole to
Evaluate the Implementation of the Recommendations of
the Second United Nations Conference on the Exploration
and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, with a view to improving the execution of activities relating to international cooperation, particularly those included in the United Nations Programme on Space Applications, and to proposing
concrete steps to increase such co-operation as well as to
make it more efficient;
10. Endorses the recommendations of the Working
Group ofthe Whole, as endorsed by the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space and as contained in paragraphs 11 to 13 of the report of the Working Group of the
Whole; 11
11. Endorses the recommendation of and the agreements reached in the Scientific and Technical SubCommittee with respect to the use of nuclear power
sources in outer space, contained in paragraphs 55 to 63 of
the report on the work of its twenty-fourth session, 12 as
endorsed by the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space in paragraph 58 of its report; 7
12. Decides that, during the twenty-fifth session of the
Scientific and Technical Sub-Committee, the Working
Group on the Use of Nuclear Power Sources in Outer
Space shall be reconvened to conduct additional work on
the basis of its previous reports and of subsequent reports
of the Scientific and Technical Sub-Committee;
13. Endorses the United Nations Programme on Space
Applications for 1988, as proposed to the Committee on
the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space by the Expert on Space
Applications; 13
14. Emphasizes the urgency and importance of implementing fully the recommendations of the Second United
Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses
of Outer Space as early as possible;
15. Reaffirms its approval of the recommendation of
t he Conference regarding the establishment and strengtht'11i11g ,if rcgio11al mechanisms of co-operation and their

---------- -

---

-

~ - - - - ----~-------

11 [bid.. Supplement No. 20 (A/42/20), annex 11.
12 A/ AC 105/383 and Corr.1.
1 ' <;,~· 1\/AC J(l'iFIRO. ,c,·t. 111.

General Assembly-Forty-second Session

108

promotion and creation through the United Nations system;
16. Expresses its appreciation to ali Governments that
made or expressed their intention to make contributions
towards carrying out the recommendations ofthe Conference;
17. Invites ali Governments to take effective action for
the implementation of the recommendations of the Conference;
18. Urges ali States, in particular those with major
space capabilities, to contribute actively to the goal of preventing an arms race in outer space as an essential condition for the promotion of international co-operation in the
exploration and uses of outer space for peaceful purposes;
19. Takes note of the views expressed and documents
circulated during the thirtieth session of the Committee on
the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space and during the fortysecond session of the General Assembly concerning ways
and means of maintaining outer space for peaceful purposes;
20. Requests the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space to continue to consider, as a matter of priority, ways and means of maintaining outer space for
peaceful purposes and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its forty-third session;
21. Affirms that the interference that satellite systems
to be newly established may cause to systems already registered with the International Telecommunication Union
shall not exceed the limits specified in the relevant provision of the Radio Regulations of the Union applicable to
space serv1ces;
22. Requests ali organs, organizations and bodies of
the United Nations system and other intergovernmental
organizations working in the field of outer space or on
space-related matters to co-operate in the implementation
of the recommendations of the Conference;
23. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-third session on the implementation of the recommendations of the Conference;
24. Requests the specialized agencies and other international organizations to continue and, where appropriate, enhance their co-operation with the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space and to provide it with progress reports on their work relating to the peaceful uses of
outer space;
25. Requests the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space to continue its work, in accordance with the
present resolution, to consider, as appropriate, new projects in outer space activities and to submit a report to the
General Assembly at its forty-third session, including its
views on which subjects should be studied in the future.

Taking note of the report of the Commissioner-General
ofthe United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, covering the period from
1 July 1986 to 30 June 1987, 14
1. Notes with dcep regret that repatriation or compensation of the refugees as provided for in paragraph 11 of
General Assembly resolution 194 (111) has not been effected, that no substantial progress has been made in the
programme endorsed by the Assembly in paragraph 2 of
its resolution 513 (VI) of 26 January 1952 for the reintegration of refugees either by repatriation or resettlement
and that, therefore, the situation of the refugees continues
to be a matter of serious concern;
2. Expresses its thanks to the Commissioner-General
and to ali the staff ofthe United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, recognizing that the Agency is doing ali it can within the limits of
available resources, and also expresses its thanks to the
specialized agencies and private organizations for their
valuable work in assisting the refugees;
3. Reiterates its request that the headquarters of the
Agency should be relocated to its former site within its
area of operations as soon as practicable;
4. Notes with regret that the United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine has been unable to find a
means of achieving progress in the implementation of
paragraph 11 of General Assembly resolution 194 (111). 15
and requests the Commission to exert continued efforts
towards the implementation of that paragraph and to report to the Assembly as appropriate, but no later than
1 September 1988:
S. Directs atte11tio11 to the continuing seriousness ofthe
financia) position of the Agency, as outlined in the report
of the Commissioner-General;
6. Notes with prufound concern that, despite the commendable and successful efforts of the CommissionerGeneral to collect additional contributions, this increased
leve! of income to the Agency is still insufficient to cover
essential budget requirements in the present year and that,
al currently foreseen levels of giving, deficits will recur
each year;
7. Calls upan ali Governments, as a matter of urgency,
to make the most generous efforts possible to meet the anticipated needs of the Agency, particularly in the light of
the budgetary deficit projected in the report of the Commissioner-General, and therefore urges non-contributing
Governments to contribute regularly and contributing
Governments to consider i'ncreasing their regular contributions.
R9th plenary meeting
2 December !9R7

89th plenary meeting
2 December 1987
42/69.

United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East
A
AssIST A NCE TO p ALESTINE REFlJGE'ES

n
WORKINU CiR<lllP ON nu: FtNANCING m-- 1 HE l!NtTED
NATIONS RF-1 IFI-" ,\ND WORKS A(,FNCY HlR PAi FSTINF
RFHl(ilTS IN IHI NEAR FAST

/'he Generul Assenihly.

Recalling 1ts resolutions 2656 (XXV) of 7 December
1970, 2728 (XXV) of IS December 1970, 2791 (XXVI) of
h Decemher 1971. .'%4 (XXVII) of 1, lkcember 1'>72.

The General Assemhly,

Recalling its resolution 41/69 A of 3 December 1986
and ali its previous resolutions on the question, including
resolution 194 (111) of 11 December 1948.

14 OJ]inal Rí'Cor<Í\ oj tht· (,'cneral /h.\emblv, Forty-\·enmd .\'eü1on,
Supfl,·me111 No: 13 (A;4'/11 and Add.l and Add 1/Corr 11
\ce i\ /4:?l'- 1". :rnn,,
