19 novembre 1946

Quarante-huitii!me seance phlniere

965

FORTY-EIGHTH PLENARY MEETING

QUARANiE-HUllIEME SEANCE PLENIERE

Held on Tuesday, 19 November 1946, at 11 a.m.

Tenue le mardi 19 novembre 1946 a 11 heures.

CONTENTS

TABLE DES MATIERES

Page

Pages

107. Welcome to the Representatives of
107. Reception des representants de l'AfghaAfghanistan, Iceland and Sweden by
nistan, de l'Islande et de la Suede par
the General Assembly of the United
l'Assemblee generale des Nations Unies .. 965
965'
Nations
108. Persecutions et discriminations. Resolu108. Persecution and Discrimination: resolution presentee par la delegation de
tion presented by the Delegation of Egypt 969
l'Egypte
,
, 969
109. Election de trois membres non perma109. Election of three non-permanent Mem975
. nents du Conseil de securite
975
bers of the Security Council
110.
Election
de
six
membres
du
Conseil
eco110. Election of six Members of the Economique et social . ,
, . . . . .. 976
976
nomic and Social Council
Presiden't: Mr. P.-H. SPAAK (Belgium).

President: M. P.-H. SPAAK (Belgique).

107. Welcome to the Representatives of
Afghanis~an, Iceland and Sweden by
the General Assembly of the United
Nations

107. Reception des representcmts de l'Afghanistan, de rislande et de la Suede
.
par l'Assemblee generale des Nations
Unies

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The first item on the agenda is the admission
of Afghanistan, Iceland and Sweden to member. ship in the United Nations.
I have received the following letter from the
Secretary-General :1
"Mr. President,
"I have the honour to inform you that I
have communicated to the Governments of
Afghanistan, the Republic of Iceland, and
Sweden, the decision of the General Assembly
to admit these countries to membership in the
United Nations.
"On 19 November 1946, the duly accredited
representatives of Afghanistan, the Republic of
Iceland, and Sweden presented the instruments of their countries' accession to the
United Nations.
. <b
"In accordance with rule 116 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, Afghanistan, the Republic of Iceland and Sweden
must therefore be considered Members of the
United Nations as from that date."

Le PRESIDENT: L'ordre du jour appelle l'admission de l'Mghanistan, de l'Islande et de la
Suede l'Organisation des Nations Unies.

a

J'ai re~u du Secretaire general la lettre SUivante:
"Monsieur le President,
"J'ai l'honneur de vous faire savoir que fai
communique aux Gouvernements de l'Afghanistan, de la Republique d'Islande et de la
Suede la decision de l' Assemblee generale
d'admettre ces pays comme Membres des Nations Unies.
"Le 19 noveinbre 1946, les repnSsentants
dument habilites de l'Afghanistan, de la Republique d'Islande et de la Suede ont presente
les instruments d'adhesion de leurs pays aux
Nations Unies.
"Conformement a l'article 116 du reglement interieur provisoire de l'Assemblee generale, l'Afghanistan, la Republique d'Islande et
la Suede doivent donc~tre consideres comme
Membres de l'Organisation a partir de cette
date,"

Je suis convaincu d'etre l'interprete de
l' opinion unanime de cette l'Assemblee en
presentant aux representants de 1'Afghanistan, de
l'Islande et de la Suede nos sinceres felicitations
et en exprinlan~ a nos nouveaux collegues la
cordialite avec laquelle nous les aC,cueillons.
Ce jour doit etre marque, me semble-toil,
d'une pierre blanche dans les travaux denotre
AssembIee, car nous accomplissons un pas important, versl un de, nos buts essentiels qui est·
.
1'universalite des Nations Unies,
Nous savons tous que les buts que nous visons, que les ideaux que nous defendons ne
seront vraiment atteints que lorsque toutes les
nations du monde, sans aucune exception, aurant pris leurplace parmi nous et travailleront
de concert avec nous.
Je m'en voudrais de ne pas souligner devant
I should not fail to impress upon the new
representatives the fact that their countries have les nouveaux representants le fait que leurs pays
been admitted to membership in the United ont ete admis comme Membres des Nations Unies

I am sure I '1-m interpreting the unanimous
feeling of the Assembly in offering the representatives of Afghanistan, Iceland and Sweden the
sincere congratulations of the Assembly and in
expressing a cordial welcome to our new
colleagues.
This should be regarded as a red-letter day, it
seems to me, in the work of our General Assem. bly, for we are taking an important step towards
the achievement of one of our essential purposes,
the universality of the United Nations.
We all know that the purposes for which we
are working, the ideals we are defeI1-ding, will
never be fully realized until all the nations of the
world, without exception, are ranged alongside
us and are working with us.

_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _-J

Forty-eighth Plenary Meeting

966

Nations by a unanim~us vote of all the nations
represented here. The reason for this. is ~hat we
know how loyal they are to the pnncIples of
democracy, how scrupulously they apply the
great concepts of social justice, and how faithfully they defend the rights of man. It is because
we know, too, that they wish to collaborate with
us and join their efforts with ours in order to
achieve a just and lasting peace.
The international collaboration for which we
ask their support imposes obligations on all who
wish to participate in it. We must be understanding and tolerant, we must try hard to understand and to help each other. Wc know
what Afghanistan, Iceland and Sweden have
done in the past in the field of international
co-operation; it is because we know it that we
have confidence in them for the future. It is in
this spirit of trust and brotherly internatione;t.l
collaboration that we ask them to take part in
our work for the greater good of all.

I call upon Mr. Aziz,' representative of
Afghanistan.
Mr. AZIZ (Afghanistan): It is with great
pleasure that I take this opportunity to express,
on behalf of my Government, its sincere and
deep thanks for having been extended the privilege of membership in this great body.

a l'unanimite de toutes les nations representees
ici. S'il en cst ainsi, c'est parce que nous connaissons leur fidelite aux principes de la democratic, le respect avec lequel ils appliquent
les grandes idees de justice sociale et leur fidelite
aux droits de l'homme. C'est parce que nous
savons aussi qu'ils veulent collaborer avec nous,
joindre leurs efforts aux notres pour realiser une
paix juste et durable.
La collaboration internationale a laque1le nous
leur demandons de s'associer impose des devoirs
a ceux qui veulent l'entreprendre. Il faut etre
comprehensif, tolerant, il faut faire un grand
effort pour se comprendre et ppur s'aider les
uns les autres. Nous savons ce que, dans ce
domaine de la cooperation internationale, l'Afghanistan, l'lslande et la Suede ont fait dans le
passe. C'est precisement parce que nous le savons que nous avons confiance en eux pour
l'avenir. C'est dans cet esprit de confiance et de
fraternelle collaboration internationale que nollS
leur demandons de participer a nos travaux pour
le plus grand bien de tous.
Je donne la parole a M. Aziz, representant de
l'Afghanistan.

Afghanistan is an essentially independent and
peace-loving nation, and will readily carry out
its obligations «rith a keen sense of appreciation
of the noble purpose for which the United
Nations has been created, and will do the utmost
in its power to assist in the realization of these
commendable aims. Afghanistan is firm in its
belief that the untiring efforts of the United
Nations will ultimately succeed in the achievement of everlasting peace.

M. AZIZ (Afghanistan) (traduit de l'anglais) :
C'est un grand plaisir que je saisis l'occasion
qui m'est donnee d'exprimer ici la sincere et
profonde gratitude qu'eprouve mon Gouvernement de l'honneur que represente pour mon
pays son admission dans cette grande Organisation.
L'Afghanistan est un pays essentiellement attache a son independance et a la paix; il assumera yolontiers les obligations qui lui incornbent desormais, car il est pleinement conscient
de la noblesse des fins pour lesquelles les ~ations
Unies ont ete creees; il fera tout ce qui est en
son pouvoir pour contribuer a lcs realiseI'. L'Afghanistan crait fermement que les efforts inlassables de l'Organisation assureront finalement
all monde une paix durable.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
call upon Mr. Thors, representative of Iceland.

Le PRESIDENT: Je donne la parole
M. Thors, representant de l'lslande.

Mr. THORS (Iceland): Today, when the eyes
of the entire world are on the General Assembly
of the United Nations, it i~ of such little significance that one more small nation is' admitted to
its !"anks. However, for the people of Iceland
this is a long-desired moment and an historical
event.

M. THORS (Islande) (traduit de lJanglais) :
Au moment ou le monde entier ales yeux fixes
sur les Nations Unies, l'admission au sein de
cette Assemblee d'une nouveUe petite nation
semble un evenement de bien faible importance.
Pour le peuple de l'lslande, i1 s'agit cependant,
la, d'un moment longtemps attendu et d'un evenement historique.
La delegation de l'lslande desire exprimer au
President de l'Al'semblee, au nom du Gouvernement et du peuple islandais, ses remerciements
sinceres pour les paroles. de bienvenue, si amicales et si encourageantes qu'il a prononcees.
Nous desirons aussi remercier chacun des Membrcs de l'Assemblee d'avoir bien voulu voter en
faveur de notre admission, et nous no liS sentons
plus particulierement redevables envers toutes les
grandes Puissances qui ont fait franchir a notre
demande les differentes etapes de la procedure
jusqu'a l'admission finale. 11 a ete 'egalement reconfortant pour nous d'entendre, aux nombreu-

On behalf of the Government of Iceland and
of our people, the Icelandic delegation wishes to
express its sincere thanks to the President of the
. Assembly for his friendly and encouragin(T words
of welcorn:e. We also vvish to thank every Member ?f. the Assembly for having voted for our
admIsslO~, and we fee! particUlarly indebted to
all the bIg Powers which, through the different
stages of the admission procedure brought our
application to final approval. 'It was also
heartening to hear so many words of welcome
from the representatives of so many countries
at the many meetings where our case was being

L

19 November 1946

it

,J
!

19 novembre 1946

967

scrutinized. Wc thank you all and we are happy
to be here.

We feel that Iceland has, in fact, always been
one of the United Nations. All through the war
our country, by a free and friendly agreement
between the United States Government and the
Government of Iceland, was used asa military
base for the Allies. It became a most important
base in the Battle of the Atlantic and was of vital
importance for the defence of America and indispensable in keeping open the sea lanes to
Great Britain and the Union of Soviet Sociali[;t
Republics. We were proud to do our share. It
cost great sacrifices. Through enemy action
about two in every thousand of our population
were killed and about twenty per cent of our
fishing boats and transport vessels were lost.

Iceland participated in all the war-time general conferences of the United Nations, such
as that of the Food and Agricul.ture Organization and, with our insignificant share, we contributed to UNRRA. However, we remained
outside the Golden Gate at San Francisco.
The Icelandic people feel that they never cart
and never will, at any time or under any circumstances, voluntarily declare war on any nation. According to Article 4 of the United Nations Charter, membership is open to peaceloving States. It is perhaps doubtful that any
other nation fulfills this condition as completely
as Iceland, as we have no anned forces. The
Icelandic nation bases its life and its future on
the ideals of peace, democracy and human
rights, which are identical with the lofty aims
of the United Nations.
It is completely clear that today, with the
horrible, devastating and far-reaching means of
warfare, the security of the smallest nation of
the world means the security of the largest nations and of all the rest of the world. When a
house burns in one corner of our small globe,
its flames may spread ~onflagration and ruin
over all the world, ,our one world.

We are perfectly well aware that Ioeland's
contribution to the work of the United Nations
can only be minimal, but we desire to give our
wholehearted support to its noble aims to keep
alive the tender flames of peace. We are well
aware that peace and prosperity are merely two
different expressions of the same goal. Under
the banner of the United Nations, mankind at
long last hopes to march on towards the realization of the ideals that generation after generation has dreamed of, but so far has not achieved.
Iceland is happy to be allowed to participate
in these endeavours. The success of the United

Quarante-huitieme seance pleniere

8es reunions ou le cas de l'Islande a ete examine,
les representants de tant de pays prononcer des
mots de bienvenue. Nous vous remercions tous,
et nous sommes heureux d'etre parmi vous.
Nous avons l'impression que l'lslande a toujoms, cn fait, appartenu a l'Organisation des
Nations Unies. Tout au long de la guerre, grace·
a un accord amical librement conelu entre le
Gouvcrnernent des Etats-Unis et le notre, 1'lslande a servi de base militaire aux Allies. ElIe
est meme devenue, lors de la bataille de l'AtIantique, une base essentielle et qui s'est revelee
indispensable a la de£ense de l'Amerique et au
maintien des routes maritimes allant vel'S l' Angleterre et l'Union des Republiques socialistes
~'0vietjques.
Nousavons ete fiers d'apporter
notre contribution a l'effort commun. Elle a
cntralflc de grands sacrifices de notre part; nos
pcrtes en vies humaines, du fait de 1'ennemi, ont
ctc de deux pour mille environ et vingt pour cent
el1vjron d.e nos bateaux de peche et de nos batiments de transport ontete coules.
L'Islande a participe a toutes les conferences
rrenerales des Nations Unies qui ont eu lieu pendant la guerre, telles que celles de l'Organisation pour l'aEmentation et l'agriculture, et elle
a eontribue, dans la faible mesute de ses ressourees, a 1'ceuvre de l'UNRRA. Nous n'avons
toutefois pas ete admis a franchir, a San-Francisco, le seuil de la Porte d'Or.
Le peuple islandais sait que jamais, a aucun
moment et en aucune circonstance, il ne pourra
ni ne voudra declarer de son plein gre la guerre
a aucune nation. Aux termes de l'Article 4 de
la Charte, tout Etat pacifique peut devenir
Membre des Nations Unies. 11 est bien peu probable qu'aucune nation remplisse cette condition.
d'une fac;on aussi complete que FIslande, car
nous n'avons pas de force armee. La nation
islandaise fonde son existence et son avenir sur
un ideal de paix, de democratie et sur le respect
des droits de 1'homme, ce qui repond exactemeht
aux nobles fins des Nations Unies.
Il est tout a fait evident qu'etant donne les
effroyables moyens de destruction a long rayon
d'action qui existent aujourd'hui, lasecuritc de
la plus petite nation du globe est liee a celle des
plus grandes nations et de tout le reste du monde.
Lorsqu'une maison brUle en un point quelconque de notre petite planete, les flammes peuvent propager la destruction et la ruine sur tqute
la surface de ce monde, qui est le notre, et qui
est "un".
Nous savons parfaitement que. 1',Islande ~e
peut apporter a l'reuvre des NatIOns Umes
qu'une faible contribution, mais nous tenons a
participer sans reserve au no~le effort de
l'Organisation en vue d'entretemr la Jlamme
vacillante de la paix. Nous savons blen que
paix et prosperitc ne sont que. deux aspects
differents d'un meme but. Derriere le drapeau
des Nations Unies, l'humanite espere pouvoir enfin progresser vel'S la realisation des ideals dont
chacune des generations successives a reve, mais
qu'aucune n'a pu encore realiseI'.
L'Islande est heureuse de pouvoir participer a
ces efforts. Le succes des Nations Unies est

19 novembre 1946

967

scrutinized. We thank you all and we are happy
to be here.

We feel that Iceland has, in fact, always been
one of the United Nations. All through the war
our country, by a free and friendly agreement
between the United States Government and the
Government of Iceland, was used as a military
base for the Allies. It became a most important
base in the Battle of the Atlantic and was of vital
importance for the defence of America and indispensable in keeping open the sea lanes to
Great Britain and the Union of ~.iovict Sociali.st
Republics. We were proud to do our share. It
cost great sacrifices. Through enemy action
about two in every thousand of our population
were killed and about twenty per cent of our
fishing boats and transport vessels were lost.

Iceland participated in all the war-time general conferences of the United Nations. such
as that of the Food and Agricul~ure Organization and, with our insignificant share, we contributed to UNRRA. However, we remained
outside the Golden Gate at San Francisco.
The Icelandic people feel that they never can
and never will, at any time or under any circumstances, voluntarily declare war on any nation. According to Article 4 of the United Nations Charter, membership is open to peaceloving States. It is perhaps doubtful that any
other nation fulfills this condition as completely
as Iceland, as we have no anned forces. The
Icelandic nation bases its life and its future on
the ideals of peace, democracy and human
rights, which are identical with the lofty aims
of the United Nations.
It is completely clear that today, with the
horrible, devastating and far-reaching means of
warfare, the security of the smallest nation of
the world means the security of the largest nations and of all the rest of the world. When a
house burns in one corner of our small globe,
its flames may spread conflagration and ruin
over all the world, our one world.

We are perfectly well aware that Iceland's
contribution to the work of the United Nations
can only be minimal, but we desire to give our
wholehearted support to its noble aims to keep
alive the tender flames of peace. We are well
aware that peace and prosperity are merely two
different expressions of the same goal. Under
the banner of the United Nations, mankind at
long last hopes to march on towards the realization of the ideals that generation after generation has dreamed of, but so far has not achieved.
Iceland is happy to be allowed to participate
in these endeavours. The success of the United

Quarante-huitieme seance pleniere

ses reunions ou le cas de l'Islande a ete examine,
les representants de tant de pays prononcer des
mots de bienvenue. Nous vous remercions tous,
et nous sommes heureux d'etre panni vous.
NODS avons l'impression que l'Islande a toujours, en fait, appartenu a l'Organisation des,
Nations Unies. Tout au long de la guerre, grace
a un accord amical librement conc1u entre le
Gouvernernent des Etats-Unis et le notre, l'lslande a servi de base militaire aux Allies. Elle
est meme devenue, lors de la bataille de l'Atlantique, une base essentielle et qui s'est nSvelee
indispensable a la defcnse de l'Amerique et au
maintien des routes maritimes allant vel'S l'Angletcl're et l'Union des Rcpubliques socialistes
sovietiques. Nous avons ete fiers d'apporter
notre contribution it l'efIort commun. EHe a
cntrulne de grands sacrifices de notre part; nos
]Jcrtes en vies humaincs, du fait de l'ennemi, ont
cte de deux pour mille environ et vingt pour cent
cnviron de nos bateaux de peche et de nos batimentsde transport ontete coules.
L'Islande a participe a toutes les conferences
3"enemles des Nations Unies qui ont eu lieu pendant la guerre, telles que celles de l'Organisation pour l'alimentation et l'agriculture, et eHe
a contribue, dans la faible mesute de ses ressourees, a l'ceuvre de· l'UNRRA. Nous n'avons
toutefois pas etc admis a franchir, a San-Francisco, le seuil de la Porte d'Or.
Le peuple islandais sait que jamais, a aucun
moment et en aucune circonstance, il ne pourra
ni ne voudra declarer de son plein gre la guerre
a aucune nation. Aux termes de l'Article 4 de
la Charte, tout Etat pacifique peut devenir
Membre des Nations Unies. Il est bien peu probable qu'aucune nation remplisse cette condition
d'une fa<;on aussi complete que l'Islande, car
nous n'avons pas de force armee. La nation
islandaise fonde son existence et son avenir sur
un ideal de paix, de democratie et sur le respect
des droits de l'homme, ce qui repone! exacteinent
aux nobles fins des Nations Unies.
Il est tout a fait evident qu'etant donne les
effroyables moyens de destruction a long rayon
d'action qui existent aujourd'hui, lasecurite de
la plus petite nation du globe est liee a celIe des
plus grandes nations et de tout le reste du monde.
Lorsqu'une maison brUle en un point quel~
conque de notre petite planete, les flammes peuvent propager la destruction et la ruine sur tqute
la surface de ce monde, qui est le notre, et qui
est "un".
Nous savons parfaitement que l'Islande ne
peut apporter a l'reuvre des Nations Unies
qu'une faible contribution, mais nous tenons a
participer sans reserve au noble effort de
l'Organisation en vue d'entretenir la. flamme
vacillante de la paix. Nous savons bien que
paix et prosperite ne sont que. deux aspects
difIerents d'un meme but. Derriere le drapeau
des Nations Unies, l'humanite espere pouvoir enfin progresser vel'S la realisation des ideals dont
chacune des generations successives a reve, mais
qu'aucune n'a pu encore realiseI'.
L'Islande est heureuse de pouvoir participer a
ces efforts. Le succes des Nations Unies est

Forty-eighth Plenary Meeting

968

19 November 1946

Nations is the most cherished hope of all mankind. May it grow in strength, friendship and
wisdom.

l'aspiration qui tient le plus au creur de toute
l'humanite. Puisse la vigueur des Nations Unies
se developper, puisse l'amitie qui les lie se fortifier et leur sagesse s'accroltre.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
call upon Mr. Unden, representative of Sweden.

Le PRESIDENT: Je donne la parole a M. Unden, representant de la Suede.

M. UNDEN (Suede): Monsieur le President,
permettez-moi tout d'abord de vous remercier
tres chaleureusement pour les aimabIes paroles
que vous avez bien voulu m'adresser en saluant
la Suede comme Membre des Nations Unies.
Le Gouvernement de la Suede et tout le peuple
suedois ont appris avec une profonde satisfaction
la decision unamme par laquelle l'AssembIee
generale a accepte la demande d' admission presentee par la Suede. Nous tenons aussi a exprimer notre profonde reconnaissance pour les
paroles bienveillantes qui ont ete prononcees par
de nombreux representants lors de l'examen de
cette demande par les differents organismes des
Nations Unies.
By entering the United Nations, Sweden is
En entrant aux Nations Umes, la: Suede acaccepting important restrictions on her liberty cepte d'irnportantes restrictions a sa liberte d'acof action in cases where collective steps may be tion, pour le cas Oll des mesures collectives
taken to prevent threats to peace. In the Swedish seraient prises en vue de prevenir des menaces
Parliament there was no difference of opinion contre la paix. Il n'y a eu, au Parlement suewhen it came to accepting these international dois, aucune divergence d'opinion quand il
obligations. We undertook them with a full s'est agi d'accepter ces obligations internatio- .
realization of their implications. The Charter of nales. Nous les avons assumees avec la pleine
the United Nations binds Members to endeavour conscience de leur portee. La Charte des Nato settle all international disputes solely by peace- tions Unies oblige les Membres a rechercher le
ful means.
reglement de tout differend international, urnquement par des moyens pacifiques.
Already, as a Member of the League of NaDeja, comme Membre de la Societe des Nations, Sweden was one of the States which" as- tions, la Suede se trouvait parmi les Etats qui
sumed the most far-reaching. obligations with assumaient les obligations les plus etendues en
regard to arbitration and conciliation in inter- ce qui concerne l'arbitrage et la conciliation dans
national relations.
les relations internationales.
It is with great satisfaction that we welcome
Nous saluons avec une grande satisfaction
the establishment of the International Court of l'etablissement de la Cour internationale de
Justice as successor to the judicial body which Justice qui a succede a l'organisme judiciaire qui
used. to function under the auspices of the fonctionnait sous les auspices de la Societe des
League of Nations. We also entertain the lively Nations. Nous avons aussi le vif espoir que les
hope that the provisions of the Charter for the dispositions de la Charte sur le reglement padfipeaceful settlement of international disputes will que des differends internationaux seront applibe applied by the Security Council in such a way quees par le Conseil de securite, de maniere a
as to give the peoples of the world confidence in inspirer aux peuples de la confiance en son imits impartiality and in its wisdom.
partialite et en sa sagesse.
In taking her place amongst the United NaEn prenant place parmi les Nations Umes, la
tions, Sweden will have the privilege of being Suede aura le privilege de pouvoir participer
able to take part in that international co-opera- al'reuvre de cooperation internationale q~i, dans
tion which, in many spheres, has already been de nombreux domaines, a deja ete inaugure ou
initiated, or is about to be initiated, under the qui va l'etre sous les auspices des Nations Unies.
'\iuspices of the United Nations. We are embark., Nous nous mettons a cette tache avec les meiling on this task with the best intentions and with leures intentions et avec le desir sincere de cona sincere desire to contribute to its fulfilment.
tribuer a son achevement.
Post-war experience has shown us that interLes experiences d'apres guerre nous ont monnational negotiations often encounter great diffi- tre que les negociations internationales se heurculties. That can readily l~ad public opinion to tent souvent a de grandes difficultes. Cela peut
despair of the possibility of sincere and fruitful facilemerit amener l'opinion publique a desespeinternational co-operation. We must not, how- rer des possibilites d'une cooperation internatioever, exaggerate the extent of these difficulties nale sincere et fertile. Mais il ne faut pas
nor allow them to discourage or dishearten us. exagerer l'importance de ces difficultes, ni permettre qu'elles nous poussent au decouragement
et au pessimisme.
Their mentality, history and. geographical
Par sa mentalit,e, par son. experience historiMr. UNDEN (Sweden) ( translated from
French): Mr. President, allow me first of all
to thank you very warmly for the kind words
which you have been good enough to address
to me in greeting Sweden as a Member of the
United Nations. The Government of Sweden
and the whole Swedish people have learned with
profound satisfaction of the unanimous decision
by which the General Assembly accepted Sweden's application for admission. We also wish
to express our great gratitude for the cordial
remarks made by many delegations when our
application was being considered by the various
organs of the United Nations.

I

19 novembre 1946

969

position have taught the Swedish people to be
tolerant and to seek the elements of right that
may exist in viewpoints that may appear to be
sharply opposed.

Quarante-huitieme seance pleniere

In the Charter, the peoples of the United Nations proclaim their resolve to follow this simple
but essential principle: to practice tolerance and
live together in peace with one another as good
neighbours. The Swedish people will have no
difficulty in following this principle;

que et par sa situation geographique, le peuple
suedois est incline a la tolerance et a la recherche de ce qu'il peut y. avoir de juste, de part et
d'autre, dans les points de vue qui peuvent sembIer radicalement opposes.
Dans le grand pays qui offre son hospitaliue
genereuse a notre Organisation, la Suede est
souvent qualifh~e de pays du "juste milieu":
Sweden, the land of the middle way. En formulant cette expression, on a pense, semble-il,
aux methodes pratiquees en Suede pour la solution des problemes inuerieurs du pays, notamment dans le domaine social. Nous acceptons
bien volontiers ce qualificatif et nous aimerions aussi le justifier pour ce qui est de notre attitude vis-a.-vis des problemes internationaux qui
mettent les pays en opposition l'un avec l'autre.
Dans la Charte, les peuples des Nations Unies
proc1ament leur resolution de suivre ce principe
simple mais essentiel: pratiquer la tolerance,
vivre en paix l'un avec l'autre dans un esprit de
bon voisinage. Le peuple suedois n'aura aucune
difficulte a se conformer a ce principe.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I invite the representatives of Afghanistan, Iceland and Sweden to take their seats in the General Assembly.
(The representatives of Afghanistan, Iceland
and Sweden took their seats in the General
Assembly.)

Le PRESIDENT: Je prie les representants de
l'Afghanistan, de l'Islande· et de la Suede de
bien vouloir occuper leurs sieges dans l'Assemblee.
(Les representants de l'Afghanistan, de l'Islande et de la Suede prennent place a l'Assemblee generale.)

108. Persecutio~s et discriminations. Reso~
lution presented by the Delegation
of Egypt (document AI 187)

108. Persecutions et discriminations. Resolution presentee par la delegation
de l'Egypte (document A/187)

In the great country which is offering its generous hospitality to our Organization, Sweden is
often referred to as "the land of the middle
way." Whoever coined that expression would
appear to have had· in mind the methods
adopted in Sweden for the solution of domestic
problems, especially in the social field. We gladly
accept that description, and would like to justify
it in our attitude to the international problems
which set countries one against the other.

Le PRESIDENT: Nous passons au deuxieme
The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
We now pass to the second item on the agenda: point de l'ordre du jour: le projet de resolution
the draft resolution on persecution and di~crimi­ concernant les persecutions et les discriminations,
nation, presented by the delegation of Egypt, presente par la delegation egyptienne et dont
voici le texte:
which reads as follows:
(CL' Assemblee generale declare qu'il est dans
(The General Assembly declares that it is
l'interet superieur de l'humanite de mettre un
in the higher interests of humanity to put an
terme immediat aux persecutions et aux disimmediate end to religious and so-called racial
criminations religieuses QU dites raciales, et
persecution and discrimination, and calls on
invite les Gouvernements et les autorites resthe Governments and responsible authorities
ponsables a se conformer a la Charte des
to conform both to the letter and to the spirit
Nations Unies, dans sa lettre et son esprit, et
of the Charter of the United Nations, and to
a prendre, a cette fin, les mesures les plus
take the most prompt and energetic steps to..
promptes et les plus ·energiques."
that end."
Je donne la parole a Badaoui Bey, represenI call upon Badawi Bey, representative of
tant de l'Egypte.
Egypt.
BADAWI Bey (Egypt) (translated from
French): At the last plenary meeting of our
Assembly, when the question was raised as to
whether the draft resolution on discrimination
and persecution which Egypt had the honour to
submit should or should not be placed on the
agenda, I explained the motives which had
prompted us to bring forward this draft which
we have now submitted to the Assembly in what,
it must be admitted, is its most abstract form.
Its abstract nature was brought o,ut still more by
the galaxy of honourable and generous speakers
who defended the placing of this resolution on
the agenda, .and by those who called for the
adoption of the substance of the resolution:

BADAOUI Bey (Egypte) : A la derniere seance
plenihe de notre Assemblee, lorsque, apropos
du projet de resolution sur la discrimination et
les persecutions que l'Egypte a eu l'honneur de
presenter, fut soulevee la question de savoir si, oui
ou non, ce projet devait etre porte it l'ordre du
jour, j'ai expose id meme lell motifs qui nous
avaient incites a presenter cette resolution que
nous avons soumise a l'AssembIee, en derniere
analyse, dans son expression la plus abstraite.
Le caractere abstrait de ceUe resolution ressort
encore plus du concours des honorables et
genereux orateurs qui ont pris la parole pour
d€fendre l'inseription de cette resolution a l'ordre
du jour, et de ceux qui reclamaient l'adoption

Forty-eighth Plenary Meeting

970

19 November 1946

du fond meme de la resolution a. l'unanimite et
par acclamation. A tous ces orateurs qui m'ont
apporte leur concours gene:eux, je tiens a e.xprimer id mes profonds sentIments de reconnaISsance et de gratitude.
Si je viens aujourd'hui soutenir que le fond
If today I say that the substance of the resomeme
de la resolution a ete deja aborde, discute
lution has already been broached, discussed and
even exhausted, I do not think that I run the et m~me epuise, je ne risque pas, je CTois, de
risk of distorting the facts or exceeding the strict denaturer Ies faits ni de depasser les strictes
limits of truth. For that reason, I personally limites de la verite. C'est pourquoi, pour ma
have no intention of repeating or even expand- part, je n'entends nullement repeter aujourd'hui
ing today what I said at the previous meeting. ni meme developper ce que j'ai dit a la seance
precedente.
Qu'il me soit perrnis cependant de relever que
Allow me, however, to observe that each of
the speakers who defended this resolution had . les orateurs qui ont pris la parole pour defendre
in mind one particular form of discrimination cette resolution ont envisage, chacun pour sa
or persecution. May I suggest that this was be- part, une certaine variante de discrimination ou
cause they were all moved by intimate convic- de persecution efIectuee. Puis-je suggerer que,
tions, and that these convictions, while based on s'il en etait ainsi, c'est que tous etaient mus par
distinct and different sets of facts, all converged des convictions intimes, que ces convictions,
in the general expression of a principle which bien qu'etablies chacune respectivement sur des
constitutes one of the masterpieces of our Char- faits distincts et differents, convergeaient toutes
ter, one of the victories of good over evil, vel'S l'expression normative d'un principe qui
one of the great achievements of our civilization. constitue un des chefs-d'reuvre de notre Charte,
These speakers, with their minds on the alert, une des victoires du bien sur le mal, une des
and jealously guarding their achievement, were' grandes acquisitions de notre civilisation. Ces
determined not to give ground, but on the con- orateurs, l'esprit alarme, mais de cette ,acquisitrary to fight every kind of discrimination, what- tion fort jaloux, entendaient ne lacher prise a
ever its form and wherever it might be found. aucun prix, mais au contraire lutter contre toutc
May I add that, when an idea, such as the one discrimination, quelle qu'elle soit, queUe que
expressed in this resolution, provokes such senti- soit sa forme, partout ou elle se trouve. Puis-je
ments, there is every likelihood that it is the ajouter que, pour qu'une idee telle que celle
expression of a sublime and immutable truth. exprimee par cette resolution provoque un sentiment pareil, il y a de grandes chances qu'elle
soit l'expression d'une verite sublime et immuable.
I hasten to say that we do not claim this idea
Cette idee, je m'empresse de le declarer, nom;
as our own. Although it was uttered through the ne la revendiquons pas. Si eUe a jailli par 1'01'mouthpiece of Egypt, it was a unanimous feel- gane de l'Egypte, c'est qu'elle constituait un
ing, though latent and clandestine. Neither its sentiment unanime, quoique latent, clandestin.
full value nor its potentialities will be fully real- Cette idee n'aura tout son eclat, elle ne prendra
ized until it has been formally expressed not by toute sa vigueur, que lorsqu'elle aura ete exEgypt, not by a few represenatives, not by a primee formellement non par l'Egypte, non par
majority of the Assembly, but by a unanimous quelques representants, non par la majorite de
vote.
l'AssembIee, mais a l'unanimite.
unanimously and by acclamation. To all these
speakers who gave me their gene:o~s help, I no,:
wish to express my deep apprecIatIOn and gratitude.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French) ~
Le PRESIDENT: Je donne la parole a
I call upon Mr. Lange, representative of Poland. . M. Lange, representant de la Pologne.
Mr. LANGE (Poland): In the name of the
M. LANGE (Pologne) (traduit de l'anglais):
Polish delegation, I want to give my fullest .sup- Au nom de la delegation polonaise, je tiens a
po~t to the resolution presented by the represen- appuyer sans reserve la resolution proposee par
tatIVe of Egypt. Ours is a nation which has le representant de I'Egypte. La nation polonaise
suffered .very deeply fro~ the nazi occupation. a tres profondement souffert de 1'0ccupation des
The naZlS treated us as a so-called inferior race. nazis. Ils nous ont maltraites, pretendant que
We haye lost six million citizens during the nous etions une race inferieure. Nous avons, au
occupatIOn.
cours de cette occupation, perdu six millions de
nos concitoyens.
Today, the fascist Axis is defeated, but we know
Aujourd'hui, l'Axe fasciste est vaincu, mais
that the problem of religious and so-called racial nous savons que le probleme des persecutions et
p.ersec~tion and discrimination is far from being discrirninations fondees sur la religion et sur des
solved 10 the world. 1 think that the representa- considerations dites raciales est loin detre retive of Egypt is doing a great service to our solu dans le monde; et je crois que le represenOrganization by calling our attention to the tant de l'Egypte rend a notre Organisation un
pr~blem and asking us to adopt this resolution. grand service en appelant notre attention sur ce
It IS really only an implementation of the section probleme et en nOllS demandant d'adopter la
on human rights in our Charter, and I think that resolution qu'il presente. Celle-ci n'est a vrai
we shall all be acting in the spirit of the dire, qu'une mise en reuvre c:le la partie de notre

'.

....

19 novembre 1946

971

Quarante-huitii~me seance ph!niere

Charter if we adopt this resolution unanimously. I Charte relative aux droits de l'homme, et je
pense que nous agirons tollS dans l'esprit de la
Charte si nous adoptons cette resolution a
l'unanimite.
The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I call upon Mr. Vyshinsky, representative of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

Le PRESIDENT: Je donne la parole a M. Vychinsky, representant de l'Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques.

Mr. VYSHINSKY (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): The
Egyptian delegation has submitted to the Assembly an extremely important question regarding
the cessation of religious and racial persecution
and discrimination. This task is completely in
conformity with the purposes and principles
of the United Nations Charter, which proclaims the high duty of the United Nations in
achieving co-operation in solving international
problems of an economic, social, political and
humanitarian character and also in promoting
and encouraging respect for human rights and
for fundamental freedoms without distinction as
to race, sex, language or religion.

M. VYCHINSKY (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe) : La delegation de l'Egypte a soumis a l'Assemblee une
question tres grave. Sa proposition tend, en
effet, a mettre un terme aux persecutions et aux
discriminations religieuses et raciales. Ce dessein
est parfaitement en harmonie avec les buts et les
principes enonces dans la Charte de notre Organisation, qui proc1ame que les Nations Dnies
ont le noble devoir de realiser la cooperation
internationale en resolvant les problemes internationaux d'ordre economique, social, politique
et humanitaire, et en encourageant le respect des
droits de l'homme et des libertes fondamentales,
sans distinction de race, de sexe, de langue et de
religion.
L'Union sovietique salue toute mesure prise
en vue d'appliquer ces nobles principes. Neanmoins, la delegation sovietique doit dire que la
resolution egyptienne - que nollS etions unanimes, la dernicre fois, a vouloir inscrire a 1'01'dre du jour de I' AssembIee generale - ne peut
pas nous satisfaire. Cette resolution est tres generale. EUe ne cite aucun fait precis, aucune donnee concrete; lorsque'elle parle de persecutions et
de discriminations raciales, eUe nedonne aucun
nom, aucune adresse, elle ne nous soumet aucun
fait qui merite l'attention ou qui appelle des
mesures contre la discrimination et les persecutions pour des questions raciales ou analogues.
Cette resolution est done trop generale et depourvue de tout caractere concreto
Cependant, nous savans bien que de tels faits
existent et qu'il est reellement necessaire de prendre des mesures pour mettre un terme a cette
situation deshonorante.
La resolution qu'on nous propose comporte
done de graves imperfections. Cependant, la
deJ.~gation sovietique estime que, malgre ses imperfections, cette resolution a une grande importance parce qu'elle touche a une question de
principe; nous ne voyons donc aucune raison
pour nous y opposer. Malgre les imperfections
que viens de mentionner, la delegation sovietique
votera pour la resolution presentee par la delegation egyptienne et qui propose de prendre des
mesures contre les persecutions et les discriminations de tout genre, religieuses ou dites raciales.

The Soviet Union welcomes the steps which
are being taken with the object of achieving the
high principle mentioned. At the same time, the
Soviet delegation must state that the Egyptian
resolution, which at our last meeting we unanimously considered it necessary to include in the
agenda of the General Assembly, cannot satisfy
the Soviet delegation. This resolution is general
,in character. It does not give any concrete data
when mentioning racial persecution and discrimination, it does not give any facts, any names or
addresses, calling for attention and the taking of
appropriate measures against this discrimination
and persecution on racial or similar grounds.
This resolution, therefore, is of a general character, and there is nothing concrete in it.
Nevertheless, we know that such facts exist and
that measures to put an end to this shameful
state of affairs should indeed be taken.
The proposed resolution therefore has serious
deficiencies. But the Soviet delegation considers
that, in so far as it is of considerable significance
in principle, there is no reason to raise objections
to it although it possesses deficiencies to which I
have just referred. In spite of its deficencies the
Soviet delegation will vote for the Egyptian resolution regarding the adoption of measures against
all manner of persecution and discrimination on
religious and, so-called, racial grounds.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I call upon Mr. Wellington Koo, representative
of China.

Le PRESIDENT: Je donne la parole a M. Wellington Koo, representant de la China.

Mr. Wellington Koo (China): The Chinese
delegation heartily associates itself with the
spirit and the sentiment which inspired the
Egyptian resolution. We r,ealize that the principle enunciated in the resolution is found in
our fundamental Charter. But we believe, with
the Egyptian delegation, that we cannot call

M. Wellington Koo ( Chine) (trad uit de
l' anglais): La deMgation chinoise s'associe de
tout creur al'esprit et au sentiment qui animent
la resolution presentee par la delegation egyptienne.Nous comprenons parfaitement que le
principe qui a inspil1e cette resolution est l'un de
ceux qui figurent dans la Charte de notre 01'-

Forty-eighth Plenary Meeting

972

19 November 1946

attention too often to this very important prin- . ganisation. Nous croyons, comme la delegation
ciple in our Charter, particularly in paragraph egyptienne, qu'on ne peut rappeler trop souvent
3 of Article 1 of Chapter I: there shall be no le principe fondamental, cnonce notamment
discrimination of any kind,' either on the dans le paragraphe 3 de l'Article 1 du Chapitre
I: a savoir qu'il ne doit y avoir aucune inegalite
grounds of race, religion, sex or language.
de traitement d'aucune sorte, fondee sur des
differences de race, de religion, de sexe ou de
langue.
We support the proposal all the more heartily
Bien que la resolution ne propose pour l'inbecause we realize, and are concerned, that, stant l'adoption d'aucune mesure concrete, notre
while the resolution itself does not propose any delegation la soutient d'autant plus volontiers
concrete measures at the present time, there are que nous sommes inquiets a la pensee qu'il y a
different parts of the world which still fail to encore dans le monde des regions ou le principe
observe this fundamental principle of equality fondamental de r.egalite des races et de l'egalite
of races and equality of religions.
des religions n'est pas respecte.
I
I join with the representative of the Union of
Je m'associe au representant de l'Union sovieSoviet Socialist Republics in hoping that, in the tique pour exprimer l'espoir que notre Organisafuture, our Organization will have an opportu- tion aura l'occasion, a l'avenir, de suggerer des
nity to propose more concrete measures, especi- mesures plus concretes, surtout lorsqu'elle sera
ally when concrete questions are brought before appelee a se prononcer sur des cas d'espece.
the United Nations for adjustment.
China welcomeS the Egyptian resolution beC'est avec satisfaction que la Chine accueille
cause, in the five thousand years of our national la resolution presentee par l'Egypte. Cinq mille
existence, we have found from experience that annees d'existence nationale ont enseigne a la
neither race nor religion should be allowed to Chine qu'il ne faut pas laisser des considerations
interfere with the happiness and progress of a de race ou de religion faire obstacle au boncountry. Within the confines of China we heur et au progrcs d'un pays. Sur le territoire
have five races, we have many languages and we de la Chine vivent des hommes de cinq races difhave nearly all the principal religions in the ferentes, qui parlent des idiomes nombreux et
world. But they are never allowed to intedere qui pratiquent presque toutes les ,principales rewith the normal 'life of the people, whatever ligions du monde. Jamais, cependant, nous ne
may be their race and whatever religion they permettons a ces considerations d'entraver la vie
may embrace. In fact, we have always believed, normale des citoyens, a quelque race qu'ils apand we still do believe, in the doctrine of Con- partiennent et quelle que soit la religion qu'ils
fucius that within the four seas all are brothers. professent. En fait, nous avons toujours ete et
demeurons fideles a la doctrine de Confucius,
qui dit que les quatre ooeans entourent un peuple
de freres.
Voila pourquoi nous appuyons sans reserve
It is for that reason that we fully endorse this
resolution and join the Egyptian delegation in cette resolution; nous nous associons a la deleexpressing the very sincere hope that the sup- gation egyptienne pour exprimer l'espoir tres
sincere que l' Assemblee l'adoptera unanimement.
.
port of the Asse1ll;bly will be unanimous.
The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I call upon Mr. Romulo, representative of the
Philippine Republic.

Le PRESIDENT: Je donne la parole a
M. Romulo, representant de la Republique des
Philippines.

M. ROMULO (Republique' des Philippines)
Mr. ROMuLO(Philippine Republic): The
Philippine delegation desires to place on record (traduit de lJanglais): La delegation des Philipits vote in favour of the Egyptian resolution be- pines desire que son vote en faveur de la resolucause it believes that every appeal to the con- tion egyptienne soit consigne au proces-verbal
science of the world, that has for its purpose the car ellt: estime qu'il faut appuyer tout appel a
welding together of the United Nations into one. la conscience universelle qui tende a fondre les
world, must be, supported. Where there are Nations Unies en un seul monde. La ou ont lieu
religious and racial persecution and discrimina- des per&6cutions et discriminations fondees sur
tion, there can be no friendship and no good will. des considerations religieuses et raciales, il ne
And where there are lacking these essentials for peut y avoir niarnitie, ni bienveillance; et la
humanity to live.together in friendliness, there ou les conditions indispensables a d' arnicales
can be no peace.
relations entre les hommes font defaut, il ne
saurait y avoir de paix.
"
I1 est vrai qu'il s'agit d'une resolution, plaIt is true that this is a resolution without teeth,
as we might say, and needs implementation. But tonique pourrait-on dire, a laquelle il manque
it is important that we ourselves, in this General la force executoire. Mais il importe que, reunis
Assembly, realize how significant is the expression en cette AssembIee generale, nous soyons consciof the will of this Assembly. A resolution of this ents de l'importance que revet l'expression de
nature is a warning call by fifty-four nations, a la volonte de l'Assemblee. Une resolution de
reminder, if you will, to every Member nation ce genre constitue un avertissement, lance par
that it must give way to the pressure of world cinquante-quatre nations;' ou, si vous voulez,

19 novembre 1946

973

Quarante-huitieme seance plliniere

opinion which demands that it conform to the
letter and spirit of the Charter, signed in the
interest of one world and of one humanity. Let
us not forget, when we cast our vote today on this
important resolution, that all prejudices have
never yet broken a fetter orfreed a human soul.

c'est le rappel adresse a chacun des Etats Membres qu'il doit oMir a la pression de l'opinion
mondiale, laquelle exige que soit respectee, dans
sa lettre et dans SOl1 esprit, la Charte signee dans
l'interet d'un monde uni et d'une humanite unie.
N'oublions pas, en votant aujourd'hui sur cette .
importante resolution, que tous les prejuges du
monde n' ont encore jamais reussi a briser une
seule chatne ni a liberer une seule ame humaine.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I call upon Mr. Chagla, representative of India.

Le PRESIDENT: Je donne la
M. Chagla, representant de l'Inde.

Mr. CHAGLA (India) : On behalf of the Indian
delegation I wish warmly and most heartily to
support the resolution moved by Egypt. When
I spoke on the question of the inclusion of this
item on the agenda, I pointed out that it does
nothing more than emphasize the essential and
fundamental provisions of the Oharter. The
Oharter has set up the United Nations for the
purpose· of giving peace and security to the
world. That peace and that security are based
on freedom for all people, on the recognition
of human dignity, on the fact that the human
soul has the same value whether it is encased
in a white, brown or black body.

I have great pleasure in supporting the res~­
lution.

M. CHAGLA (rnde) (traduit de l'anglais):
Au nom de la delegation de 1'lnde, je tiens a donner un appui chaleureux et sans reserve ala resolution presentee par le representant de l'Egypte.
I:orsque j'ai pris la parole au sujet de l'inscriptlOn de cette resolution a l'ordre du jour, j'ai
fait remarquer qu'elle ne faisait rien de plus que
de mettre en relief les dispositions essentielles et
fondamentales de la Charte. La Charte a institue l'Organisation des Nations Unies afin de
donner au monde la paix et la securite. Cette
paix et cette securite sont fondees sur la liberte
de tous les peuples, ainsi que sur la reconnaissance de la dignite de la personne humaine et
du principe que l'ame humaine a la meme
valeur, qu'elle habite le corps d'un etre de race
blanche, jaune ou noire.
Il est bon que la resolution inviteles Gouvernements a se conformer a la lettre et a l'esprit de la Charte. Si nous voulons faire de l'Organisation des Nations Unies une organisation
vivante, nous ne devons pas nous bomer a
signer des chartes ou a adopter des resolutions
solennelles; nous devons egalement nous conformer fidelement et honnetement aux principes auxquels nous avons souscrit en adoptant
la Charte. Lorsque nous aurons, comme yen
suis certain, approuve unaniment cette .resolJ.1tion, j'espere que les representants de tous les
Etats Membres, une fois rentres chez eux, examineront soigneusement les lois et les regIements de leurs pays respectifs afin de s'assurer
qu'il n'existe, ni dans le domaine legislatif ni
dans le domaine administratif, aucune inegalite
de traitement entre les peuples de race et de
couleur differentes, et qu'aucune partie de la
population n'est persecutee du fait de ses
opinions religieuses, politiques ou pour toute
autre raison.
C'est avec un grand plaisir que j'appuie la
resolution de la delegation egyptienne.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I call upon Mr. Austin, representative of the
United States of America.

Le PRESIDENT: Je donne· la' parole a
M. Austin, representant des Etats-Unis
d'Amerique.

Mr. AUSTIN (United States of America):
What is taking place in this Assembly today
ought to encourage the whole world. The substance of this resolution is of immense importance because of its spiritual character. Its unani.
mous support signifies that whatever fears and
doubts the world may have had, with respect to
the capacity of the General Assembly to transact
business and make progress on a level which
gives the greatest assurance of removing the

M. AUSTIN (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit de l'anglais): Ce qui se passe aujourd'hui
au sein de cette Assemblee devrait etre une
source d'encouragement pour le monde entier.
En raison de son caractere spirituel, cette
resolution a une importance considerable. L'appui
unanime qu'elle a trouve id dissipe toutes les
craintes et les doutes que le mande a pu concevoir sur la capacite de l' A~r.embIee generale
des Nations Unies a conduire ses travaux et a.

It is well that the resolution calls upon the
Governments to conform to the letter and spirit
of the Oharter. If we want the United Nations
to become a living organization, it is not sufficient to sign charters or pass solemn resolutions;
we must conform loyally and honestly to the
principles we have subscribed to in the Charter.
After ,we have passed this resolution unanimously, as I am sure we shall, I hope the representatives of every Member State will go back
to their respective countries and carefully scrutinize the administration and laws in order to
make sure that neither in legislative nor administrative matters, is there any discrimination between peoples of different races and colours, and
that no section of their people is persecuted
because of their religion or political opinions, or
on any other ground.

parole

a

Forty-eighth Plenary Meeting

974

causes of war, ~e answered by what is taking
place here at this time. We all recognize, every
speaker has recognized, that this is a reiteration
of the fundamental principles of .the Charter of
the United Nations.

19 November 1946

This constant and repeated reference to the
fundamental principles of the Charter is very
important for the leadership of thought all over
the world. I assure you that in my own country
the reaction to the conduct of this General
Assembly with respect to this particular subject
will benefit the cause of the United Nations.
Consequently, without extending my remarks
further, I want to say that the United States
delegation recognizes in the resolution itself, in
its substance, and in the fact that it was presented and espoused by countries that are not
among the permanent members of the Security
Council, a very significant affirmation of that
great principle of sovereign equality which is
the oaken beam that supports the entire superstructure of this Organization for security and
peace in .the world.

accomplir des progres tels que l'on puisse obtenir
l'assurance la plus grande de voir disparaitre les
causes qui sont a 1'0rigine des guerres. Nous
constatons tous - chacun des orateurs qui ant
pris la parole aujourd'hui l'a reconnu - que
notre Assemblee est en train de reaffirmer les
principes fondamentaux de la Charte des
Nations U nies.
Ce rappel constant des principes fondamentaux de la Charte a une grande importance
pour l'orientation des idees dans le monde. La
reaction de mon pays devant la maniere dont
l'AssembIee generale a traite cette question particuliere servira, je vous en donne l'assurance, la
cause des Nations Unies.
Je dirai done, sans m'etendre davantage, que
la deJ,cgation des Etats-Unis voit dans la resolution elle-meme, dans sa substance et dans le
fait qu'elle a ete presentee et adoptee par des
pays qui ne sont pas membres permanents du
Conseil de seeurite, une affirmation tres significative de ce grand principe de l'egalite des
droits souverains qui est la poutre maitresse
soutenant tout l'edifice de cette Organisation
creee pour assurer la securite et la paix dans le
monde.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I call upon Sir Hartley Shawcross, representative of the United Kingdom.
,

Le PRESIDENT: Je donne la parole a
Sir Rartley Shawcross, representant du RoyaumeUni.

Sir Hartley SHAWCROSS (Royaume-Uni)
Sir Hardey SHAWCROSS (United Kingdom) :
I had wondered whether it would have been (traduit de l'anglais): Je m'etais demande si,
enough to content myself with merely raising pour faire connaitre man adhesion a cette resomy right hand in support of this resolution, lution, il ne suffirait pas que je leve la main; car
because obviously it is a resolution in regard il est evident que nous sommes tous d'accord sur
la resolution qui nous occupe.
to which we are all agreed.
J e ne veux pas prendre plus de temps et proI am not now going to take up time in prolonging our discussion but, as the represen- longer notre debat. En ma qualite de representative of a country which, for centuries, has tant d'un pays qui, depuis des siecles, a ete a
been foremost in the struggle for human liberty, l'avant-garde du combat pour la liberte huwhich in 1940 found itself, together with the maine, qui, avec le Commonwealth britannique
British Commonwealth of Nations, standing des nations, s'est trouve etre, en 1940, le seul
alone to defend these liberties, and whose pres- defenseur de ces libertes, et dont le Gouverneent Government believes profoundly that the ment actuel croit fermement que la dignite de
fundamental dignity of man transcends all the l'homme est un principe fondamental qui l'empower and might of States, I gladly join in sup- porte sur toute la puissance et la force des Etats,
je me rallie avec joie a cette resolution.
porting this resolution.
Cependant, je suis d'accord avec man ami et
But r agree with my friend and colleague
Mr. Vyshinsky, that is not enough to pass collegue, M. Vychinsky, pour penser qu'il ne
pious resolutions and make eloquent speeches suffit pas, en de telles matieres, d'adopter des
about matters of this kind. In more than one resolutions de pure forme, ni de prononcer d'elocountry at the present time, the liberties, the quents discours. 11 y a, a, l'heure actuelle, plus
rights, the dignity of man are not fully achieved d'un pays OU la liberte, les droits de l'homme et
and in some respects are actually trampled la dignite de la personne humaine ne sont pas
underfoot. That is why it is so important that effectivement respectes et ou its sont meme, a
we should, without delay, complete the consti- certains egards, foules au pied. C'est pourquoi
tution of the Commission on Human Rights and il importe tant que nous achevions sans delai de
see to it that that Commission draws up a Bill constituer la Commission des droits de I'homme,
of Rights defining the fundamental liberties of et que nous veillions a ce qu'elle elabore une
man, ensuring that there is no religious, racial declaration des droits de l'homme, dcfinissant
or political discrimination, and providing ma- les libertes fondamentales, garantissant qu'il ne
chinery to ensure that these rights are secured sera fait aucune discrimination religieuse, raciale
ou politique, et etablissant le mecanisme necesand protected.
saire pour assurer la garantie et la protection de
ces droits.
En ce qui nous concerne, nous nous proposons
For our part, we intend, not next year, not
the year after, but in the appropriate Commit- - et je ne parle pas de l'annee prochaine ni de

19 novembre 1946

975

Quarante~huitieme seance pfeniere

tee at this Assembly, to work toward the com~
pletion of the Conunission on Human Rights
and to urge upon it the importance of producing for the next session of our Assembly a
code, a bill defining the fundamental liberties
of man which all States must respect.

celle d'apres, mais de cetteannee mime - d'insister aupres la Commission appropriee de la
presente Assemblee pour que la Commission
des droits de l'homme soit definitivement constituee, et d'insister sur l'importance qu'il y a a
presenter a la prochaine Assemblee un code, une
declaration definissant les libertes fondamentales
de l'homme qJle tout Etat doit respecter.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I call upon Mr. Parodi, representative of France.

Le PRESIDENT: Je donne la parole a M. Pa.rodi, representant de la France.

Mr. PARODI (France) (translated from
French): I intend to be the briefest of all
those who have spoken, or who intend to speak,
in favour of the Egyptian proposal, not because
I think it would be useless to adduce reasons
for supporting it, but on the contrary, because
I think that the General Assembly of the United
Nations will adopt it unanimously, and with
enthusiasm.

M. PARODI (France): Je me propose d'etre
le plus bref des orateurs qui ont pris ou prendront la parole pour soutenir la proposition
egyptienne; non, certes, que j'estime inutile de
fournir id des raisons de l'appuyer, mais parce
que je pen se, au contraire, que l'AssembIee
generale des Nations Unies sera unanime a voter
ceUe proposition, et a la voter avec enthousiasme.

I belong to a country which is particularly
proud of the fact that its laws have never recognized any inequality of treatment on racial
grounds. I may add that our way of life and our
national thought are, and always have been,
radically opposed to any such conception.
The French delegation will therefore vote
wholeheartedly for the proposal of the repre3entative of Egypt.

J'appartiens a un pays qui s'enorguei11it tout
particulierement de n'avoir jamais reconnu dans
sa legislation I'inegaIite de traitement en matiere
raciale. J'ajoute que nos mceurs et notre philosophie nationale sont, et ont toujours ete
foncierement hostiles a ce concept.
La delegation franiSaise votera done sans reserve pour la proposition du representant de
I'Egypte.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
There are no more speakers on the list. No one
has spoken against the motion. I propose, therefore, to regard it as adopted unanimously.
Decision: The d1'aft resolution was adopted
unanimously.

Le PRESIDENT: Il n'y a plus d'orateur inscrif.
Personne n'a parle contre la motion. Je propose
done de la considerer comme adoptee a l'unanimite.

109. Election of thre'e non-permanent
Members of the Security Council

109. Election de trois membres non perma-

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The agenda calls for the election of three nonpermanent members of the Security Council. I
will remind you briefly ot the circumstances:
During the first part of its first session, the
General Assembly elected six non-permanent
members of the Security Council, in accordance
with the terms of the Charter and the provisional
rules of procedure. Three of those members,
Australia, Brazil and Poland, were elected for
two years. Egypt, Mexico and the Netherlands
were elected for onc year. By a resolution
adopted at its thirty-second plenary meeting, the
General Assembly decided that the members of
the Security Council elected for a period of one
year should hold offite until JaI).uary 1947.

LePREslDENT: L'ordre du jour comporte
l'election de trois membres non permanents du
Conseil de securite. J e rappelle brievement com~
ment la question se pose: .
Au cours de la premiere partie de sa premiere
session, l' Assemblee generale a procede a 1'61ection de six membres non permanents du Conseil
de securite, conformement aux termes de la
Charte et du reglement interieur provisoire.
Trois de ces membres, l'Australie, le Bresil, la
Pologne, ont ete €lus pour une p6riode de deux
ans. L'Egypte, le M exique, les Pays-Bas ont
ete elus pour une periode d'un an. Par une resolution adoptee au cours de sa trente-deuxieme
seance pIeniere, l'Assemblee generale a decide
que les membres du ConseiI de securite elus pour
une periode d'un an exerceraient· leur mandat
jusqu'en janvier 1947.
.
11 convient done que l'AssernbIee generale
procede maintenant a l'€lection de trois membres
pour remplacer les trois membres sortants du
Conseil de ~4curite au mois de janvier proehain.
Conformement aux termes de la Charte et du
reglement interieur provisoire, teI qu'il a ete
amende ici au cours de la deuxieme partie de la
premier~ session, les trois membres que l'As-

The General Assembly must therefore now
proceed to elect three members to replace the
three members retiring next January.
In accordance with the terms of the Charter
and the provisional rules of procedure, as
amended here at the second part of the first
session, the three membe:rs to be elected by the

Decision: Le projet
adopte d l'unanimiee.

de

resolution

est

nents du Conseil de s'ecurite

Forty-eighth Plenary Meeting

976

'General Assembly will hold office for two years
as from 1 January 1947.
The ballot papers will be distributed. Not all
the names of Members of the United Nations
are listed on those papers. The names of the
eight Members which are still on the Security
Council and of the three which are not eligible
for re-election, that is, -Egypt, Mexico and the
Netherlands, are not on the list. Only the names
of Members eligible for the Security Council
are included.
Heads of delegations are asked to mark with
a cross the square opposite the name of each
Member for whom they wish to vote. There
must be no other mark on the ballot paper.
Papers with votes for more than three members
will be declared void.

I propose that the GeJ?eral Assembly appoint
as tellers Mr. Perez Cisneros, representative of
Cuba, and Mr. Papanek, representative of
Czechoslovakia.
We shall now proceed to vote.
(The votes of the delegations were taken in
turn by secret ballot).

19 November 1946

semblee generale va elire resteront en fonctions
pour une duree de deux ans commenc;ant le 1er
janvier 1947.
Le.s bulletins de vote vont etre distribues. Sur
ces bulletins ne figurent pas tous les noms des
Membres des Nations U nies. Les noms des huit
membres qui continuent de sieger au Conseil
de securite et ceux des trois membres qui ne
sont pas reeligibles-a savoir l'Egypte, le Mexique et les Pays-Bas--ne sont pas inscrits sur la
liste. Ne figurent sur cette liste que les noms des
membres qui sont eligibles au Conseil de securite.
Les chefs des delegations sont invites a marquer d'une croix la case prevuCl a cote du nom
des membres pour lesquels ils desirent voter. Les
bulletins de vote ne doivent porter aucune autre
indication. Seront declares nuls ceux qui porteront l'indication de votes pour plus de trois
membres.
J e propose a l'AssembIee generale de designer
-comme scrutateurs M. Perez Cisneros, representant de Cuba, et M. Papanek, representant de
la Tchecoslovaquie.
,
Nous procederons maintenant au vote.
(Le vote a lieu au scrutin secret cl la tribune.)

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The roll-call is comple-ted. I call upon the tellers
to count the votes.
(The tellers proceeded to count the votes.)

Le PRE.SIDENT: Le scrutin est clos. J'invite
MM. les scrutateursa proceder au depouillement.
(Les scrutateurs procedent au depouillement du
scrutin. )

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The result of the voting is as follows:
Number of Members voting .... 54
Number of blank or invalid papers 0
, 54
Number of votes cast

Le PRESIDENT: Void le resultat du scrutin:

The two-thirds majority required for election
is therefore thirty-six.
The number of votes obtained is as follows:

Nombre de votants
54
Bulletins blancs ou nuls . . . . . . . .
0
Suffrages exprimes . .. . . . . . . . .. 54
La majorite requise des deux tiers est donc de
trente-six.
Ont obtenu:

Number of votes

Nombre de voix

Colombia
-" 51
Syria
,
45
Belgium
43
13
India
Norway..................... 4
Canada.......
1
Cuba
1
,. . . .. 1
Greece .. ,
Turkey...
1
Decision: Colombia, Syria and Belgium
were elected members of the Security Council
for a period of two years, beginning 1 January
1947.

Colombie
51
Syrie . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 45
Belgique
43
Inde
, .. .. . . .. . . . .. 13
Norvege '"
, .. .. .
4
Canada
-...... .
1
Cuba
1
Grece
1
:................
1
Turquie
Decision: La Colombie, la Syrie et la Belgique sont clues membres du Conseil de, sccurite
pour une periode de deux ans commen~ant le
ler janvier 1947._

110.

Election of six members of the
Economic and Social Council

110. Election de six membres du Conseil
economique et social

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
We shall now proceed to the election of six
members of the Economic and Social Council on
which six seats are due to become vacant in
January 1947, I;lamely, those of Colombia,
Greece, Lebanon, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, United States of America and Yugoslavia.

Le PRESIDENT: Nous allons maintenant proceder a l'election de six membres du Conseil economique et social, six sieges devant devenir
vacants au mois de janvier 1947: ceux de la
Colombie, de la Grece, du Liban, de la Republique socialiste sovietique q'Ukraine, des EtatsUnis d'Amerique et de la Yougoslavie.

19 novembre 1946

977

Quarante-huitieme seance plenfere

Au cours de la premiere partie de sa session,
l'Assemblee generale a elu dix-huit membres du
Conseil economique et social.. Conformement a
l'Article 61, paragraphe 3, de la Charte, et a
l'article additionnel R du reglement interieur
provisoire, six membres sont elus pour une
periode de trois ans, six pour une periode de
deux ans et six pour une periode d'un an.
En vertu d'une resolution adoptee au cours
de la trente-deuxieme seance plemere, l'AssembIee generale a decide que les membres des
Conseils elus pour une periode d'un an resteraient
en 'fonctions jusqu'au 1er janvier 1947. En
consequence, l'Assemblee generale va proceder
a l'eIection de six membres appeles a prendre
la place de ceux dont le mandat expire au mois
de janvier prochain.
Conformement a la decision prise par I'AsIn accordance with the General Assembly's
decision with regard to the;: length of the term semblee generale quant a la dun~e du mandat
of office of members of the Council, the six exerce par les membres du Comeil, les six mem~
members to be elected now will hold office for a bres qui seront elus maintenant resteront en fonctions pendant une duree de trois ans, a q)mpter
period of three years as from 1 January 1947.
du 1er janvier 1947.
On vous a distribue un nouveau bulletin de
New ballot papers have been distributed to
you. You will see that they contain a list of all vote. Vous noterez que ce bulletin comporte une
the Members eligible for the six seats on the liste de tous les membres eligibles aux six sieges
Economic and Social Council. The twelve Mem~ du Conseil economique et social. . Lesdouze
bers of the United Nations whose names do not Membres des Nations Unies dont les noms ne'
appear on the;: list are those elected last January figurent pas sur la liste sont ceux qui, en janvier
to the Economic and Social Council for terms of dernier, ont ete elus au Conseil economique et
social pour une duree, soit de deux ans, soit de
two or three years.
trois ans.
Aux termes de PArticle 61, paragraphe 2, de
Under Article 61, paragraph 2, of the Charter,
la
Charte, les membres sortants du Conseil ecoretiring members of the Economic and Social
Council are imm'ediately eligible for re-election. nomique et social sont irnmediatement reeligibles.
The names of the six' members retiring next Les noms des six membres sortant en janvier
January therefore appear on the ballot paper. prochain figurent done sur le bulletin de vote.
Les representants sont pries de marquer d~4ne
Representatives are requested to place a cross
in the space beside the name of each Member croix la case se trouvant a cote du nom des
for which they wish to vote. There must be no Membres pour lesque1s ils desirent voter. Les
other mark on the ballot paper. Any papers bulletins ne doivent porter aucune autre marque.
with votes for more than six Members will be Les bulletins qui indiqueraient des votes pour
plus de six Membres seraient declares nuls.
declared invalid.
11 n'y a pas d'observation? J'invite done
. Are there any observations? If not, I will ask
Mr. Perez Cisneros and Mr. Papanek to act as . MM. Perez Cisneros et Papanek a exercer les
fonctions de scrutateurs. Naus alions proceder
tellers. We shall vote by roll-call.
au vote.
(Le vote a lieu au scrutin secret, la tribune.)
(The votes of the delegations were taken in
turn by secret ballot.)
Le PRESIDENT: Le scrutin est clos. J'invite
The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
MM.
les scrutateurs a en operer le depouilleThe roll-call is completed. I call upon the tellers
ment.
to count the votes.
(Les scrutateurs procedent au depouillement
(The tellers proceeded to count the votes.)
du scrutin.)

At the first part of this session, the General
Assembly elected eighteen members of the Eco~
nomic and Social Council. Under Article 61,
paragraph 3, of the Charter, and supplementary
rule R of the provisional rules of procedure, as
proposed by the Preparatory Commission, six
members are elected for three years, six for two
years, and six for one year.
By a resolution adopted at its thirty-s'econd
plenary meeting, the General Assembly decided
that members of Councils elected for a term of
one year would remain in office until 1 January
1947. Consequently, the General Assembly will
now proceed to elect six members to take the
places of those whose term comes to an end next
January.

a

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The result of the voting is as follows:
Number of Members voting ..... , 54
Number of blank or invalid papers 0
Number of votes cast
54
The two-thirds majority required for election
is therefore thirty-six.
The number of votes obtained is as follows:
. Number of votes

United States of America
Venezuela
~

;

51
46

Le PRESIDENT: Voici le resultat du scrutin:
Nombre de vetants
. 54
Bulletins blancs ou nuls
.
o
Suffrages exprimes
. 54
La majorite requise des deux tiers est donc
de trente~six.
Ont obtenu:
Nombr8 d8 voix

EtatS-Unis d'Amerique . . . . . . ..
Venezuela

51
46

Forty-eighth Plenary Meeting

iI
1
I
-j

j
I

I
i

I
Ii
I

978

19 November 1946

Number of votes

Nombre de voix

New Zealand
,
,. 44
Lebanon
,
'" 35
Netherlands
. . . . . . .. 33
Turkey
,
30
Yugoslavia
, 27
Byelorussian SSR . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 25
Poland
" 10
Argelitina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 5
Greece
3
Uruguay.
3
2
Australia
Iran
2
Mexico
,
,
2
Ecuador. .. . . . . . .. . . . . . . ..
1
Luxembourg .......•......... 1
Sweden
1
Decision: The United States of America)
Venezuela and New Zealand were elected members of the Economic and Social Council for a
period of three years, beginning 1 January 1947.

Nouvelle-Zelande
44
Liban
"
"
35
Pays-Bas
33
Turquie
30
27
Yougoslavie
RSS de BieIorussie
" 25
Polognc
10
Argentine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
Grece
3
Uruguay
3
Australie
2
Iran
'. . ,
" .. '" .
2
Mexique
2
Equateur
1
Luxembourg
1
Suede
,..
1
Decision: Les Etats-Unis d)Amerique) le
Venezuela et la Nouvelle-Zilande sont ilw membres du Conseil iconomique et social pour une
periode de trois ans commen~ant le 1er janvier
1947.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I propose that we now hold another ballot.

a un deuxieme tour de scrutin.

Le PRESIDENT: Je vous propose de proceder

Mr. NOEL-BAKER (United Kingdom): Might
we have read again the number of votes ob~
tained by the States which have not been
,elected?
(The figures were read out.)

M. NOEL-BAKER (Royaume-Uni): Puis-je
demander une seconde lecture du nombre de
voix obtenues par 1es pays qui n'ont pas ete elus?

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
, We now have to decide whether we wish to hold
a second ballot immediately. I propose this
course) as we may have to take other votes
subsequentIy.
We have to apply rule 84 of the provisional
rules of procedure of the General Assembly)
which reads as follows:
"When two or more elective places are to
be filled at one time under the same conditions, those candidates obtaining in the first
ballot the majority required in rules 78 or 79
shall be elected: If the number of candidates
obtaining such majority is less than the number of persons or members to be elected) there
shall be additional ballots to fill the remaining
places) the voting being restricted to the candidates obtaining the greatest number of votes
in the previous ballot) the number of candidates being not more than twice as many as
the places remaining to be filled."

Le PRESIDENT: Nous avons maintenant a
decider si nous voulons proceder iJumediatement
a un second tour de scrutin. Je vous propose
d'agir ainsi, car nous amons a proceder a d'autres votes par la suite.

For this election there were six vacancies;
three of them have been filled. Therefore, we
have to elect three Members to fill the three
remaining vacancies. There can only be six
candidates, namely, those which obtained the
largest number of votes in the ballot which has
just taken place. These candidates are Lebanon,
the Netherlands, Turkey, Yugoslavia, the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic and Poland.
These are the only countries eligible. A new
ballot paper will be distributed to you; you may
not vote for more than three Members.

(Il est procMe a cette lecture.)

Nous avons a appliquer l'article 84 du reglement interieur provisoire de l' Assemblee generale, dont la teneur est la suivante:
. "Quand deux ou plusieurs pastes daivent
ctre pourVllS par voie d'election en meme
temps et dans les memes conditions, les candidats qui, au pren1ier tour, obtiennent la majOl'itc requise en vertu des articles 78 ou 79,
sont elus. Si le nombre de candidats obtenant
cette majOl'ite est inferieur au nombre des
personnes ou des membres a elire, on procede
a d'autres tours de scrutin afin de pourvoir les
postes encore vacants, le vote ne portant que
sur les candidats qui ont obtenu le plus grand
nombl'e de suffrages au scrutin precedent et
qui ne doivent pas etre en nombre superieur
au double de celui des postes restant a pourvoir."
En l'occurrence, nous avions six sieges vacants.
trois d'entre eux ont ete pourvus. L'election
va done porter sur trois sieges. 11 ne peut y
avoir que six candidats, ceux qui ant obtenu al!l
scrutin auquel nous venons de proceder le plus
grand nombre de voix. Ces candidats sont le
Liban, les Pays-Bas, la Turquie, la Yougoslavie,
la Republique socialiste sovUitique de Bielorussie
et la Pologne. Ce sont les seuls qui soient eligibles. Il va vous etre distribue un nouveau
bulletin de vote; vous ne pouvez voter pour plus
de trois Membres.
'

,19 novembre 1946

979

Quaranfe-neuvieme seance plenlere

I call upon Mr. Rzymowski, representative of
Poland.'

Je donne la parole a M. Rzymowski, representant de la Pologne.

Mr. RZYMOWSKI (Poland) (translated from
, French) : ' On behalf of the Polish delegation, I
wish to state that my country withdraws its
candidature for one of the vacant seats on the
Economic and Social Council and that Poland
will vote for Yugoslavia.

M. RZYMOWSKI (Pologne): Au nom de la
delegation polonaise, je declare que mon pays
renonce a sa candidature au poste vacant du
Conseil economique et social, et que la Pologne
votera en faveur de la Yougoslavie.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
It is impossible for the President to foresee what
CJ. speaker is going to say, but what the Polish
representative has just said is contrary to the
rules. There can be no nomination of candidates and no withdrawal in favour of a specified
country.
If the second ballot gives no definite results,
I propose that the Assembly postpone the third
ballot till this afternoon.

Le PRESIDENT: Il est impossible au President
de prevoir ce qu'un orateur va dire, mais les
paroles que vient de prononcer le representant
de la Pologne sont contraires aux dispositions du
reglement. Il n'y a point, lieu a presentation de
candidats, et l'on ne peut se retirer en faveur
de td ou td pays.
Si le deuxieme tour de scrutin ne doit pas
donner de resultats definitifs, je propose a l' Assemblee de remettre le troisieme tour eventuel a
cet apres-midi.
Je prie MM. les scrutateurs de bien vouloir
reprendre leur place. Nous allons proceder au
vote.
(Le vote a lieu au scmtin secret, cl la tribune.)

I would ask the tellers kindly to take their
places again. We shall proceed to a vote.
(The votes of the delegations were taken in
turn by secret ballot.)

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The roll-call is completed. I call upon the tellers
to count the votes.
(The tellers proceeded to count t~e votes.)

Le PRESIDENT: Le scrutin est clos. J'invite
MM. les scrutateursa en' operer le depouillement.
(Les scrutateurs procUent au depouillement
du scrutin.)

The PRESIDENT (translated from French);
The result of the voting is as follows:
Number of Members voting. . . . .. 53
Number of blank or invalid papers 0
Number of votes cast
, 53
The two-thirds majority required for election
is therefore thirty-six.
The number of votes obtained is as follows:

Le PRESIDENT: Void le resultat du scrutin:
Nombre de votants .. , . . . . . . .. 53
Bulletins blancs ou nuls . . . . . . . .
0
Suffrages exprimes
53
La majoriU requise des deux tiers est done de
trente-six.
Ont obtenu:

Number of votes

Nombre de voi:c

Lebanon
41
Turkey
,
,
32
Netherlands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 30
Yugoslavia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 27
Byelorussian SSR
22
Poland. . . . . . . . . . . • . . . . . . .
6
Decision: Lebanon was elected a member of
the Economic and Social Council for a period
of three years beginning 1 .January 1947.

Liban
"
41
Turquie
, .. .. . . .. . .. 32
30
Pays-Bas
Yougoslavie
. . . . . . . . . . . . .. 27
RSS de Bielorussie ..... . . . . .. 22
Pologne ..... ,..............
6
Decision: Le Liban est Elu membre du Conseil economique et social pour une plriode de
trois ans commen~ant le 1er janvier 1947.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
As two seats remain to, be filled we shall take
a third ballot this afternoon.

Le PRESIDENT: Deux sieges restant a pourvoir, nous procederons cet apres-midi un troisieme tour de scrutin.

The meeting rose at 2:30 p.m.

La seance est levee cl 14 h. 30.

FORTY-NINTH PLENARY MEETING

QUARAN-rE-NEUVIEME SEANCE PLENIERE

Held on Tuesday, 19 November 1946, at 4 p.m.

Tenue le mardi 19 novembre 1946, Cl 16 heU1·es.

CONTENTS

TABLE DES MATIERES

Page

111. Election of six members of the Economic
and Social Council (continuation) .... 980
112. Election of three members of the Committee on Contributions: reference of
981
the item to the Fifth Committee

a

Pages

111. Election de jlix membres du Conseil economique et social (suite)
980
112. Election de trois membres du Comite des
contributions. Renvoi a la Cinquieme
Commission .. .... ,................, 981
