United Nations

A/RES/58/151

General Assembly

Distr.: General
24 February 2004

Fifty-eighth session
Agenda item 112

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 22 December 2003
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/58/503)]

58/151. Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees on the activities of his Office 1 and the report of the Executive Committee
of the Programme of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on the
work of its fifty-fourth session 2 and the conclusions and decisions contained therein,
Recalling its previous annual resolutions on the work of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees since its establishment by the
General Assembly,
Expressing its appreciation for the leadership shown by the High
Commissioner, commending the staff and implementing partners of the Office of the
High Commissioner for the competent, courageous and dedicated manner in which
they discharge their responsibilities, and underscoring its strong condemnation of all
forms of violence to which humanitarian personnel and United Nations and
associated personnel are increasingly exposed,
Endorses the report of the Executive Committee of the Programme of the
1.
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on the work of its fifty-fourth
session;2
2.
Welcomes the important work undertaken by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and its Executive Committee in the
course of the year, and notes in this context the conclusions adopted on international
protection, on the return of persons found not to be in need of international
protection, on protection safeguards in interception measures, and on protection
from sexual abuse and exploitation, 3 which are aimed at strengthening the
international protection regime, consistent with the Agenda for Protection 4 resulting
from the Global Consultations on International Protection, and at assisting
_______________
1

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 12 (A/58/12).
Ibid., Supplement No. 12A (A/58/12/Add.1).
3
Ibid., chap. III, sects. B–E.
4
Ibid., Fifty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 12A (A/57/12/Add.1), annex IV.
2

03 50364

A/RES/58/151

Governments in meeting their protection responsibilities in today’s changing
international environment;
3.
Reaffirms the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees 5 and its
1967 Protocol 6 as the foundation of the international refugee protection regime, and
recognizes the importance of their full and effective application by States parties
and the values they embody, notes with satisfaction that one hundred and forty-five
States are now parties to one instrument or to both, encourages States not parties to
consider acceding to those instruments, underlines in particular the importance of
full respect for the principle of non-refoulement, and recognizes that a number of
States not parties to the international refugee instruments have shown a generous
approach to hosting refugees;
Notes that fifty-five States are now parties to the 1954 Convention
4.
relating to the Status of Stateless Persons 7 and that twenty-seven States are parties to
the 1961 Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness, 8 and encourages the High
Commissioner to continue his activities on behalf of stateless persons;
5.
Re-emphasizes that the protection of refugees is primarily the
responsibility of States, whose full and effective cooperation, action and political
resolve are required to enable the Office of the High Commissioner to fulfil its
mandated functions;
Emphasizes that international protection is a dynamic and action-oriented
6.
function that is at the core of the mandate of the Office of the High Commissioner
and which includes, in cooperation with States and other partners, the promotion
and facilitation of, inter alia, the admission, reception and treatment of refugees and
the ensuring of durable, protection-oriented solutions, bearing in mind the particular
needs of vulnerable groups, and notes in this context that the delivery of
international protection is a staff-intensive service that requires adequate staff with
the appropriate expertise, especially at the field level;
Welcomes the High Commissioner’s “Convention Plus” initiative, 9 and
7.
encourages the High Commissioner and those States that have offered to facilitate
Convention Plus agreements to strengthen the international protection regime
through the development of comprehensive approaches to resolving refugee
situations, including improving international burden- and responsibility-sharing and
realizing durable solutions;
Recalls the important role of effective partnerships and coordination in
8.
meeting the needs of refugees and other displaced persons and in finding durable
solutions to their situations, and welcomes the efforts under way, in cooperation
with other United Nations agencies and development actors, to promote a
framework for durable solutions, particularly in protracted refugee situations,
including the “4Rs” approach (repatriation, reintegration, rehabilitation and
reconstruction) to sustainable return;

_______________
5

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189, No. 2545.
Ibid., vol. 606, No. 8791.
7
Ibid., vol. 360, No. 5158.
8
Ibid., vol. 989, No. 14458.
9
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 12 (A/58/12),
para. 24.
6

2

A/RES/58/151

9.
Urges all States and relevant non-governmental and other organizations,
in conjunction with the Office of the High Commissioner, in a spirit of international
solidarity and burden- and responsibility-sharing, to cooperate and to mobilize
resources with a view to enhancing the capacity of, and reducing the heavy burden
borne by, countries that have received large numbers of refugees and
asylum-seekers, and calls upon the Office to continue to play its catalytic role in
mobilizing assistance from the international community to address the root causes
as well as the economic, environmental and social impact of large-scale refugee
populations in developing countries, particularly least developed countries, and
countries with economies in transition;
10. Strongly reaffirms the fundamental importance and the purely
humanitarian and non-political character of the function of the Office of the High
Commissioner of providing international protection to refugees and seeking
permanent solutions to refugee problems, and recalls that these solutions include
voluntary repatriation and, where appropriate and feasible, local integration and
resettlement in a third country, while reaffirming that voluntary repatriation,
supported by necessary rehabilitation and development assistance to facilitate
sustainable reintegration, remains the preferred solution;
11. Emphasizes the obligation of all States to accept the return of their
nationals, calls upon States to facilitate the return of their nationals who have been
determined not to be in need of international protection, and affirms the need for the
return of persons to be undertaken in a safe and humane manner and with full
respect for their human rights and dignity, irrespective of the status of the persons
concerned;
12. Encourages the Office of the High Commissioner to continue to improve
its management systems and to ensure effective and transparent use of its resources,
recognizes that adequate and timely resources are essential for the Office to
continue to fulfil the mandate conferred upon it through its statute 10 and by
subsequent General Assembly resolutions concerning refugees and other persons of
concern, and urges Governments and other donors to respond promptly to annual
and supplementary appeals issued by the Office for requirements under its
programmes;
13. Requests the High Commissioner to report on his activities to the General
Assembly at its fifty-ninth session.
77th plenary meeting
22 December 2003

_______________
10

Resolution 428 (V), annex.

3
