(;cn<'ral Assembl~- -l·orty-second Session

252

política! status in accordann: w1th the relevan! prov1s1011~
of the Charter of the United Nations and the Dedaration
and, in that connection, reaffirrns the irnportance offoster
ing an awareness arnong the people of the Territory of the
possibilities open to them in the exercise of their right to
self-determination and independence.
6. Urges the administering Power, in consultation with
the territorial Government. to continue to provide ass1s
tance for increased employment of the local population in
the civil service;
7. Reaffirms the responsibility of the administering
Power to promote the economic and social development of
the Territory and recommends that priority should continue to be given to the diversification of the Territory's
economy in order to provide the foundations for sound social and economic developrnent;
8. Notes the steps taken by the territorial Government
to promote agricultura! production and calls upon the administering Power to provide the necessary assistance in
that field so as to reduce and resolve the Territorv's heavv
dependence on imported foodstuffs;
•
•
9. Calls upan the specialized agencies and other orga
nizations ofthe United Nations system, as well as regional
institutions such as the Caribbean Development Bank, to
continue to take ali necessary measures to accelerate pro
gress in the social and economic life of the Territory;
10. Requests the Special Committee to continue the examination of this question at its next session, including the
possible dispatch of a further visiting mission to the Cayman Islands at an appropriate time and in consultatior1
with the administering Power, and to report thereon to the
General Assembly al its forty-third ,ession
92nd plenary meeting
4 Decembcr 191?7

42/86.

Question of Bermuda

The General Assembly,
Having considered thc question of Bermuda,
Having examined the relevan! chapters of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation ofthe Declaration 011 the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,~7
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting oflndependen_ce to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and ali other
resoluttons and decisions ofthe United Nations relating to
Bermuda, in particular General Assembly resolution
41/18 of 31 October 1986.
Conscious of the need to ensure the full and speedy irnplementation of the Declaration in respect of the Territory,
Noting that, although thc Scnatl' ,if Bermuda did not
'.1dopt a bill calling for a referendum m April 1987 38 011 the
tssue of mdependence, t he is;.ue has heen t he subject of debates in the Territory.
Aw~re of the special circumstanccs of the gcographt,·,il
locat10n and economic conditions of the Territorv and
be~ring in mind the nccessity of divers1fying and str~ngth
enmg further 1ts economy as a matter of priority in orckr
to promote economic stahtlity,

37 /bid., fortv-second
chaps. 111, IV, V ·and IX
38 See resolution 41 / 1X

.\'e\.\1¡11;.

\11¡1¡,1, m,,,1:

\'()

'i

, A L 1 : 1 1,

Welcoming the role bcing played in thc Territory by thc
Unitcd Nations Development Programme,
Mindful that United Nations visiting missions providc
an effective means of ascertaining the situation in the small
Territories and considering that the possibility of sending
a visiting mission to Bermuda at an appropriate time
should be kept under review,
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation ofthe Declaration on the Granting oflndependence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to Bermuda; 28

2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of Bermuda to self-determination and independence in conformity with the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
3. Reiterares the view that such factors as territorial
size, geographical location, size of population and limited
natural resources should in no way delay the speedy exercise by the people ofthe Territory oftheir inalienable right
to self-determination and independence in conformity
with the Declaration, which fully applies to Bermuda;
4. Reiterares that it is the obligation of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as the
administering Power, to create such conditions in the Territory as will enable the people of Bermuda to exercise
freely and without interference their inalienable right to
self-determination and independence in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) and, in that connection, reaffirms the importance of fostering an awareness among the people ofBermuda ofthe possibilities open
to them in the exercise of that right;
5. Reaffirrns that it is ultimately for the people of Bermuda themselves to determine their own future political
status m accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations and the Declaration;
6. Reaffirrns its strong conviction that the presence of
military bases and installations in the Territory could constitute a major obstacle to the implementation of the Declaration and that it is the responsibility of the administering Power to ensure that the existence of such bases and
installations does not hinder the population of the Territory from exercising its right to self- determination and independence in conformity with the purposes and principies of the Charter;
7. Urges the administering Power to continue to take
ali necessary measures not to involve Bermuda in any offensive acts or interference directed against other Statcs
and to comply fully with the purposes and principies of
the Charter, the Declaration and the resolutions and decisions of the General Assembly relating to military activi
ties and arrangements by colonial Powers in Territories
under their administration;
8. Once agaín urges the administering Power, in cooperation with the territorial Government, to continue to
take ali effective measures to guarantee the right of the
people of Bermuda to own and dispose of their natural resources and to establish and maintain control over their
future dcvclopmcnt with a view to creating conditions for
a diversified, balanccd and viable cconomy;
9.
Urges t he specialized agencies ami other organizations of the llnited Nations system to continue to pay spe
cial attcntion to the development needs of Bermuda;
10. Urges the administering Power, in co-operation
with the terntorial Government, to continue to providc
assistancc for increased employment of the local populatwn 111 thc civil service, particularly at senior lcveb;

\ 11

Rc,olution, adopted on thc report, of lhe Fourth Committee

11. Emphasizes the desirabililj of sending a \ 1s1ting
mission to the Territory and rcqucsh 1he administering
Power to facilita te thc dispatch nf such a miss ion at l he
earliest possible opportunity;
12. Requests the Special Committee to continue the examination ofthis question at its next -..ession, induding the
possible dispatch of a visiting mi:,sim1 to Bermuda at an
appropriate time and in consultation with the administering Power, and to report thereon to lhe General Assemhly
at its forty-third session.
92nd plenary meeting
4 Dcccmhcr 1987
42/87.

Question of Guam

The General Asscmbly,
Having considered the queslinn of Guam,
Having examined the relevan! chaptcrs of the reporl o!
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
lmplementation ofthe Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,.lg
Recal/ing its resolution l'il4 (XV) of 14 Decemher
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and ali other
resolutions and decisions ofthe United Nations relating to
Guam, in particular General Assembly resolution 4112"
of 31 October 1986,
Conscious of the need to ensure thc full and specdy im
plementation of the Declaration in respect of 1he Tern
tory,
Having heard the statement of thc representat1vc of tht
United States of America, as the administering Power.
relating to Guam, 40
Taking note of the statement by thc representative of thc
administering Power that the Guam Commission on SelfDetermination, which was appoinlcd in February 1984.
had completed its work on the draft text of a Commonwealth Act, and that voters would be required, in a referendum, to pronounce themselves on the draft text, and
noting that the Guam Legislature had appropriated
$183,000 to fund a voter education prngramme,
Taking note of the statement by thc n:prcsentative of thc
administering Power that the United States Department
ofDefense had planned to release an additional 1,435 hectares of land to the territorial Governmenl in 1986,
Noting the potential offered for diversifying and developing the economy ofthe Territory, for example, by commercial fishing and agriculture, and taking note of lhe
statement of the representative of the administering Power
that the draft Commonwealth Act seeks to promote cconomic development by estabhshing a free 1rade ✓.onc bctween Guam and the United Statcs of America,
Taking note of the statement of the represcntative of thc
administering Power that provisions of thc draft Commonwealth Act would recognize thc distinct cultural identity ofthe Chamorro penplc. the indige11011s inhabitanh (lf
Guam,
Aw~re ofthe special circumslanc·cs oflhe gcograph1cal
locat1011 and econornic condition, uf lhe Territnry and
bearing in mind the neccssitv nf di, crsifying and strengt h-

39

Official Rccords o/ the Generul h1,·111hlr. /-or11 1,·m11d S,•\\1,-,1,
Sui!f'lement No. 23 (A/42/].1). d1ap, 111. \' .,nd IX
/bid., f'ortv-\econd \1'\\/rn1. Fuurth ( ,1111111/f,'¡ '1lth llll"l'lt11g ;11 d
corrigendum. •

253

ening furt her its economy as a matter of priority in order
to promote economic stability,
Re< allíng the dispatch m 1979 ofa United Nations visiting mission to the Terntory,
Mindful that United Nations visiting missions provide
an effective means of ascertaining the situation in the small
Territories and reiterating that the possibility of sending a
furthcr visiting mission to Guam at an appropriate time
should he kept under review,
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the lmplementat ion ofthe Declaration on the Granting oflndependence
10 Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to Guam; 28
2. Reajjirms the inalienable right of the peopk of
Guam to self-determination and independence in conform1ty with the Declaration on the Granting of lndependencc' 10 Colonial Countries and Peoples;
l. Reaffirm.1 its conviclion that such factors as territonal size, geographical location, size of population and
limited natural resources should in no way delay the implementation of the Oeclaration, which fully applies to
Guam.
4. Reaffirms the importance of fostering an awareness
among the people of Guam of the possibilities open to
them with regard to their right to self-determination and
calls upon the United States of America, as the administering Power, in co-operation with the territorial Government, to expedite the process of decolonization strictly in
accordance with the expressed wishes of the people of thc
Tcrrllory;
5 Reafjirms its strong conviction that the presem:e of
military bases and installations in the Territory could constitute a majar obstacle to the implementation of the Declara! ion and that it Ü, the responsibility of the administering Power to ensure that the existence of such bases
and installations does not hinder the population of the
T erritory from exercising its right to self-determination
and independence in conformity with the purposes and
principies of the Charter of the United Nations;
b.
Urges the administering Power to continue to take
ali necessary measures not to involve the Territory in any
offensive acts or interference against other States and to
comply fully with the purposes and principies of thc
Charter, thc Declaration and the resolutions and decisions
of1he General Assembly relating to military activities and
arrangements by colonial Powers in Territories undcr
t heir administration:

7. Reaffirms the responsibility of the administering
Power, under the Charter, to promote the economic and
-,ocial development of Guam and, in t hat connection, e alis
upon the administering Power to take further steps to
strengthen and diversify the economy of the Territory,
with a view to reducmg ih economic dependencc on the
administering Power:
8. Reitera/es that one of the obstacles to economic
growth in Guam, and particularly to agricultura! development. is the holding of large tracts of land by the United
States federal authorities, and calls upon the administering Power, in co-operation with the territorial Government. to expedite the lransfer of land to the people of thc
Tcrrit()ry:
,¡
Relll'rates its cufl upon the administering Power to
suppllrt measures by the territorial Government aimed at
remm ing constraints to growth in the a reas of agriculturc
and commercial fishing and to ensure devclopmcnt in
tlw,,t· arcas to the fullest extent;
