UNITED NATIONS

NATIONS UNIES

SECURITY
COUNCIL

CONSEIL
DE SECURITE

OFFICIAL RECORDS

PROCES·VERBAUX OFFICIELS

FOURTH YEAR

No. 10

FOUR HUNDRED AND SEVENTH
MEETING
He~d at Lake Sttccess,

New York,

QUATRIEME ANNEE

No 10

QUATRE CE~ SEPTIEME SEANCE

on Tuesday, 8 February 1949, at 3 p.m.

Tmue de Lake Sttccess, New-York,
le 1!wrdi 8 fevrier 1949, a 15 helwes.

President: Mr. T. F. TSIANG (China).

President: M. T. F, TS(AN"G (Chine),

Present: The representatives of the following
countries: Argentina, Canada, China, Cuba,
Egypt, France, Norway, Ukrainian Soviet Soetali~t Republic, Unioa of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom, United States of America.

Presents: Les repl'esentants des pays suivants:
Argentine, Cam,da, Cbinc, Cuba, Egypte,
France, Norvege, Republique socialiste sovie~ique cl'Ukraine, Union des Republiqucs sociajstes sQviHiql\es, Royaume-Uni, Etats-Unis
d'Amerique.

1. Provisional agenda (S/Agenda 407)

1. Ordre du jour provisoire
(S j Agenda 407)

1 Adoption of the agenda.

1. Adoption de l'ordre du JOLlr.

2, Letter dated 14 Janl1ary 1949 from the Secrt,;tary-General addressed to tl1e Presi.dent of
the Security Council transmitting the resolution adopted by the General Assembly at its
one htmdred and sixty~third meeting, 19
Noverr,ber 1948, concer:ling the prohibition of
the atomic weapon and reduction by Olle-third
of the armaments and armed forces of the
permanent members of the Security Council

2. Lettre, en date du 14 janvier 1949, adressee
nu President dl! Conseil de securite par le
5ecn~taire gener<ll et transmcttant le te...."<te de
la resolution adoptee par l'Assemblee generale a sa cent soixante-troisieme seance, le
19 novemhre 1948, sur I'interdiction de l'arme
atomique et la rMuetion d'Ltn tiers des arme~
ments et des forces armees des rnembres permanents du Conseil de securite (5/1216).

(Sj1216).
The PRESIDENT: Before the Council beg.ins to
consider the agenda, I wish to express to the
representative of Canada the thanks of my colleagues and myself for his services as President
during the month of January. General McNaughton presided over our deliberations with his usual
courtesy and fairness, for which we are pro~
foundly grateful.

Le PRESIDEN"T (traduit de l'anglais): Avant
que le Conseil aborde l'examen de l'ordre clu
iour je voudrais remercier le representant du
Can~da, au nom de roes collegnes et en man nom
proprC, pour les services qu'il a rendus en sa
qualite ,de President au COUTS, ~u ,mois d,e janvier.
Le general McNaughton a preSIde nos debats avec
sa courtoisie et son equite hahituelles, t:I 1'0.15 lui
en SQmmes profond6mcnt l'econnaissants.

General McNAUGHTON (Canaoa): I should
like to express my most sincere appreciation for
the kind and courteous words which the President has used in connexion with my Presidency
last month.

Leg-eneral McNAUGHTON (Canada) Uraduit
de l'anglais): r<"pprecie vivemcnt les aimables
paroles que le President vient 'de pronon~er a
propos de mon nctivite en qualite de Presldent
pendant le mois demier.

2. Adoption of the agenda

2. Adoption de l'ordre du jour

The agenda was adapted.

L'ardrc dft jour est adopte.

3.

Letter dated 14 January 1949 from
the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council
transmitting the re8olution (192111).
adopted by the General As8embly at
its one hundred and 8ixty-third meeting, 19 November 1948, concerning
the prohibition of the atomic weapon
and reduction by one-third of the
armaments and armed force8 of the
permanent members of the Security

Council (5/1216)

3. Lettre, en date du 14 janvier 1949,
addressee an President du COllseil de
securite par le Secretaire generale et
transmettant le texle de la resolution
adoptee par l'Assemhlee generale a
S8 cent soixallte lroisieme seanee, le
19 novembre 1948, 8ur l'interdiclion de l'arme atomique et la reduclion d'un tiers des armements et des
forces armees des membres permanents du CODBeil de sceuritk (S/

1216)

The PRESIDENT: The Security Council has before it for consideration resolution 192 (Ill) of
the General Assembly, transmitted to it in document 5/1216.
If no member wishes to speak, I would suggest
tIJat tIJe Security Council should transmit this
resolution to the Commission for Conventional
Armaments.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'angla,is) : Le Conseil
de securite a devant lui la resolution 192 (Ill)
de l'AssembJee generale qui lui est transmise dans
le document S/1216,
Si personne ne demande la parole, je propose
la
au Conseil de transmettre cette resolution
Commission des armements de type classique.

Mr. MAUl< (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Rlt~sian):. In view of
the importance of the ques\J.on raised by the
General Assembly resolution concerning the prohibition of the atomic weapon and the reduction
of armaments, which has been referred to the
Security Council, and considerin~ also that the
resolution in question is couched 1n very general
and vague terms, the delegation of the USSR has
been instructed by its Government to submit the
following draft resolution [S/1246/Rev.1] for
the Security Council's consideration. I shall now
read the text of the draft resolution which the
delegation of the USSR is submitting to the
Security Council:

M. MALIK (Union des Republiques socia1istes
sovilhiques) (traduit du russe): Etant dOIU1e
l'importance que presente la question de la reduction des armements et de l'interdiction de I'arme
atomique dont traite la resolution de l'AssembJee
generale qui est soumise a l'examen du Conseil
de securite: etant donne, d'autre part,. que cette
resolution est redigee en tenncs tres generaux et
ne comporte pas d'indications preeises, la delegation de l'URSS est chargee par son Gouvernement de soumettre au Conseil de securite le
projet de resolution suivant [S/1246L dont je
vais donner lecture.

"The Security Council,

a

"Le ConseiJ de securitc,

"Having studied the General Assembly resolution of 19 November 1948 on the prohibition of
the atomic weapon and reduction by one-third of
the armaments and armed forces of the permanent members of the Sec'Jrity Council, and the
discussion of this question at the third session of
the General Assembly;

"Ayant pris connaissance de la resolution de
l'Assemblee generale du 19 novemhre 1948 relala
tive i l'interdiction de l'arme atomique et
reduction d'un tiers des armements et des forces
armees des membres permanents du Conseil de
s&urite, ainsi que des debats de la troisieme
session de l'Assemblee generale i ce sujet j

"Notes, firstly, the increasing activity developing among the aggressive circles of certain
Powers, and their policy of unleashing a new
war, which is accompanied by an unjustified increase in armaments of all kinds, a gross infla~
tion of military budgets and an ever-growing
burden of taxation and other material hardships
upon wide sections of the people in these States;

"Note, en premier lieu, l'activite croissante des
milieux agressifs de certaines Puissances, qui
menent une politique tendant a fomenter une
nouvelle guerre, laquelle s'accompagne d'un
accroissement injustifie des armements de tot:te
espece, d'un gonflement a l'extreme des budgets
de guerre et d'un accroissement continu du fardeau des impMs ainsi que d'autres charges materieHes pour les grandes masses de la population
de ces Etats j

"Notes also the constant and ever-increasing
propaganda of a new war, which is being encouraged by ruling sections in certain countries,
despite the fact that such propaganda was justly
censured in a General Assembly .resolution
[110 (1I)] as early as 1947 and is a direct
weapon in the hands of the warmongers of all
kinds who seek to promote fear, uncertainty and
war hysteria among the people and in international public circles;

"Note egalement la propagande incessante et
toujours plus intense en faveur d'une nouvelle
guerre, propagande encouragee par les milieux
dirigeants de certains pays, en depit du fait que
pareille propagande a cre a just!': titre condamnee
des l'annee 1947, par la resolution de l'Assemblee generale [110 1I] et qu'eile constitue une
arme dire<::te entre les mains de.s bellicistes de
tous genres, qui visent a provoquer la peur, l'incertitude et l'hysterie guerriere parml la popu~
lation et dans les milieux publics internationaux;

"Notes furthermore the recent establishw!':nt
of a number of groups of States, led by the

"Note, en meme temps, la constitution au cours
de ces derniers temps 'de tonte une serie de grou-

a

3
d'Etats, ayant a leur tete les milieux
agresslfs de certaines grandcs Pllissances lesqueUes s'efforcent d'imposer aux aut res pay~ lcur
polit,ique agressive, tout en augmentant la productlOn des armements et en elablissant dans ce
b~t~ ~ans t~u~es les parties du globe, des bases
mlhtatres aenennes et navales, mesures qui ne
sont en aucune maniere compatibles avec les interets de la defensc desdits pays;
"Notes, secondly, that up to the present time
"Collsta.t!:, en second lieu, qu'a l'heure actl1elIe
nothing has been done to implement the General rie~ n'a He .entrcpris en vue de mettre en appliAssembly's decision of 24 Janu<lry 1946 [1 (I)] catl?n I,: Resolution de l'Assemblee generale du
on the establishment of a commission to deal with 24 Ja~vler 1946 [1 (l)] sur la "creation d'une
the problems raised by the discovery of <ltomic commIssion chargee d'etudier les problemes souenergy and the decision of 14 December 1946 leves par la decotlverte de l'energie atomique" et
[41 (1)] on the principles governing the general la decision du 14 decembre 1946 [41 (I)] Sllr
regulation and reduction of armaments, thereby les "prindpes l'egissant la reglementation et la
impairing the authority of the United Nations;
reduction generales des armements", ce qui parte
rn~j udice a l'autorite de l'Organisation des Nations
Unies;
"Notes also that both the Atomic Energy Com"Constale en meme temps que ni la Commission
mission and the Commission for Conventional de l'energie atomique ni la Commission des armeArmaments have failed to fulfil the t<J.sk;; laid ments de type dassique ne se sont acquittecs des
upon them, mainly becal1se the governments of ti~he~ qui leur ont He assignees, ce qui s'explique
certain great Powers have hitherto not ;;triven pnnclpalement par le fait que les gouvcmements
for the adoption of decisions which would be de cerlaines grandes Puissances ne se sont pas
acceptable to all peace-loving Powers and would jusqu'ici efforces de prendre des decisions qui
not infringe the national sovereignty of any of soient acceptables pour tmltes les Puissances pacifiques et ne portent pas atteinte a la souverainete
those Powers;
nationale de l'une ou de l'atltre de ces Puissances;
"Constate, en troisieme lieu, que la decision de
"Notes, thirdly, that the General Assembly decision of 19 November 1948 [192 (H!)] on the l'AssembJee generale du 19 novembre 1948
prohibition of the atomic weapon and the reduc- [192 (III)] sur "l'interdiction de I'arme atotion by one-third of the armaments and armed mique et la reduction d'un tiers des armemcnts
forces of the permanent members of the Security et des forces armees des membres permanents
Council recommends the Security Council to pur~ du Conseil de securite" contient une recommansue the study of the regulation and redllction of dation invitant le Conseil de seCllrite i poursl1ivrc
conventional armaments, bl1t disregards the deci- I'etude de la reglementation et de la reduction
sion a<lopted by the General Assembly in 1946 des armements cle type c1assique, mais qu'elle
on the necessity for prohibiting the atomic laisse de dM la decision prise par l'Assemblee
weapon, and the decision on the implementation generale en 1946 quant a la necessite de I'inter~
of measures for a speedy reduction of arma- diction de l'arme atomique de meme qu'une autr(';
ments an<l armed forces adopted by the General decision prise a l'epoque par l'Assemblee generale
relative aux mesures propres a realiser dans le
Assembly at that time;
delai le plus brei la reduction de;; arme.ments et
des forces arrnees;
"Cons/ate en outre qtle la decision de l'Assem"Notes moreover, that the General Assembly
blee
generale du 19 novembre 1948 attire l'attenresolution of 19 November 1948 points out the
need for formulating proposals for the receipt, tion sur la necessite absolue de formuler des
checking and publication of information on the propositions concernant la reception, la verifinumbers of the armed forces and the volume of cation et la publication d'informations SU1' les
armaments of the Members of the United effectifs des forces annees et l'importance des
Nations, but passes over in silence the highly armements des Etats Membres de l'Organisation
important question of furnishing information on des Nations Unies mais passe sous silence une
atomic weapons to the Security Coundl; which is question aussi importante que la communicati?n
wholly inadmissible, particll1arly in view of the all Conseil de securite de renseignements au stllet
fact that the atomic weapon is an instrument, not de l'arme atomique, ce qui est absolument i~ad­
missible elant donne surtout que l'amle atomlque
of defence, but of aggression;
est line arme d'agression et non une arme de
defense;
"Canstate, en meme temps, que la continuation
"Declares in addition that any contjnuanc~ of
de
I'etude de la question de la reglementation et
the study of the regulation and reduction of
de
la reduction des armements et l'elaboration
armaments, and preparation of proposals for the
de
propositions relatives au ras~embl~ment. de
collection of information on armed forces, mllst
renseignements
sur 1es forces armees dOlvent etre
be subordinated to the t<:l.sk of elaborating and
subordonnees a la tache qui consiste a elaborer
implementing concrete measures for the general et a mettre en cenvre des meSlires concl"etes tendant
regulation and reduction of clfl11aments and ~he a la reduction generale et a la reglementation des
prohibition of atomic weapons and other major armements et 11. l'interdiction de l'arme atomique
types of weapons for mass destruction;
et d'autres annes fondamentales de destruction
massive;

aggl'essive sections of certain great Powers, who
seek to impose their aggressive policy upon other
countries, are increasing the manufacture of arms
and, for this purpose, are setting up in all parts
of the world naval and air bases for which no
jll;;tification can possibly be provided by the defence requirements of these countries;

pemen~s

4

"Recognizing also that complete data on armed
forces and armaments of all trpes, including
atomic armaments, are essential for tIle preparation of measures designed to reduce and regLtlate
armaments and armed forces; and

"Reconnaissant a ce propos l)tle, pour l'elaboration de mesures tendant a la reduction et.i [a
reglementation des ",rmemenls et des. forces
<Irmees, il est absohlmcnt necessait'e de dlsposer
de renseignemel1ts complets Sllr [es forces annees
et les am1ements de tout genre, y compris l'arme
atomiqtte,

"Acting in accordance with its responsibiiLties
for the m~lintcnance of international peace and
security and with the powers conferred on it by
Article 26 of the Oarter, anu guided by the
General Assembly's resolution of 19 November
194B and those of 24, January and 14 December

"Ag-issant cOnformement a la responsabllite
qui lui inc:ombe de maintenir la paix et la securite il1ternationa1es et aux pOllvoirs qui lul sont
conferes par !'Artide 26 de la Chal'te de l'Ol'ganisatior:. des Nations Unies et se guidant egalement sur la. deci.sion prise par ['AssembleI'. generale le 19 novembre 1948 et Sur les decisions
pl'ises par l' AssembleI'. genel'ale 1es 24 janvier et
14 decembre 1946,

1946.
"Resolves
"1. To instruct the Commission for Conventional Armaments, as a flrst step, to prepare a
phm, to he submitted to the Security Council by
1 June 1949, for the reduction by one-third of
the armaments and armed forces of the five permanent members of the Secl1rity COllndlno later
than 1 March 1950;
"2, To instruct the Atomic Energy Commission to stlhmit to the Security Council by 1 June
1949 both the draft of a convention on the prohibition of atomic weapons and the'draft of a
convention for the control of atomic energy, with
the underst,mding that both conventions shall be
concluded and come into force simt:ltaneously;

"Both of these conventions shall be based on a
due consideration for the lawful interests of all
States Members of the United NfltioliS and of
the States upholding the high principles of the
Unite.d Nations, but sh<lll not be based on the
interests of any group of States pursuing their
own narrow concerns j
"3. The Commission for Conventional Armaments and the Atomic Energy Commissioll shall
be guided 111 their work by the principle that the
prohibition of atomic weapons and tlle establishme"t of control over atomic energy must be an
integl'<l.l pal·t of the g,eneral plan for the reduction by one-third of the armti1nents of the permanent members of the Security Council, and
mllst be considered a first important step in that
field;
"4. To consider as essential the establishment
within the framcwork of the SecuriLy Council
of an international control body to supervise and
control the implementation of the measures for
the reduction of armaments and armed forces
and the prohibition of atomic weapons:
"5. To consider it as essential that the permanent members of the Security Council stlbrnit
fuil data on their armed forces a.nd armaments
of all types, incltlditlg' atomic weapons, no later
than 31 1'1arch 1949."
Those arc the proposals of the Soviet Union
on that question,
The PRESrDENT: The Security Council now has
before it both the General Assembly resolution
of 19 November 1948 [192 (IJI)] transmitted

"Decide:
"1. D(: charge:.' la Commission des <lrmements
du type classique d'etablir, a titre de premiere
mestlre, un 1)];1\1 tendant a reduirc d'un tiers pour
le 1er maTS 1950, les alillements et les forces
al'mees des cinq Eta!.::; membres permanents du
Conseil de securite. Le plan susmentionne devra
etl'e pl'esente :.ln Conseil de se.curite au plus tard
le 1er jttin 1949.
"2, De cha~ger la Commission de l'energie
atollliqttl; de presenter au Conseil de securite,
pour le 1er jnin 1949, et un projet de convention
tendant a interdire I'amle atomique et un projet
de comention relatif au controle de l'energie
atomiqlle, en partant de ce que les del1x. conventions dcvront hrc collc1ues et mises en vigueur
siml1ltanel11ent.
"Les de-nx convcntions devl'ont avoir ponf base
la necessite de tenir compte des inten~ts 16gitimes
de tous 1es Et:<lts Mcmbres de l'Organisation des
Nations Unies et des Etats qLti ilppl1icnt les princires elcves de l'Organisation, et ne pas s'inspirer
des intere-ts d'llll groupement que1collque d'Etats
qui [Joursuit ses intcrets etroits.
"3. Que la Conunis3ion des armements de type
classiqtle et la Commission de l'energic atomique
ul;vronl s'inspirer dans leurs travaux de l'idee
que l'interdidion de l'a-rme atomiqu~ et l'etablissement d'tlll controle de l'energie atomique doivent etre pal,tie integrante d'un plan general
tenc1ant a reduirc d'nn tiers les armements des
membres permanents i ce titre de premiere ll1esure
'
importante dans Cl'. domaine.

"4. De reconnaitre lanecessite ahsolue de creer,
clans le cadre du ConseiJ de_ securite, un organe
international de contr61e pOltr 'Surveiller et contraler l'application des mcsures pour la reduction
des armements et des forces annees et pour l'interdiction de l'arnle atomiqtte.
"5. De recommitre comme indispensnble que
1es membres permanenb du COl1seil de seetlrite
pn~sentent all plus tard ie 31 mars 1949 des donnees completes sur le::J.rs forces armees et leurs
<irmements de taus genres, y compris I'arme
atorriique.
Telles sont les propositions que la delegation
de l'URSS a I'honneu!' de presenter a propos de
cl;~te question,
Le PRESIDENT (tradltit de l'anglais) : Le Consei1
de secmite a maintenant dc.vant 1ui la resolution
192 (HI) de l'Assembh~e generale en date'dn

5
to i: in document 5/1216, :J.:J.d the draft resolu-

tion just snbmitted by the representative of the
USSR [S/1246J. I should welcome discussion
on either re301t1tiol1 or on both.
Mr. AUSTIN (United States of America): The
agenda which we have adopted contains an item
re[ening to the !cUe: from the Sccrctnrv.Gcncrnl

[S/1216 J, which contains a coPy of tile resolution of the General Assembly of 19 November
1948. That is what is before us, ar.cl the question is whether we shall transmit that resolution
to be ComI:lission £Or Conventional Armaments.
There is no other qtlestion before us.

19 novembre 1948 c:ui lui est transmis c dans le
document ~/1216, et le projet de resolution que
vient de p~esel1ter le repre,entant de ]'URSS
[5/1246]. La disCLlssioll peut s'ellWLge~ sur !,une
de (CS deux resolations au SlIr les deux a la fois.
M. AUSTIN (Etats-Ullis d'Ameriqm:) (tradl.:<t
de l'angJais): L'ord~e un jot:!' que nC:\lS venous

d';;Idopter contient un point ayant tr:lit :i !:l rP.We
dl1 Secretaire general [5/1216] dans hquelle est
reproduit le texte de la resolution de l'Asse1l1hlee
generaJe en date du 19 llove:nbre 1948. C'est le
point que nClUS devo::ls examiner, et ee qu'il s'ag~t
de savoir, e'est si !lOUS tnl.nsmettrons cette reso~
11.1tiOll
la Commis3ion des armements de type
classique. Nous n'avons aueune autre question it
etudicr.

a

It is difficult to uetermine: whether or not all
that Was said by the representative of the USSR
comprises part of II resolutioll. This fact provides
a very good illustration of the need for a ,ule
with respect to the submission and mimeog-raphing of a resolution ')efore it is cons:dered. This
certainly furnishes a signal example of the
necessity for having copies of a resolutiOlt pre~
pared so that members of the Security CotlUcil
may at least have nn opportunity to read the reso~
luticm at a meeting. to say nothing of having' an
opportunity to study it oventight.

Il est difficile ele juger si tout ee C]l:e vient de
nous clire le representant de l'URSS pent rentrer
dans le cadre d'unc resoluti:m. Ce cas montre
c1-airement qu'il nous faut e'ablil" un feglemel1t
re-Iatif a la presentation et ;\ la reproduction des
pDjets de resolution avant leur examen. Cet
exemple pWl1ve cl'une fac;Oll cdatante qu'iJ e,t
indispensable de preparer de." copies des projets
de resolution, de fa~on que les mcrnbres d:1
Conseil de securite puissent au mains les lire a'J
califS de la seance; ce semit encore miel.\.'{, evi~
demment, s'ils pouvaient les <.voir la vtille d'u~
seance.

If my unc\erstanding is correct, the resolution
presented by the re?resentative 0"£ the USSR is
a sl1ccotasl1 oJ all the diffe~cnt beu:ls, [leas and
othe.r ingredients that have come to us from time
to time throughout the history of the United
Nations. At different times, in the Security
Council and in the General- Assembly, we have
heard these variom proposition!' from the delegatlon of be DSSJ...

Si je cumprends bien, le projet de. l'eiiohttio:l
I'URSS est une
macedoine des propositions qui nous ont ete preSe:ltees au cours de l'histoire de l'Organisatia.1
des Nations Unies, et que nOl:s avons dejiL entendees, soit at Conseil de securite, soit it l'Asscmhlee generale.

I may be in errOr when I speak of what is
codained in this resolution, because I have no
text before me al1d therefore cannot be certain
of what I SlY; all I Call depend upon is my hearing: of the resolution as it was read. However,
I Lstencd attentively and, as nearly as I could
foLow the resolution, it contains something
about "proptl.g-anda of a new war" and "warmongers", which an'. old, old ideas that have becn
argued <md, in some instances, rejected by a very
large note; something about atomic energy and
the duties of the Atomic Energy Commission;
s01:lething dealing with what the great Powers
have failed to do, what action they h;J.ve failed to
take, in tlle direction of peace; and the claim
that the present item of business in the Security
CO'Jncil by-passes prohibition of the atomic
'weapon. \Vell, it was by-passed by a vote of
43 to 6, with onc absten:ion, in tbe General
Assembly at Paris 1. There is no such thing as
aton'ic we~pOll prohibition in the Assembly resolution before 1.15.. In other words, it is apparent
that there ;s some effort here to revive that old
issue thnt was (lefeated by a vote of 43 to 6, with

Je puis :nc tromper en pa:-Iant dll contenU de
ce projet de resolution, car je n'en ai pas le tex~e
SCllS les yeux, et je ne puis done etre certain de
ce C]ue j'avance; je dais !1"en tenir, ce q~~
j'ai entendll lorsql.1e ce proJe! nons a ete lu, J at
ecoute eette lecture avec attention et, pour autant
que j'aie pu suivre le texte, celui-ci melltion:1e
qnelqt1e dosc a p~opos de "la propagande en
fp.veur d'll:1e nOllve:le g11crre:" et de "bellicistes";
ce sont la de tl'es vieil1es idees qui ont ett: deja
discutees et en c.ertaines occasions, rejetces par
de tres f01t~S majorites. 11 parle aussi de.l'~nergie
at?miquc et des tkhesde la Comm1ss1011 ,de
l'inergie ;ltoll'1iql1e, de ee que les grmdes PlllSganc<cs n'od pas fait, des meSllres qu'elles aum\cnt
dn prendre pom assurer 1<. paix. et l1'Ol~t ps
prises. Enn.l1, i1 pretend que cc pomt de I ordre
du jonr dll Conseil ue seeurite ne tient pas compte
de l'interdiction de l'energie atomique. Eh bim,
c'est pal' t".ll vote de 43 voix contre 6, avcc une
<tJstention, que ['Assemblee generale qui s,'est
tenue :J. Paris 1 n'cn a pas tenll comptr,. La resolution de l'Assem1.Me gel1erale que nOllS avcns
sous les yeux nt :ait aucune 'allusion a l'intercJ:ction de l'energie atomique. En d'autres termes,
i1 est evide!l~ que l'on ~~it un c.ffor~ IJo.t1~ r;ss:1s~
c:ter une Vlellle propOSition, qUi a e.te leJetee pal
43 voi:x contre 6, ;).vec noe abstentLOn.

Z abstentio~.

• See offici[!l Records of the thiui sessio!, Dj Iile
Gen-eral Assembly, Part I, 163rd plenary rneetlTIg.

pl~sente par le representant de

a,

'Voir l~s Docum,nf~ of/icids de la Iroisicme sesJion
d~ I'AssclIIUh generale, 'Premie~e partie, ~63eme seance
p~eniere.

6
I am not going to make the claim here that
a member of the Security COL\llCi1 cannot use a
drag-net to catch every item of bL1siness that that
member has offered and on which it has been
defeated, during the history of the Nations, If
a representative considers it wise to do so, J am
not going to stand ill his way, I am not even dis~
CtIssing t1,(O wisdom of doing that I,ere, for I am
not going to discuss the merits of an}' of the
llumerOllS items in this so-calh'd resoltltion. All
I am saying is that, if it were possible to interpose it here amidst the pending btlsiness, its sole
objective could be to canse delay and to make
it difficult, if not impossible, to take one single
step toward the establishment of conditions of
peace,

I

Je ne vais pas pretenclre ici qu'un membre du
Conseil de securite n'ait p3.S le droit de chercher
It repecher toutes les propositions qu'il a presentees
et qui ont deja ete rejetees par l'Organisation des
Nations Unies, Si un representant considere qu'il
est sage de le faire, je ne m'y oppose point. J e ne
discute rneme pas la sagessc. d \tne telIe attitude,
car je ne vais rneme pas examiner la va1ettr des
nombreux points enumeres dans ce pretendtl
projet de resolution. Je ne dirai que ceci: si I'on
veut introduire ce projet dans les traval1X ell
cours, cela ne relit eire que pOllr provoqller des
deIais et rendre difficile, sinon tout a fait ir!lrossib le, de prendre tOllte mesure en vue cl't.~tablir
des conditions favorables
la paix,

a

Of course, the concern of all the world is
peace. The hearts of people all over the world are
filled with an earnest desire that this great Organization shall advance in its efforts to establish
means of protection and security against the use
of force, eithcr in the form of ag-gressive action
or in other forms that threaten the peace of the
world.

C'est evidemment la paix qui est ie souci clu
monde tout entier. Dans le 11loncle entier, on
desire arc1emment que notre grande Organisation
fasse des efforts en vue dc treer un systeme de
protection et de securite contre l'emploi de la
force, que ce demier revete ]a fonne d'agression
all toute atltre forme pOllV<lnt mcnacer la paix
du monde,

Now here we are, having more than a year ago
separated consideration of the control of atomic
energy from consideration of the control of conventional armaments, and we have macle progress,
I think we have made excellent progress, because
the consideration of the control of coll\'entional
armaments has been thorongh and hrls brought to
its fin8.l formulation the lmited judgment of
forty-three rvIember States that we sl~olllcl go forward, as stated in this reso1tltion of the General
Assembly, through the instrumentality of the
Security Council-that body having the same
membership as the Commission for Conventional
Armaments-and take a tonc:rete, dear and
simple first step. It is good propaganda, by the
way~a great deal better propaganda than this
collection, this grab-bag of old issl1es being
thrown together here in the face of the Secnrity
Conncil when it has such a clear and simple
mandate as that found in the General Assembly
resolution.
-

Il y a deja pIns d'nn an que [lOllS avons decide
de separer la question dLl c:ontr6lc de I'energie
atomiqtte de celle dn cant role des armements de
type c1assique, et nous avons fait des progres
depuis. Je crois pOlivoir dire que nous avons
realise de grnnds progrcs, mr I'etude du contr6lc
des .ar1l1emcnts du type classiqne a ete tres detaillee et a abouti une decision commune, prise !Jar
Cjuarante-trois Etats membres, <lUX 1crll1es de
laqnelle n011S devons a11er de l'avant, et prendre,
par I'intermediaire elt1 Conseil de securite - dont
la composition est la memc qne celle de la Commission des armements de type classique une premiere mesnre concrete, nette et simple.
Tont cela, soit dit en passcU1t, prodllit d'excellents
effets, des dIets de beaucotlfJ superieurs a ceux
que produit ce ra111assis de vieillcs propositions
la
que I'on jette maintenant totltes ensemble
face dll Conseil de Ilecnrite, alors que la resolution
de l' Assemblec generale a donne a cc demier
lm mandat net et simple.

What is it that the Security Council is asked
to do? Accordi~g to the resoll1tion, the General
Assembly

a faire? Auxtermes de cette resolution, I'Assemblee generale:

"Recommends the Security Council to pursue
the study of the regulation and rednction of conventional armaments and armed forces throuR,h
the agency of the Commission for Conventional
Armaments in order to obtain concrete results as
soon as possible.. ,"

"Recommande au Conseil de securite de poursuivre I'etude ele la reglementation et de la reduction des armements de type c1assique et des forces
armees par l'inte~m6diaire de la Commission des
armements de type dassique, afin d'obtenir, des
que possible, des resultats concrf'ts."

a

a

Qu'est-ce que le Conseil ele secllrite est invite

Pausing there for a moment, let us consider
what the author of that reso]ution-especially
that part of the resolution-thought it lDeant to
the peace of the world, I am (]l1oting from document AjC.ljSR 197 of 15 November 1948 in
which Senator Rolin of Belgium-who,:::Is w~ all
know, was the person who presented the Belgian
amend,ment, which this resolution is-is reported
as saymg:

Arretons-nolls la un instant, et exn.mlnol1s quelle
etait, dans I'esprit de l'auteur de cette resolution
- et je pense, en particulier, a la p<l.rtie de la
resohltion dont je viens de dOllnel' lecture la signification de ce texte pour la paix dU11londe,
D'apres le document AjCljSR197, en date du
15 nOl'embre 1948, le senateur Ro!in, representant
de la Belgique, qui, comme 110115 le savons tons,
a soumis I'amendement beige qui a servi de base
cette re-solution, a dit:
"In the opinion of the delegations which llad
"Dans I'esprit de's delegations qni ont approuve
supported the Belgian amendment, the Commis- l'amendement beige, la Commission des armesion for Conventional Armaments shotlld hegin ments de type tlassi.qtle doit se mettre imlnediatework immediately. What were, in fact, those ment an travail. En effet, que sont ces "reStlltats
'concrete results' which depended on an 'improve- concrets" qni sont subordonnes it I'''amelioration
ment of the international atmosphere'? It was a ide l'atmosphere intcrnationale"? 11 s'agit de I'ob-

a

7
question of the objective of the resD~ution which
hac been adopted in 1946 [41 (1)], namely, an
effective reduction Ofan11aments. Dut, in order
to attain those concrete resulLs, a basis for further
progress should be established, namely, the gatheriug of correct and verified information on the
armaments and ar:ned forces of the various
States."
Let me ask, what is the intention Jf a country
wh:ch blocks or interferes with the progress of
a resolution which would accomplisl1 that? \7l/h::.t
is ~he p:lrpose? Is it really to try to e5tablish
conditions for pf'a~f'? The presumption is that
if :his celay, if this obstn1ction-no ma:ter by
whdt means it is c<:.rried otlt-make5 remote the
possibility of a reduction of arinaments, a definite
purpose was in view.

Now this resolntian [192 (Ill)] tells us simply
the step that should be taken first to get what
Senator Rolin characterhed as "a basis for further progress . . 'J namely, the gathering of
correct and verified information. . ." The resolut:on provides as follows. I am reading from
the next l)aragrapb after the O:le that began with

"Recommend.s :

"Trust.s th~t the Commission for Conventional
Armaments J i:"l carrying Ol1t its plan of work, wJ!
dewtei:s first attention to for;nulating proposals
for the receipt, checking and publication, by an
intern8.tiol1<ll organ of control within the framework of the Sewrity Council, of full information to be supplied by Member States with regard
to their effectives and their conventional arma~
ments."
A simple proposition, is it not? Has :he distir.gtlished representative of the USSR ever
offered to tell tlS ahout-and allow us to \'erifythe effectives and the co:wentional annaments of
his great country? I can say that the United
States :1ZlS offeree! that, and still offers it. In
supporting this Assembly resolution, it does so in
full hor:esty and with the expectaticn of carryi:lg
it 011t fully, for its part, if the resoltltion has t:le
good fortune to be implemellted by the Security
Council.
First let us ascertain what the facts are, let us
llllllt'lBtaml till:: sl1bject mattcr. How can we go
ahead with be redtlction of sometlling of whic11
we do not know the dimensions? How can we
m.'1.ke any rational internatior:al reiLuction if we
do 110t have a view of the intern~tional scene
and of the n:1ative: strength of <1rm:llnents and
effectives?

Senator Rolin went into the past a little in support of his resolt:tiOll J saying in effect that he
had had p'feviotts experience of attempts at the
reduction of armaments and armed forces and,
had found that this was an indispensable requisite
for rn<i.king a wise plan for the reduction and
regulation of armaments.

I am not undertaklng to atgt1e the merits of
this resohltiqn, for it has already been passed;

je~tif ceja \'lse

p",r la resolution adIJptee en
1946 [41 (1)], c'est-a-dire la reduction effective
des anr.ements. Mais J afin d'atleindre des resu1tats c?ncrets, il faut etablir la bElsC qui pCl"J:1cttrn
de f:ure des progres ulteriettrs, c'est-a-dire ra.ssemb1er des donnees precises et contrcMes sur
1es annements et forces armees des diffhents
Etats."
QueUes pellvent eire, je VDUS le demanC:e, les
intentiO:1S d'tm Etat qui essaie dJempecher IJapfJli_
cation d'une resolution qui nous pem:ettrait d:atteindrc ce bl1t? Quels san: les buts qu'il poursl1it?
Cet Etat des:rc-t-i1 reellement l'etablissell1ent de
conditiC·lls favorables it la paix? 11 est it presumel'
que, quels que soient les moyens enlployes. c'est
un but precis que l'on poursuit en se 1ivrant ~
cette obstruction qui a pourresl11tat de retarder
la reduction des armements.
La resolution de IJAssemblee genemle [192
(fH)] :lOUS bdique sous une fOnlle si:nple guelles
mesures doivent etre prises en premier lieu pour J
camme 1'.1 dit .1e senatem Ro1in, "et<lblir 1<:. base
qui pcmlcttra de faire des pmgr~s l.Ilte.rietl1·s"; c:lle
dcmande de "idSsembler des dOllllees pn~ei3es et
contr6Jees". Le paragra}:hc de la resolution de
l'Asscrnblee gener:a1e qui fait st1ite a (elui dont
je viens de douncr lecture est reC:ige. e:l (es
termes:
"Bl1ut le V~JI que J dans l'execution de son
[Jlan de travail J la Commission des al'll1e:ncnts
de type classique se preoccl1pe de formuler tout
,l'ahorc1 des proposition:: pour la reception J Id
verification et la public<:.tion par ltr. mganisme
interna:ional de contr61e, dans le taCLre du Conscil
de se.curite. J d'informations completes a foumir
par les Etats Memhrc:s touchant lellrs ef~ectiij
et letlN arln~mcnts de type classicpe."
Ce texte n'est-il pas a'Jsolnmmt clair? Le dis~
tingl1e representan~ de l'URSS a-t-il jamais propose de foumir des renseignements touchant les
effectifs et les armements de type classique de
son graml pays, et de nOtlS permettre de Y;'ri0~r
ces l'enseignements? En revanche, je pellX (hre
que 1es Etats-Unis IJont fait et reste?t ~i~P?Ses
le faire. l1s apportent en toute 'Stncerrte 1em
<lppui i cette resolution de I'A~setnble.e gell~ra~c
et s'appreter.tJ pour lelu part, a l'apphquer II1tegralement si, par bonheur, e1le est mtse en ceuvre
par le Conseil de securite.
Tout d'abord, i1 faut etablir lIes faits J bien
comprendre ce dont il s'agit. Comment pOllVOllS110US tenler de red!1ire quelque chose c10nt le~
dimensions ne IlOUS sont pas connues? Ccmmen:
pouvons-nous, de f-w;on raisonnable, proceder ~
l1tle reduction des annements clans le l1londt SI
ntlllS n'avons flas une vue claire de l<l situation
internationale si DOUS ne connaissons pa~ la
lmissa:lce en J'h0Il1111eS et en mab~riel des djver~
pays?
Le senateur Rolin a tire de I'histoire recente
quelques argt1nlCl;ts ~. l'apl?tli de sa l:esohttio,1l
lorsqu'il a declare qu tl aV<llt une cet;tallle exp~·
:-ience des essais precedemment tentes pour re~
duire les atlllements et le,c;. forces annees des
divers pays, et 1u'il ~vajt ,col1s~ate queJ ROtT
etablir un plan ra:lOnne. de ;ed.l1C~lnt:t e~ de regl~~
mentation des annements, 11 etalt mdlspensahe
de possede7 des renseignements.

a

Je n'essaie pas d~. d:~c~ter la ,w.lleur ~e cettc
resolution. Elle a deja ete adoptee par lAssem~

8
it was adopted by the General Assembly after
that body had turned down a resolution offered
by the USSR [.."11723] which dragged in the control of atomic energy and the reduction of arma.
ments generally by one-third. This resolution
was adopted by the General Assembly by a vote
of 43 to 6 with 1 abstention. We do not have to
repeat it, that is not what is before us. It is not
now a question 01 whether or not the Security
Council adopts this resolution; this is a resolution
of the General Assembly and the question before
us is whether we shall transmit it to the Commission for Conventional Armaments. That is
what is before us. This other proposal is not be·
fore us except in so far as it has been given here
in an oral statement. To that extent it is here,
,md if il should succeed in provoking a long
debate it would simply delay, by so much time,
the transmission of the General Assembly's re.~o­
1ntion to the Commission for Conventional
Armaments.
In concluding, I should like to say briefly that
what is meant by the reference in the USSR
resolution-if illdeed it is in it, and I am not
sure that it is-to groupings of States can only
be conjectured, but my conjechtre is that it refers
to regionnl arrallgements. Possibly it is intended
to include the Vvestern hemisphere, the American Republics Pact and the Act of Chapllltepec
behind that, but if it refers to what is now under
consideration, that is to the Atlantic Pact, the
best I can do is to C}tlotc from the Secretary of
State regarding onr policy in that connexion. 1n
a Press release of 26 January 1949 he said.
among other things:

"We are c:onvinced that we can best contribute
to the maintenance of peace bv joining with other
nations in making it absolutely clear in advance
that any armed attack affecting oitr national
secmity would be met with overwhelming force.
"The proposed treaty would be a collective defence arrangement within the framework of the
United Nations Charter, designed to strengthen
the United Nations by providing for the orderly
and co-ordinated fulfilment of the obligations of
the participating nations under the Chatter."

T could say more, but I am content to leave
it there because I think that that is a clear-cut
expression of the peacehtl objective of that
regional arrangement and an affirmation of
fidelity to the principles and to the Organization
of the United Nations.
The General Assembly has already considered
that part of this USSR draft resolution which
relates to rednction of armaments by one-third
and to the prohibition of atomic: weapons, and
has rejected it. It has passed upon the questions
that are contained in the Assembly resolution before us and has adopted them. It seems to liS
that it is now up to the Union of Soviet Socialist
RepLtblies to co-operate with the other members
of the Commission for Conventional Armaments
in all effort to take specific measures in this field,
especially such measures as would bring about
exact, verified knowledge and information r~­
garding arms and eft'ectives. It would also seem

bUe genera1e, aprcs que celle-ci eut rejete un
projet de resolution presente par l'URSS
[A/723], projet qui soulevait la question du
contrcle de l'energie atomique et celle de la
reduction generale (ks nrmements, dans la proportion d'un tiers. La resolution. dont n011S somInes saisis a ete adoptee par l'A5semblL~e genera1e
par 43 voix contre 6, avec une abstention. It est
inutile de le rappe1er, la question n'est pas la. 11
ne s'ngit pas de savoir si le Conseil de seeurite
doit 011 non approl1ver cette resolution; elle a
ete adoptee par l'Assemblee generale. La question
est de savoir si nous transmettrons cette resoltltion a I~ Commission des armements. de type
classique. C'est de ce1a qu'il s'agit Nous ne
somntes pas saisis de I'autre proposition; elle a,
certes, ete presentee oralement, mais, si tela suffisait pour nollS entrainer dans un long debat, la
transmission a 10. Commission de.s armemellts de
type c1assique de la resolution :adoptee par l'Assemblee gener<lle se trouverait retal·Me d'autant.
Pour conc1ure, je vOltdrais dire bricvement
que le sens de l'allusion EL des groupements d'Etats
que contient le projet cie resolution de l'URSS si telte allusion existe, ce dout je ne suis :pa~
sur - ne pent faire l'objet que de conjectures.
Ma prop1"e conjecture est qu'elle vise les accords
regionaux. Peut-etre elltend-on l'appliquer au
Pacte de l'hemisph ere occidental, au Pacte des
Repttbliques americnines et it I'Acte de Chnpul·
tepee pour le passe, lt1~is, si on veut l'appliquer
aussi a des mesures que I'on etuc1ie acttleIlement,
c'est-a.-dire all Pade de ['Atlantique, je ne saurais
miellx faire que de citer tllle declaration faite
par le Secretaire d'Etat sur notre politiqne a cet
egard. Dans un communique a. la presse, en date
dtt 26 janvier 1949, ce demie, a declare entre
atttres:
"Nous sommes convaincus que la meillcure
fa<;on pour nOLts de contribuer au maintien de la
paix est de nous assoeier a d'autres nations pour
dedarer d'avance et salis ambages que toute agression armee qui raffecterait notre securite nationale
se heurterait it Ulle force ecrasante,
"Le traite envisage sera tm accord de defense
collectif clans le cadre cie la Charte des Nations
Uoies, accord dcstine a renforeer l'Organisation,
en prevoyant des mesures en vue de l'accomplissemellt oruonne et coordonne de leurs ouligations
par les nations partieipantes, conformemellt mix
disposi.tions de la Charte."
J e pourrais en dire davantage, mais il me semble
que ce1a est suffis<tnt. Nous trouvons J.a tme defi.ni.tion parfaitement claire des buts pacifiques de
cet accord regional et une affirmation de fidelite
aux principes de l'Organisation des Nations Unies.
L'Asscmblee generate a deja examine la partie
du projet de r~solution de l'URSS qui a trait
it la reduction d'tm tiers des armements et it l'interdiction de I'arme atomique, et ['a rejetee. Elle
a e::-;i1mine 1es propositions contenues dans la
resollllion dont nous sommes saisis et les a
adoptces. A l'henre actueJle, c'est it. l'Union .des
Repuhliques socia1istes sovietiques, nous semblet-il, qu'i1 appartient de cooperer avec les autres
membres de la Commission des armements de
type classique, afin d~aboutir a des mesures
concretes permettant, notamment, ue rel\nir des
renseignements precis et controles sur les effec_
tifs et 1es anl1f'.ffients des divers pays. De meme~

\

tha~ any new USSR propcsa[s, such as this one
Wlllclt coJiects all the different. items and brings
them together before the Security Council, s:lould
be presented to the Com:-n.ission for Con'len~ional
Anm.ments, if they are worthy of cons~deration
by that Commission.
However, I am n:)t cornpl.aini:1g. The representative of the USSR can present it here if he
wishes z.n(] i.f h<; t~ink!; that hot js a wise thing
to do. That IS lllS Judgment, and I am not under~nldng to say ~hat it is unwise. What I am saying
1:::; tlw.t a special for1.lm for reduction of COnvcntional ~rmaments has bee~ ::re2ted. by tbe Security
COllncll. It has been assIgned thiS special study.
That is the plu.ce, if. this resolution proposed by
the representatlve 0: t1~e USSR contains :-eduction of cOI:ventional armaments.

The United State~ gave its support to this Belgian amendmellt. It may be reca:Jed that the
United States had a differen: resolution
[A/C.lIS.C.12/1] in the begicning but,observing
the sitt:ation the Uuited States g,o: bebind this
resolution in Pa~is. Tt wJI faithfully ;lndertake
to c,trry it out.
J

J

I think that the pending questio':l whtther or

not the resoltttion should be tnnsmitted to the
Commission for Conventional A~m"me:1ts should
be ccdded in the affirmative,
Sir Alexander

i~ nou,s. semble que tOlltc nouvelle proposition de
1 UR:JS,?u genre de celle-ci, qui rassemble totttes
les questions pOur les porter tou:es ensemble
?evant,]c Cons.eil de securite, devrait etre scumise
a. la Co.mrr.lsswll des an.llements de type classlque, SI elle vau: la pemc que cette derniere
I'etudie.
.To~tefoj,5, je n~ vcux pas presenter de recri.
llltn,ahons a ce sllJet. Le representant de I"JRSS
peut prcscntc:r tlne teLc proposition i~i, s'il desire
a~il" a!n.si. et, s'] .cstime q':1'il est sage de le faire.
C est a .111 d en Jug-er, et Je ne pretends pas affir.
mer qU'il scrait ~cu sage ele le bire. Je vel1:X:
tout sm~plemer.t dire qu'ulI organisme competent
pour traite~ de la question de la reduction des
armements de type dassiquc Cl. ete cree par le
Consei1 de Seettrite, orga:1isme qui a precisbnent
pour mandat d'ewdier cette cuestion. C'est devant
eel orgaJlis~Jle que la prcpos1tion de l'URSS devULt e~~·e p~es~l1tee, si e:Je porte sur la quesLon
de la reductlor_ des armements de type classique.
Les Etats-Unis ont accorde 1eur appu:' a l'amencement de la Belgiql1e. 11 est utile de n.ppeler
c;ue, i't l':Jrigine, les Etats-~Jnis d'Ameriql1e avaient
presente un projet de resclution ~ifferen: [Ale.!/
S,C.12/1], mais t;ye, tellant compte de la situation i1~ or.t
Paris donne leur appl1: ~1l texte
en executer fidelement
beige. Ils s'cr.gagent
les dispositions.

a

a

J'eslillle gilt nOlls devons resoudre <)ar l'affirmat:ve la qtlc~tion qui est notre ordie du jom
et qui est de savoir si nOllS devor.s transmettrc
la resolution de l'As5ul1Jlc<: generale !J. 13 Ccrnmission des annements
type classiqne.

a

cc

(Uuitt:u Kingdom) :

Sir A1cl"ancer ::;... DOGAN (Rnyanme-tJni) (tra-

1 wish only to S1?}' that I fnlly endorse everything

iuii de J'(l1lghi.r): Je YOlldrW5 simplement dire

that bas just been sai,l by the representative of
the United States. I have not wry llluch to add,
but I should rather like t8 emphasize one or two
points in particular on which M~. Austin touched
in the com·se of his re:narks.

que je sltis entierement d'accord avec tout ce que
yiellt dc declarer le repre.~e:1t;lJlt de.:: Etnts-Unis.
Je n'aurai que fort petl it ajouter, si ce n'est pour
souligr.tT une DU detL"\ idees que M, Austin a
1lleJltionncc~ <.tu C01.lr~ de SOlI interve.ntion.
Tout d'a1Jord, je desire souligner que l'o~dre
du jour du Conseil de securite ne COlTIjlort:e reeIleme:!t qu'lmc seu)e question; celle de l'exiUne:J. d~
la lettrc adressee rar le Secretalre genera: au
Co:!sei1 d: securite, trc:nsnettant le texte de la
resolution acoptte par l'Assemblee gelJ'hale le
19 novembre 1948. C'cst la la premiere question
dOnt le C::l11sei1 est sods: et sur laquelle r doit se
pronoIlcer. ]'espere que le Conscll voudril, a lln~
fortlt majorite, don:1er suite it cette lettre, et h
suite eviC:ellte a lui donner est de rellvoyer it h
Comrr.ission des arrncments de type c1assique la
resolution cie l'Assemb[ee get'era:e, etat!t donne
j'existwce, (h.ns la n~soltttion de l'Assemblee generale cl'un paragraphe c.eji cite par l\f, Austin et
pal· lequel l'Assem bll~e gene-ra1e:

CADOGAN

In the first place, r wish to e::nphasize that
the effective n.genda b~fore the Serurity Council
contains only one :tem, which is the letter from
the Secl·etary-General transmittng the resolution
,tdopted by the General Assembly on 19 ~O\'em­
ber 1948. That is the l'Jrst business before the
Co:tncil und the first point on which the Council
will have to reach a decision. 1 should hope that
a large I;mjority of the Council would wish to
tal(e action all that 1etter and the obvious action
for them tu lake would bc to refer the General
Assembl)' res-olution t,:> the Commission for Conventional Armaments, ill view of the paragraph
111 the General As:>emhly rt:sO:lltiOll already
quoted by Mr. Aus:in, in which t:1e General
J

A5sembly:
"RecommcHds the Security Council to pursue
the study or the regu:ation am: reduction of
conventional arman-.ents ~n(l armed forces
tbrol1gh the agency of the Conmission for Conventional Armaments..."
I hope, therefore, that the Council will not find
m:lc!J difficulty in t<llcing tbat nction-even today,
if no very long discussion is required on the subject, a1lL I do not guite see why there should be.
I come now to the draft resolution submitted
orally toda:' by tIle representative of the USSR

J

"Recom11tand~ alA Conscil de secttl'ite cl/> floursuivre l'etud~ de la reglementt'lticn et des forees
ar.l1eeS pa.r l'intel'tr:ediaire de la Cornmi;sion des
ar:nemellts £le type c1assiq~lc ..."

]'espere done que le Conseil pour~aJ sans trap
de di:Iicultes. p:'endre une decision en ce ~ens pellt-hre alljollrd'hui mel1le - a moins <]u'UJe
disctBsicm prolongee ne s'avere necessaire, et .ie
ne yois pas pourquoi il devrait en t'.tre alnsi.

]'e:1· arrive lnaintenant au projet de ~esoll1tion
presente ori1lement aujourd'hui p.ar le represen-

10
If the representative of the USSR insists upon
it, of course the Council will be ready, I am sure,
to discuss it at some suitable time. At this time
we do not have the written text !Jefore us. It is
rather a Long and formidable document. I uo not
pretend to have digested it all, though I iistened
to it as best I could. I did note one or two points,
but, obviously, we are not ready here and now to
embark 011 a discussion of that long draft resolution, if a discllssion of it is desired. Of course,
if the representative of the USSR insists, the
Council con1d discuss it at some later date. I
wish merely to draw attention to one feature of it.

tant de l'URSS. Si le representant de. l'URSS
insiste sur sa proposition, le Conseil sera pret,
j'en SU1S sur, a l'examiner au moment opportul1.
Mais, pOur I'instant, UOUI:: n'avons pas Cl" texte par
ecrit. 11 s'agit d'ull documen1t' assez long et
complique, et, malgn~ toute I'attention avec laqueUe je l'o.i ecoute, je ne pretends pas l'avoir
entieremenr assimi1e, T'ai note un ou ueux
points, mais i1 est evident {jue nOllS ne sammes
pas en mesure cl'entreprendre sur-le-champ la
discussion de cc long projet de resolution, it
supposeI' (jlle cette discussion soit jugee souhai~
table. NatureIlement, si le repn~sen!tant de I'URSS
insiste pOllr que cette discussion ait lieu, le
Conseil pOurra I'entreprendre a une date ulterieurc. Je voudrais simplement attirer l'attention
du Consei1 Sur une des caracteristiques de cc
projet.

So far as I understood the text which the representative of the USSR read to the Council, it
provides, among other things, for the formulation
of a plan for the recluction of the armaments
of the five permanent members of the Security
Council by one-third. That was a plan which was
submitted to the General Assembly at its Paris
session hy the delegation of the USSR, and it was
very decisively rejected.

Le texte dont le representant ell" L'URSS vient
de donncr lecture at: Conseil, prevait, entre alltres
chases, si jc comprends bien, l'eJabonation d'un
plan de reduction d'un tiers des armements des
cinq membres permanents du Conseil de securite.
C'est l~ un plan qui a deja ete soulllis par la
delegation de l'URSS a l'AssemhMe generale lors
de sa session a Paris et qui a ete rejete a Ulle
fort<: majorite.
11 semble que La pratique se soit recemmen.t
repandue de res.snsc:iter des projets rejetes, de
chercher a remettre en discussion et de me-ttre
aux voix des projets (jLti, de toute evidence, ne
peuvent recueillir une majorite. C'est la line pmcedure vic.ieuse en prineipe et qui peut eventueIlement creel' une confusion fac11euse. Qu'arrivcraitil, en effet, s.i la proposition de l'URSS 6.taitadoptee et si la Commission des annernents de -type
claBsique se trouvait saisie, d'Ltne part, du pl-an
expose clans la resolution de l'Assemblee geoerail" et, d'rtutre part, du plan de I'URSS? Ce1a
ne pourrait, me semble-t-it, qu'fmtra:i.ner une
confusion prolongee clans [es dehtts de la Commi,<;siOll et une perte de temps considerable.
Si toutcfois, comme je l'ai dit, on insiste sur
Cl" point, le Conseil pourrait examiner le projet de
resolutiOn de l'URSS quancl i1 le jllgera opportull.
Mais je rtcommande instamment que l'on ne perde
pas plus de temps, d'abord a attenclre la publi.c..tion de Cl" dcrnier, ensuite a l'examiner, et enfin
Cl" qui est pire it l'examiner longuement.
Le Conseil doit poursuivre la discLlssion <le la
question qui figure a son ordre dll JOUl' et s'cfforccr aujourd'hui mbne, si possible, de se pronDnccr
a son sujet, c'est-a-dire de re~lVoyer a la Commission des armements de type c1assique le tcxte
de la resoll..1Jtion adoptee par l'AssembJee generale
a Paris le 19 novembre dcrnier.

Lately there has been growing up, I am afraid,
practice of reviving defeated projects, of
nttcmpting to discuss anel to vote on projects that
obviotlsly do not have a majority in SLtpport of
them. It seems to me that this is unsound in
principle, and that it migl1t lead to grave confusion. Let us assume, for tl,e moment, that
the USSR proposal were adopteu and the Commission for Conventional Armaments were confronted, on the ooe hand, with the plan outline,!
in the General Assembly resolution, and, on the
other, with the USSR plan. That, it seems to
me, could only lead to protracted confLtsion in
the debates in the Commission, and also, of course,
to a considerable waste of time.

a

However, as I have said, if it is insisted upon,
the Council could discuss the text of t~e USSR
draft resolution when it sees fit. What I would
urge is that more time should not be wasted by,
first, waiting for that text; secondly, studying it;
and thirdly--ancl worse stm-studying it at
length. The Council shot,ld go ahead with the
item on its ;}gencla for today, and endeavour, if
possible even today, to take a decision on it,
that is to say, to pass to the Commission for ConventionaL Armaments the text of the General
Assembly resolution adopted in Paris on 19 November last.
The PRESfDENT: It is evident that the tra:lSlalions of the draft resolution submitted by the
rep~'esentative of the USSR should be reproduced and made available to us. I am informed
that the translation and reproduction will take
some time, so that the document will not actulllly
reach us until tomorrow morning. Unless some
member of the Security Council is ready to speak
on the draft resolution itself, or on its relation
(0 the item on the agenda, I would .<;uggest that
we acljOtlrn and meet on Thursday afternoon.

Le PRESIDENT (tradllit de l'anglais): I1 est
evident que la traduction de Cl" projet de resolution
devrait etre reproduite et mise it notre dispo:;ition.
]'apprel1ds que la tradllction et la reproduction
prelldront un certain temps, et que le document ne
nous pOlrvicndra que: demain mat in. Pat' consequent, a maillS qu'un.. des membres du Cotlseil
ne soit pret a prendre la parole sur le projet de
l'esolution lui-tneme ou sur le rapport que presente ce1ui~ci avec le point qui figure it. l'ordre du
jour, je proposerai de lever la seance et de nous
l-eunir a notlveau jeudi apres·midi.

Mr. AUSTIN (Uniled St.1tes of America): I
do not quite understand the parliamentary situa-

M. AUSTIN (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (tradw~t
de l'anglais) : Je ne comprends pas tres. bien la

II
don, and I think dIe President can make it clear
in a word. Does the President construe the situation to be such that we must await the reproduction of the resolution offered by the USSR before we vote on the item on the agenda that iiS
before us?

situation de point de vue de la procedure, ma.is
je crois que le Presic.ent pourrait nous l'expliquer
en peu de mots, Le President eSitime-t-il q:te,
a\'~nt de proceder at: vote sur la question inscdte
a llotr~ ordre du jour, il noes faut attendre que
le projet de resolution depose par la deh~gation
de I'URSS ait ete distribueE

The PRESIOENT: We have before us d letter
from the Secretary-General transmitting to us a
resolution of the General Assembly. Related to
that resolution is a draft resolution submitted
by one of the members of the Security Council.
It appears to me that the Security Council should
have a chance to consider the effect of this draft
resolution on this item. Before we understand
what the relations are between this draft resolution and the General Assembly resolution. it
seems to me wise not ta~e action. I am not saying anything beyond that, I want to say th~t
members of the Security Cound should ha,'e a
chance to appreciate t~ effect of that draft reso·
lution on this communication from the SecretaryGeneral before we decide what to do with this
item or with this draft resolution.

L~ PRi;SID£NT (t,.adll;t de l'ang/di.r): NOll,'>
avons devant nons une lettre du Secretaire general
nous transmeltant une resolution de l'Assemblee
generale. D'aut:-e part, nous avons, lie a cette
resolution, un projet de resolution qui est depose
par I'un des rnembres du Conseil de securite. Il
me ·semble que le Conseil doit pouvoir examiner
les repercmsions pcssibles de ce projet de resolution sur la question qui figure a I'ordre du
jour. I1 me semble qu'il serai,t plus sage de ne
pas nous p:-ononcer avant de connaitre le rapport
entre ce projet de resohtion et la resolution de
l'Assemblee generale. Je n'ai den voulu dire de
plus. Je veux simple-ment dire que les membres
du Conseil de securite doivent pouvoir examiner
les repercussions rlu pmjet de resolution dom iJ
s'agit, sur la communication du Secretaire gene·
l'egard de
ral, avant de prendre urre decision
j'en ou de l'aurre de ces textes.

(tratlslated

from

a

the resolution of which the President has g,iven
notice. However, as the President first asked
whether any member of the Council wished to
make any remarks in connexion with this subject,
I am taking the liberty of drawing his attention
to the fact that we are considering a General
As!>embly resolution which cefinitely recommends
that the Security Council should continue to study
thc control and reduction of conventional arma·
ments and armed forces through the Commission
for Conventional Armaments, in order to obtain
a concrete result as soon as possible.

M. Gum:RREz (Cuba) (traduil de J'espagnol):
La delegation de Cuba r.e s'engage pas dans une
discussion de la resolution dont a. parle le Presi·
dent; cepel:dant, commc il a demande tout d'abtlrd
si quelque membre du Conseil desirait bire des
observations it ce sujet, je me p~rmets cl'attirer
son attention sur le fait que nous sommes en
train d'examiner uut. resolution de l'As3emblee
generale qui contient une recommandation concrete demandant au Canseil de securite de poursuivre I'etude de la reglernentation t':t de la
reduction des armements de type dassique et ties
forces annees par :'intennediaire de la Commission des annements de type cla.ssique, afin
cl'aboutir le plus rapidement possible un resultat
concret,

According to the rules of procedure, this is
the only matter before the Council, because rule
31 states that resolutious, amendments and substantive motions must be presented in writing
before the)' can be considered. Consequently, the
Cuuan delegalion considers that the correct ane
parliamentary procedure in the present case is to
refer t~e General Assembly resolution to the relevant Commission. If the USSR delegation so
desires, it may present its draft resolution there,
and, once it is duly translated, it may be considered. For that Commission, and not this
Council, is the appropriate place in which to discuss it.

D'apres le reglement, c'est Ut la. seule question
dont le Conseil soit saisi, puisque, eonfOnnel:1ent
it l'article .31 du reglement interieur, les Pfl'j~ts
de resolutions, les .arnendements ou les proposi~
tions de fond ne peuvent etfe e:<amines que s'ils
sont presentes par ecrit. La delegation de Cuba
estime done que, en I'occurrence, it convient, pOUl'"
se conformer au reglement, de trans.rnettre la
resolution de I'Assembtee generale a la Commission en question. La delegation de I'URSS peut,
si elle le desire, presenter son projet cette COInmission qui pourra l'examiner apres traduction.
C'est en dYet a cet organe, et nOn au Conseil,
qu'il appartient d'examiner ce projet de resolution.

The PRESIDENT: The Security Council is adjourned until Thursday, 10 February, at 3 p.m.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'cnglais) : La pro·
chaine seance aura lieu le jeudi to fevrier, il.
15 heures.

The meeting "ou at 4,55 p.m.

la seance est levee lJ 16 h. 55.

Mr.

GUTJERREZ

(Cuba)

S panisll) : The Cuban delegation is not discussing

a

a
