S/2015/626

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
13 August 2015
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on developments in
Guinea-Bissau and the activities of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 220 3
(2015), by which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) until 29 February
2016 and requested me to submit to it reports on the implementation of the
resolution every six months. In addition to presenting the status of the
implementation of the mandate, the report also provides an update on key political,
security, human rights, socioeconomic and humanitarian developments in Guinea Bissau since my report of 19 January 2015 (S/2015/37).

II. Major developments in Guinea-Bissau
A.

Political situation
2.
During the period under review, the political situation in Guinea -Bissau
remained calm for the most part, although marked by growing disagreements among
the organs of sovereignty and within the main political party, the African Party for
the Independence of Guinea and Cabo Verde (PAIGC), notably between the
President and the Prime Minister.
3.
On 16 February, the 28 members of the ad hoc Commission on Constitutional
Reform took office in a ceremony chaired by the President of the National
Assembly, Cipriano Cassamá. The Commission consists of 10 members of
Parliament, 4 representatives of civil society, and one representative each from the
Office of the Prime Minister, the Office of the President of the Republic, the
Supreme Court and the Office of the Prosecutor General, supported by 10 staff of
the National Assembly, who provide legal technical assistance. The Commission is
expected to prepare a revised draft Constitution within a year to be submitted to
public consultation before its final adoption by the National Assembly.
4.
On 10 and 11 March, the Government held the Forum Bissau, 2025 Vision:
Positive Guinea-Bissau, in preparation for the international partners’ round table in
Brussels on 25 March. At the opening ceremony, the President, José Mário Va z,

15-12964 (E)

170815

*1512964*

S/2015/626

expressed his full and unconditional support to the Government for the organization of
the round table and appealed to the international community to continue supporting
Guinea-Bissau. On 12 March, the Prime Minister, Domingos Simões Pereira,
presented the Strategic and Operational Plan 2015-2020 to the National Assembly
and outlined the Government’s vision for the development of Guinea -Bissau.
5.
On 25 March, the Government of Guinea-Bissau organized the international
partners’ round table for Guinea-Bissau in Brussels, with the support of the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the European Union. Over
70 delegations representing countries, multilateral organizations, international
financial institutions, regional organizations and represe ntatives of civil society
participated in the event. Pledges amounting to $1.2 billion were made in support of
the Government’s Strategic and Operational Plan 2015 -2020. The Government’s plan
provides a clear basis for reform of key areas such as defence, security and justice
and economic and social development and aims to lay the foundations for long lasting stability and sustainable development in Guinea-Bissau. On the eve of the
round table, the Council of the European Union lifted measures which had lim ited
European Union aid to the country since July 2011 over concerns of impunity.
6.
On 2 April, the Prime Minister briefed the National Assembly on the outcome
of the round table, attributing its success to the mobilization of the whole of
Guinea-Bissau society around a common objective. He noted that the international
community had sent a clear signal of sustained support to the stabilization of
Guinea-Bissau. At the end of the briefing, the Assembly adopted a motion of
confidence in support of the Government. On 7 April, the Prime Minister briefed
national, international, bilateral and multilateral partners, expressing the
Government’s intent to create strong coordination mechanisms to thoroughly
monitor the use, organization and coordination of the fund ing pledged at the round
table.
7.
On 18 May, the 32 members of the Organizing Commission of the National
Conference towards the Consolidation of Peace and Development took their oath at
a ceremony chaired by the President of the National Assembly and att ended by my
Special Representative and Head of UNIOGBIS, Miguel Trovoada, and members of
the diplomatic community. In his speech, the President of the Commission, Father
Domingos da Fonseca, stressed that peace was a precondition for national
development and would require the effort of all the people of Guinea-Bissau. The
President of the National Assembly highlighted the importance of reconciling with
the past, but stressed that truth-seeking should not be turned into a witch-hunt. He
also stressed that the country must tackle the causes of violence and inequality so
that all citizens can enjoy dignified lives. He referred to the need for the
Commission to bear in mind the possibility of providing an amnesty as one of the
instruments that could lead to national reconciliation. On 9 June, the Organizing
Commission convened its first meeting and decided to organize a retreat in
Canchungo (Cacheu region) from 10 to 12 July. During the retreat, the Commission
outlined a work plan leading to the holding of a national conference in 2016, and the
subsequent establishment of follow-up mechanisms for conflict resolution. The
Commission identified several causes of conflict in Guinea -Bissau, including power
struggle among groups, ethnic tension and intolerance.
8.
On 19 May, the Authority of Heads of State and Government of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) held its forty-seventh ordinary

2/17

15-12964

S/2015/626

session in Accra, where it strongly encouraged the authorities of Guinea -Bissau to
pursue their structural reforms and expressed satisfaction at the success of the
international partners’ round table. ECOWAS encouraged international partners to
honour their pledges and expressed its commitment to continue supporting the
implementation of the defence and security sector reform programme. Furthermore,
ECOWAS decided to extend the mandate of its Mission in Guinea -Bissau
(ECOMIB) until 31 December 2015 and requested the President of the Commission
to continue his démarches to raise funds from development partners to su pport
ECOMIB.
9.
From 28 to 30 May, the President hosted a State visit by King Mohammed VI
of Morocco to Guinea-Bissau. King Mohammed VI was accompanied by a large
delegation of representatives of government and business. The two countries signed
16 bilateral agreements regarding fisheries, agriculture, internal security, local
governance, infrastructure, solar energy and health during the visit. Morocco also
donated 4 million doses of animal vaccines and 12 tons of drugs to treat tuberculosis
and other illnesses in Guinea-Bissau. In addition, a Moroccan medical team
provided free consultations and surgical interventions at the Simão Mendes National
Hospital in Bissau.
10. On 30 May, the Council of Ministers held a special session for the first time in
Bafatá. The Government intends to hold further special sessions outside Bissau,
bringing together regional and local authorities to adopt their respecti ve regional
development plans.
11. On 12 June, the President presided over a swearing -in ceremony of
13 members of the Council of State, the highest advisory body in Guinea -Bissau.
The Council of State is a consultative political organ of the President of the
Republic, competent to issue advisory opinions on the dissolution of the National
Assembly, the declaration of a state of emergency, the dismissal of the Government,
or the declaration of war, as well as to advise the Head of the State in the exercise of
his/her functions upon his/her request.
12. On 20 and 21 June, the Central Committee of PAIGC convened to discuss the
party’s internal situation, and decided, inter alia, (a) to replace the party’s National
Secretary, Abel da Silva, with Aly Hijazy; (b) to appoint Manuel Santos as President
of the Organizing Commission of the party’s National Convention; (c ) to adopt a
motion of confidence on its leadership; and (d) to request its Third Vice -President,
Baciro Dja, to submit a financial report of the party’s electoral campaign of 2014.
On 23 June, Mr. Dja resigned from his position of Minister of the Presiden cy of the
Council of Ministers.
13. In response to the concerns of the international partners about the political
situation and recurrent rumours of the imminent dismissal of the Government, the
Prime Minister hosted on 24 June a working dinner for the di plomatic corps in
Bissau. In his address, the Prime Minister acknowledged the existence of tensions
that had slowed down the implementation of the decisions of the international
partners’ round table. Recalling the PAIGC Central Committee’s requests for
institutional dialogue, he expressed his intention to immediately discuss the current
situation with the President of the Republic. On 25 June, at the request of the
Government, the National Assembly held an emergency debate, and unanimously
adopted a motion of confidence in the Government.

15-12964

3/17

S/2015/626

14. On 3 July, the President denied in a televised address allegations that he had
intended to dismiss the Government of Prime Minister Pereira. This put an end to
months of political uncertainty and is expected to help to accelerate the
implementation of the Government’s Strategic and Operational Plan 2015-2020.
15. During the first week of August, the political situation in Guinea -Bissau
became more tense as a result of the widening rift between the President and the
Prime Minister. On 6 August, the Prime Minister held a conference with
representatives of the international community during which he announced his
intention to preserve the outcome of the elections. Later that day, he reiterated this
message in an address to the nation. The following day, the President also held a
meeting with the diplomatic community in Bissau, at which he criticized the
performance of the Government and acknowledged that the country was facing a
serious crisis that hampered the normal functioning of State institutions. On
8 August, the political bureau of PAIGC, which supported the candidacy of
President Vaz, held an extraordinary meeting and issued a statement calling for the
immediate re-establishment of meaningful dialogue, in particular by the President of
the Republic. It strongly condemned the President’s actions and warned of a
possible withdrawal of confidence. Moreover, the second largest political party, the
Party for Social Renewal, issued a similar statement on 5 August, expressi ng
solidarity with the Government, while blaming PAIGC for the status quo. In view of
these developments, I personally reached out to President Vaz and other regional
leaders, stressing that the political differences in Guinea -Bissau must be resolved in
a peaceful, collaborative and constructive way. My Special Representative also
continued to call on all actors to resume dialogue and place the national interest
above personal differences.
16. Two members of the Cabinet have been put under investigation by the Office
of the Prosecutor General for suspicion of fraud and economic crimes. The
Secretary of State for International Cooperation and Communities was detained on
4 June because of his alleged involvement in the irregular issuing of diplomatic and
service passports. He was released conditionally on 6 June. On 9 July, the Foreign
Minister was summoned by the Office of the Prosecutor General, ordered to pay a
bond of approximately $167,000 and had his passport withdrawn pending
investigation. On 13 July, the National Secretariat of PAIGC issued a communiqué
expressing its concern about the “systematic attacks against members of the
Government by the Office of the Prosecutor General on the grounds of their alleged
involvement in corruption cases” and called on the organs of sovereignty to respect
the presumption of innocence.

B.

Security situation
17. The overall security situation in the country remained stable during the
reporting period, and the Government continued with the implementation of its
reform programmes. On 6 March, Ambassador Octávio Alves, Adviser to the
Minister for Foreign Affairs, was appointed as Minister of Internal Administration.
The post had been vacant since the dismissal of Botche Candé in November 2014. A
jurist trained in Portugal, Mr. Alves had been Prosecutor General and was Secretary
of State for Public Order during the Government of Carlos Gomes Jr.

4/17

15-12964

S/2015/626

18. On 14 May, the Council of Ministers, upon a proposal of the Minister of
Internal Administration, dismissed the Commissioner General of the Public Order
Police, Brigadier General Armando Nhaga, and the General Commander of the
National Guard, Brigadier General Tomás Djassi. Both had been confirmed in their
respective functions after the 2012 coup. Superintendent José Antóni o Marques,
until that time the Inspector General of the Ministry of Internal Administration, was
sworn in as the new Commissioner General of the Public Order Police on 15 May.
The new General Commander of the National Guard, also sworn in on 15 May, is
Brigadier General Armando da Costa Marna, who was until then serving as Deputy
to the dismissed General Commander.

C.

Human rights situation
19. During the reporting period, very little progress was made in the investigation
of, and in establishing accountability mechanisms for, past serious human rights
violations. A notable exception was the prosecution of four police officers charged
with the beating of a civilian who died on 20 September 2014. On 25 May, the
Regional Court of Bissau held the second session of the trial, questioning two
suspects, a major and a sergeant. During the trial session, on 15 June, the former
heads of the Public Order Police and the National Guard were to be heard as
witnesses. However they failed to appear and the hearing was cancelled. They were
subsequently notified and heard as witnesses on 22 June at the Regional Court of
Bissau, and the trial will continue after the hearing of forensic experts scheduled for
July.
20. Violence against women and children, in particular forced marriage, rape,
domestic violence and female genital mutilation, remains a serious concern in
Guinea-Bissau. According to the African Report on Violence against Children,
jointly launched on 11 February by the African Union, the Office of the Speci al
Representative of the Secretary-General on Violence against Children, the
Permanent Mission of Zambia to the United Nations and the African Child Policy
Forum, 34 per cent of girls are subjected to forced marriage in the country. Local
non-governmental organizations estimate that 80 per cent of those cases occur in the
eastern regions. It should be noted that in most of the cases law enforcement and
judicial authorities are unable to take action owing to the lack of material and
human resources, coupled with hostility from community members.
21. In a positive development, progress was made in the implementation of the
Law against Female Genital Mutilation, enacted in July 2011. On 16 May, 10 female
cutters (fanatecas) committed to abandoning this harmful practice and to
denouncing and reporting any cases of which they became aware. The commitment
was made at a public ceremony organized by Djinopi, a local non -governmental
organization, and UNIOGBIS partners working on the eradication of female genital
mutilation. Moreover, on 26 May, the Regional Court of Bafatá delivered its verdict
in relation to the genital mutilation of eight girls, aged between 11 months and
7 years, in Ganadu (Bafatá region) in mid-January. The parents of the girls (three
women and a man) were sentenced to three years’ imprisonment for the crime of
female genital mutilation. A fifth defendant was acquitted, the court citing
insufficient evidence. The Prosecutor indicated that he would appeal the acquittal.
This is the third case of female genital mutilation to be prosecuted since the
enactment of the Law. UNIOGBIS, the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA)

15-12964

5/17

S/2015/626

and the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) are working closely with civil
society and the authorities in the fight against fe male genital mutilation.
22. On 1 June, the first case under the Law against Domestic Violence was
brought to court. The Women and Children Brigade of the Judiciary Police arreste d
a woman from the Missira neighbourhood of Bissau for extreme child abuse. The
police forwarded the case to the Office of the Prosecutor General, who confirmed
his intention to prosecute, and released the suspect subject to periodic reportin g
before a competent authority.
23. Breaches of the rights of persons deprived of their liberty were among the
most serious and recurrent human rights violations throughout the reporting period.
Conditions in prisons and detention centres, including police cells, continue to
deteriorate. Regular monitoring visits reveal severe overcrowding; la ck of access to
legal and medical assistance; disregard for due process, many persons being
detained without charge or beyond the legal maximum periods; absence of potable
water, toilets and hygiene facilities; cells without sunlight or ventilation; and ov erall
poorly maintained physical infrastructure. These conditions amount to cruel and
inhuman treatment, and fall far short of the Standard Minimum Rules for the
Treatment of Prisoners, as well as the National Minimum Standards for the
Treatment of Detainees. UNIOGBIS is compiling a report containing these findings
and making recommendations for improvement, which will be made available to the
Ministers of Justice and Internal Administration.

D.

Social, economic and humanitarian situation
24. Although fragile, the recent socioeconomic evolution in Guinea -Bissau is
encouraging. Increased revenue and the re-establishing of international financial
flows have allowed the Government to resume settling a number of arrears.
According to the International Monetary Fund and UNDP, customs and tax revenue
improved sharply in 2014 (by 39 per cent and 9 per cent, respectively), as the
Government tightened controls over fuel imports and streamlined tax exemptions
(mainly on fuel), rehabilitated customs posts and intensified the auditing of large
taxpayers. To date, almost all salary arrears and public servants’ salaries are being
paid regularly. At the same time, the Government cleared all external arrears,
excluding technical and membership arrears to several international organizations.
Despite this recent improvement, domestic revenue mobilization remains fragile and
the tax gap is still large. The inefficient public electricity and water company
(EAGB) puts enormous pressure on public finance. In 2015, the Governm ent is
making transfers of CFAF 2.8 billion (some $4.8 million) to EAGB to cover current
and past losses. Despite price increases observed in food stuffs, particularly cereal
products and fruit in the first quarter of 2015, inflation remains muted. Growth is
projected to average 4.7 per cent in 2015.
25. The Government’s Strategic and Operational Plan 2015 -2020 and the results of
the international partners’ round table are a key basis for coherent engagement and
mobilization of partners in line with the principle of aid efficiency. The United
Nations, through the office of the Resident Coordinator, is supporting the
Government in reinforcing its coordination and mo bilization capacity.
26. In terms of sustainable development, the Ministry of the Environment ,
supported by the World Bank, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United

6/17

15-12964

S/2015/626

Nations (FAO) and UNDP, launched, in May 2015, the United Nations Collaborative
Programme on Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation in
Guinea-Bissau. The purpose is to guarantee forest conservation, sustainable
management of forests and enhancement of forest carbon stocks. To mitigate the
impact of climate change, the Ministry of the Environment has opened a
Meteorological and Climatological Centre in Gabú region, a contribution of the
Global Environment Facility through UNDP.
27. Cashew nuts continue to be the main export of Guinea -Bissau and one of the
main sources of income for many families, especially in rural areas. The 2015
campaign was launched officially on 18 April and to date is considered promising.
The Government has announced a set of measures to fight against the smuggling of
cashew nuts. The Government expects to export 200,000 tons in 2015 at a price of
$1,100 per ton against 136, 000 tons exported in 2014.
28. Following the poor harvest in the 2014/15 agricultural campaign, a rapid
impact assessment on food and nutritional security of the most vulnerable
households in the eight regions of the country was undertaken in March. Over
90 per cent of the surveyed households reported that the crop yields for the 2014/15
agricultural season had fallen considerably compared to the previous campaign,
thereby adversely affecting their food supply, 51 per cent of the households
indicating they had only one month’s cereal stocks. The assessment revealed that
80 per cent of households surveyed in the most affected regions — Cacheu, Oio,
Bafatá and Gabú — reported not having enough seed stocks for the crop year
2015/16. The efforts to reduce food and nutrition insecurity in the country have
been led by the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development with the support of
the World Food Programme (WFP) and FAO. The results of the Multiple Indicator
Cluster Survey of Guinea-Bissau for 2014, published in April 2015 by the Ministry
of the Economy and Finance and the National Statistics Institute, with UNICEF
support, provide comprehensive data for addressing the provision of services in
education, health and social protection.
29. To date, no confirmed cases of Ebola virus disease have been reported in
Guinea-Bissau. However, the country remains at high risk. Efforts to scale up the
preparedness and early response capacity are critical if the country is to contain
such a threat. A national coordination mechanism has been established and United
Nations agencies and partners, including UNICEF, the World Health Organization
(WHO), the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the Ministry
of Health of Portugal and others, are providing direct support to implement Ebola
virus disease prevention and early response measures. On 24 and 25 June, my acting
Special Representative and Head of the United Nations Mission for Ebola
Emergency Response visited Guinea-Bissau to take stock of the current Ebola virus
disease prevention and preparedness efforts in the country and evaluate with the
Government how the United Nations can further mobilize support. Following his
visit, he called on the national authorities to enhance their coordination, and on the
population to remain vigilant. An inter-agency mission comprising representatives
of the Centers for Disease Control, WHO, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and WFP was deployed to help to enhance the coordination of
all actors at the national, local and cross-border levels, and to bolster preparedness
and early response capacities.

15-12964

7/17

S/2015/626

III. Status of implementation of the mandate of the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau
A.

Inclusive political dialogue and national reconciliation process
30. On 9 April, UNIOGBIS supported the organization of a retreat of the outgoing
Organizing Commission of the National Conference towards the Consolidation of
Peace and Development to review the work undertaken since its previous retreat late
in 2014 and prepare the handover to the new members of the Commission who
would take up their functions on 18 May. The outgoing Commission recommended,
inter alia, the launching of a public outreach pr ogramme to clarify the objectives of
the Commission, the updating of the Commission’s internal regulations, and the
establishment of its own budget and premises funded by the Government. These
recommendations were submitted to the new Commission as handove r notes.

B.

Strategic and technical advice and support to national authorities
in implementing the national security sector reform and rule of
law strategies
31. During the period under review, UNIOGBIS has co-chaired, hosted and
supported the meetings of the International Partners Working Group on security
sector reform, as well as the United Nations Peacebuilding and Development
Assistance Framework sessions on the rule of law and comprehensive security
sector reform, aimed at ensuring a coordinated approach among international
partners supporting security sector reform and the rule of law.
32. Upon the request of the Government of Guinea -Bissau, an African Union-led
joint security sector assessment mission was conducted from 2 to 12 March. The
mission comprised representatives of the African Union, the United Nations,
ECOWAS, the European Union, the Community of Portuguese -speaking Countries
and the African Security Sector Network. The mission aimed at identifying priority
areas for support of security sector reform and opportunities for stakeholders and
partners willing to support a nationally-led, inclusive and comprehensive reform of
the security sector. The recommendations of the mission will align with existing
security sector reform guidance developed by the African Union, the United Nations
and ECOWAS to improve accountability, efficiency, effectiveness and responsiveness,
as well as to strengthen democratic control of security institutions in Guinea -Bissau.
33. From 2 March to 31 May, UNIOGBIS supported the Arms and Ammunitions
Department of the Armed Forces of Guinea-Bissau in registering military weapons
in the private possession of members of the Armed Forces. The Army invited all
personnel on active duty, on reserve or retired, and the dependents of the deceased
former freedom fighters to declare any military weapon in their possession for
registration purposes. UNIOGBIS also assisted the Arms and Ammunitions
Department in carrying out a public awareness campaign, through the printin g and
distribution of posters and the broadcasting of radio messages in Portuguese,
Creole, Fulani, Mandinka and Balanta in the eastern and so uthern regions of the
country.

8/17

15-12964

S/2015/626

34. On 21 April, the President promulgated the Decree Law on the establishment
of the Special Pension Fund for the armed forces and security institutions, which
had been approved by the Council of Ministers on 26 February. The newly approved
Decree Law abrogates Decree Law No. 9/2010 of 5 April 2010 on the establishment
of the special fund. UNIOGBIS provided technical support in the drafting,
reviewing and publication of the new Decree Law, which contains two main
components, namely a pension and a one-time gratuity. The proposed financial
package would be funded by international partners, together with a 10 per cent
government contribution. The Decree Law paves the way for the demobilization
through retirement of up to 1,498 personnel of the total of 2,282 to be demobilized.
The personnel to be demobilized that are not eligible for the S pecial Pension Fund
would benefit from a reintegration mechanism. The Government has confirmed its
determination to retire 500 military and security personnel by the end of 2015,
contingent on partners’ funding.
35. From 12 to 15 May, UNIOGBIS continued to carry out the national security
sector reform public awareness programme, targeting more than 700 additional
people in the southern regions. The programme serves to advance dialogue, trust building and mutual learning between national institutions, the c ivilian population
and international actors. It aims to strengthen oversight as part of ongoing efforts in
security sector reform and the rule of law.

C.

United Nations good offices
36. My Special Representative made full use of his good offices to help to build
confidence between stakeholders and contribute to preventing an escalation of
tensions. He has continued to engage key national stakeholders, in particular the
President of the Republic, the Prime Minister and the Speaker of Parliament. He ha s
also consulted regularly with political parties and civil society, including women’s
and youth organizations, as well as religious leaders, trade unions and private sector
representatives in close coordination with international and reg ional actors,
including ECOWAS.

D.

Support to the Government of Guinea-Bissau in the mobilization,
harmonization and coordination of international assistance
37. My Special Representative has continued to chair monthly meetings with the
international partners based in Bissau to coordinate support to Guinea-Bissau. On
27 February, he chaired such a meeting in advance of the international partners’
round table. Participants exchanged views on the contents of the Government’s
Strategic and Operational Plan 2015-2020. The Minister of the Economy and the
Secretary of State for Planning and Development participated in the discussion to
resolve for the international partners any doubts arising from the document. On
10 April, my Special Representative convened a meeting of the consultative group
of the round table, attended by representatives of the African Union, the Community
of Portuguese-speaking Countries, ECOWAS and the European Union in Bissau,
and of the World Bank based in Dakar. On 14 April, he chaired a debriefing m eeting
with the international partners based in Bissau during which the follow -up to the
round table was discussed.

15-12964

9/17

S/2015/626

38. On 7 May, my Special Representative met the President of Senegal, Macky
Sall, in Dakar for a discussion and update on the political stabilization process in
Guinea-Bissau, including the role played by ECOWAS. My Special Representative
informed the President of the implementation and follow-up mechanisms being set
up by Guinea-Bissau national authorities, with United Nations and partners’
support, to help to materialize the pledges made by international partners during the
round table. He also briefed on the progress and constraints regarding the
implementation of security sector reform in Guinea-Bissau. On his part, President
Sall acknowledged the continuing vital role of the United Nations and its partners
and reaffirmed his engagement to assist stabilization efforts in Guinea -Bissau.

E.

Strengthening democratic institutions and enhancing the capacity
of State organs to function effectively and constitutionally
39. In order to promote citizen participation, UNIOBGIS assisted civil society
organizations from the Bafatá and Cacheu regions with regard to strengthened
engagement with the National Assembly on local socioeconomic developme nt. Civil
society organizations requested representatives of specialized committees of the
National Assembly to visit the regions.

F.

Strategic and technical advice and support for the establishment
of effective and efficient law enforcement and criminal justice and
penitentiary systems
40. Within the reporting period, UNIOGBIS has provided strategic advice and
technical support to the national authorities in developing a national policing and
internal security strategic plan (2015-2020), envisioned to be the road map for
efficient policing in the foreseeable future. This was undertaken through the holding
of six workshops bringing together UNIOGBIS and the national counterparts.
41. The United Nations continued to support coordination in the area of police,
justice and corrections. On 3 February, 11 magistrates, including two women,
graduated from the Judicial Training Centre, which is being supported by UNDP in
collaboration with UNIOGBIS. On 19 and 20 February, UNIOGBIS conducted a
validation workshop to evaluate the human resources and operational capabilities of
the national road traffic system in order to improve perceptions of public authority
and security. The assessment brought to the fore the need for expedited approval of
the revised National Traffic Code and will provide the basis for the development of
standard operating procedures for improved road traffic and further development of
new training modules. In addition, UNIOGBIS provided support to the national
authorities in the development of standardized police forms, including for incident
reports, victim/witness statements, evidence collection, suspect detention, search
warrants, declaration of suspect, medical examination, and detention orders. These
were adopted immediately by the Public Order Police and the National Police. It is
expected that they will be adopted by all policing agencies in the framework of
national standards of practice.
42. Since 20 March, UNIOGBIS has been supporting the national registration and
survey of police and other law enforcement staff, as part of the ongoing vetting and
certification process that stalled in the aftermath of the April 2012 coup. The survey

10/17

15-12964

S/2015/626

will provide the relevant data on the members of internal security institutions who
joined a service in the past two years and will also be utilized in the next stages of
the selection, training and certification processes. The registration survey is
expected to be completed by July 2015. A total of 3,200 officers, including
400 women, from policing and internal security institutions have been registered
and their data updated in the database so far.
43. From February to June, the Superior Council for Policing and Internal Security
Coordination, which comprises the heads of the national police institutions , with the
participation of the International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL), held
five meetings to strengthen coordination, information -sharing and joint security
analysis. UNIOGBIS manages the agenda and runs the secretariat function for these
meetings.
44. From April to June, UNIOGBIS provided crime scene and forensic
investigations training to 60 officers from different law enforcement agencies in São
Domingos, Bafatá and Buba to enhance their capacity to undertake crime scene
investigations and also refresh their knowledge of the standard procedures for
investigations of violent and property crimes.
45. From 19 to 29 May, UNIOGBIS supported the national law enforcement
agencies and the Office of the Prosecutor General in the organization of a n
operation that used the Mobile INTERPOL Network Device at various land, sea and
air ports of entry into Guinea-Bissau. The Prosecutor General’s Office deployed
prosecutors at each location, along with police personnel. A total of six foreigners
holding Guinea-Bissau passports were detained on suspicion of carrying forged
identification documents, and six stolen European passports were confiscated during
the operation.
46. On 3 March, my Special Representative attended the opening ceremony of the
new judicial year in Bissau, chaired by President Vaz. The ceremony included a
number of interventions pointing out the defects of the judicial system, namely
corruption, political interference and the lack of professionalism of magistrates,
judges, civil servants and lawyers, which have negatively affected popular
perception of the entire system. In his opening speech, the President reaffirmed the
supremacy of the rule of law and reiterated his support for the proposed nationa l
programme for justice reform.
47. On 13 March, the National Programme for Justice Reform (2015 -2019) was
officially launched at the Ministry of Justice. The National Programme comprises
five main axes, namely, (a) independence and transparency of the justice sector;
(b) efficiency of the justice system; (c) strengthening of human and material
capacities; (d) legal reform; and (e) access to justice and law. The Programme has
an estimated cost of $48 million. The Government has committed to contributing up
to 4 per cent of that amount, and to mobilizing the remaining funds from
international partners. The vision of the Government is to reach, by 2019, the full
independence and integrity of the judiciary, and to improve access and delivery of
justice to the population. The United Nations system in Bissau, notably UNDP, has
provided considerable technical and financial support for the preparation of the
National Programme.
48. From 4 to 8 and from 18 to 22 May, UNIOGBIS delivered a two -week training
session to magistrates of Guinea-Bissau on the resolution of administrative disputes

15-12964

11/17

S/2015/626

in collaboration with UNDP, which assists the national counterparts in the
management of the Magistrates Training School.
49. During the month of June, as a contribution to the ongoing debate on the Code
of Military Justice at the National Assembly, UNIOGBIS assisted the Ministry of
Defence in the publication and dissemination among national stakeholders of the
draft principles governing the administration of justice through military tribunals,
which were discussed during the Annual Forum on Criminal Justice organized by
the Ministries of Justice and Defence with UNIOGBIS support in October 2014.

G.

Promotion and protection of human rights and human rights
monitoring and reporting activities
50. During the period under review, UNIOGBIS worked with police and judicial
authorities in support of local religious leaders and civil society organizations such
as the Association of Friends of the Child in their mediation efforts to rescue and
protect girls in situations of forced marriage. Since January 2015, as a result of the
Association’s mediation, five girls, aged between 13 and 19, have returned home
after their family members signed a commitment not to submit the girls to forced
marriage. Monitoring by the Association confirmed that the girls remain safe. A
further 26 girls rescued from forced marriage are being cared for in an Association
shelter. UNIOGBIS continues to support human rights advocacy on crimes related
to forced marriage and is working with law enforce ment agencies to identify their
needs in order to effectively enforce arrests for these and other gend er-based crimes.
51. On 18 and 19 February, UNIOGBIS conducted a workshop in Bissau gathering
60 members of local human rights movements from throughout the country.
Participants learned about the most important international human rights treaties and
their complementarity with national legislation in Guinea -Bissau as well as how to
use basic information-gathering techniques. This kind of training empowers human
rights defenders and also helps to develop a loose network of human rights
defenders that work together with UNIOGBIS in their respective regions.
52. From 20 April to 7 May, UNIOGBIS held three traditional gatherings
(djumbais) on Bubaque Island and at Bafatá and Gabú on the need to prevent
domestic violence, early and forced marriage, female genital mutilation, child
trafficking and exploitation, and the importance of bringing these cases to justice.
Approximately 800 representatives of community-based organizations, youth
groups, students from primary and secondary schools and traditional leaders
participated in these open debates. The meeting in Bubaque, which was held in
collaboration with the local Centre for Access to Justice, concluded with t he
approval of a letter addressed to the Government and the media, requesting the
reactivation of the local court, which has been closed since 2004.
53. From 4 to 8 May, UNIOGBIS, in collaboration with the Judicial Training
Centre, concluded a series of training courses on human rights and administration of
justice for civil and military judges and prosecutors, lawyers and members of the
judiciary police. This is in line with the implementation of the National Programme
for Justice Reform (2015-2019).

12/17

15-12964

S/2015/626

H.

Strategic and technical advice and support to the Government of
Guinea-Bissau to combat drug trafficking and transnational
organized crime
54. During the reporting period, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, in
close collaboration with UNIOGBIS, continued to provide capacity-building, logistic
support, training and specialized technical assistance to the Transnational Crime
Unit and other law enforcement agencies in Bissau, on combating transnational
organized crime, including drug trafficking. Throughout the reporting period, the
Unit, in conjunction with national law enforcement agencies, conducted intelligence
missions and assessments. From February to the beginning of June, the Unit
participated in a number of operations.
55. On 26 February, UNIOGBIS and the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, with the support of the Peacebuilding Fund, provided the Transnational
Crime Unit with a vehicle to strengthen its operational capability. On the same day,
the Management Board of the Unit endorsed the nomination of six new police
officers to join its structures and authorized the recruitment of six additional staff
for the Unit. There are 20 police officers currently assigned to the Unit.
56. Between 27 and 30 April, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and
UNIOGBIS jointly supported a smuggling training and operations programme for
20 officers from the Judiciary Police, the Transnational Crime Unit, the National
Guard and INTERPOL on the use of the Mobile INTERPOL Network Device, as
part of the Airport Communication Programme. Funded by the European Union, the
latter Programme started in Guinea-Bissau in 2010 and aims at building druginterdiction capabilities linking selected international airports in Africa, La tin
America and the Caribbean.
57. On 26 May, the Management Board of the Transnational Crime Unit approved
a standard operating procedure, on transnational organized crime investigations
concerning drug trafficking. On 14 July the Board approved three additional
standard operating procedures, on combating child trafficking, on identification of
fraudulent documents, and on cooperation between law enforcement agencies.
Training sessions for 30 police officers on how to implement these practices across
the national law enforcement agencies were held from 20 to 30 July. The
Transnational Crime Unit continues to develop its intelligence capabilities with the
use of a database installed in December 2014. The responsibility for the use of the
database was fully transferred to national authorities during the reporting period.
58. On 4 and 5 June, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime organized in
Bissau a regional workshop for the transnational crime units in the subregion, with
participants from Guinea-Bissau, Liberia and Sierra Leone. The event included
discussions on the harmonization of legal frameworks, legal assistance, joint
operations, and the identification of challenges and constraints. The workshop
concluded with the signature of a joint regional protocol on inter -agency
coordination and cooperation with regard to transnational crime units.
59. From 1 to 20 June, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime supported
the installation of a drug laboratory in Bissau to be used by all law enforcement
agencies of Guinea-Bissau. The technical support was provided by two specialists,
one from Spain and the other from Liberia. On the same occasion, a standard

15-12964

13/17

S/2015/626

operating procedure on using the police laboratory was elaborated and specialized
training was delivered to the national counterparts.

I.

Incorporating a gender perspective into peacebuilding, in line with
Security Council resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008)
60. International Women’s Day was commemorated on 8 March in Bissau, with a
march attended by members of the Government, the First Lady, representatives of
the Office of the President of the Republic, the diplomatic corps and regional and
international organizations including my Special Representative. Several side events
were held on 6 March, including a parliamentary discussion on the way forward for
the Canchungo Declaration. In addition, on 6 and 7 March, UNIOGBIS conducted
training on the prevention of sexual and gender-based violence and the response
thereto, for 40 police officers and civil society and women’s groups in São
Domingos (Cacheu region).
61. On 20 and 21 March, UNIOGBIS, with the United Nations Entity for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women, facilitated a workshop in Canchungo
(Cacheu region) for women parliamentarians and leaders of the specialized
commissions of the National Assembly (10 men and 14 women). The workshop
resulted in the establishment of a women’s parliamentary caucus, the National
Network of Women in Parliament. The parliamentarians identified training gaps and
requested further capacity-building on how to read and provide input to bills in
parliament through a gender lens, and on lobbying and advocacy. Participants also
adopted the Canchungo Declaration as the main strategic document of the caucus.
62. The Canchungo Declaration, an advocacy tool adopted in October 2014 during
a gender seminar sponsored by UNIOGBIS, aims to raise the awareness of national
authorities about the urgent need to adopt strategies for the greater participation of
women in politics and decision-making processes as a necessary condition for the
consolidation of democracy and the rule of law. On 11 February, the Declaration
was officially presented to the President, the National Assembly and the Government,
which pledged to ensure its implementation within the State institutions. During the
March workshop, the National Network of Women in Parliament defined as its chief
priority actions the introduction of a women’s quota through the review of the
electoral law and the law on political parties; the dissemination of the laws on
female genital mutilation; and tackling domestic violence.
63. From 14 to 17 April, UNIOGBIS supported the Ministries of Defence and
Internal Administration in the organization of two workshops for 70 military and
police personnel (52 men and 18 women) on gender mainstreaming in the Quinara
and Gabú regions. The participants were provided with tools to design plans and
implement policies within the security sector with a gender perspective which
would include the ongoing reform process and the promotion of female recruitment.
64. From 11 to 18 May, within the framework of the joint European Union -UNDP
project to support the supreme audit institutions in the Portuguese -speaking countries
in Africa and Timor-Leste, the National Network of Women in Parliament conducted
a seminar to share experiences with their peers from Cabo Verde on policy
leadership and how to lead the debate on State bud gets from a gender perspective.

14/17

15-12964

S/2015/626

J.

Work with the Peacebuilding Commission in support of
Guinea-Bissau’s peacebuilding priorities
65. From 19 to 21 April, the Chair of the Guinea -Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador Antonio de Aguiar Patriota of Brazil,
travelled to Bissau where he met with national authorities and international partners.
In the wake of the international partners’ round table of March 2015, the Chair of
the Guinea-Bissau configuration expressed the continuing support of the Commission
to the authorities and the people of Guinea-Bissau, and its steadfast commitment to
providing assistance in advancing the Government’s priorities as outlined in the
development plan, including through the implementation of key reforms, such as in
the area of security sector reform.
66. On 29 April, the Prime Minister and my Special Representative were the
invited speakers at a meeting of the Secretary-General’s Peacebuilding Fund
Advisory Group. Participating by video conference from Bissau, they briefed the
Advisory Group on the opportunities and challenges Guinea-Bissau faced in the
wake of the international partners’ round table and the United Nations efforts in
support of the implementation of Government priorities.
67. On 19 May, the Executive Committee for Peacebuilding Fund programmes in
Guinea-Bissau endorsed the 2015-2017 Peacebuilding Priority Plan as the basis for
the full re-engagement of the Fund in Guinea-Bissau over the next three years. The
Priority Plan, which is closely aligned with Government priorities, will f ocus on
areas of catalytic intervention addressing the drivers of conflict in Guinea -Bissau,
including the promotion of national and constructive political dialogue and
consensus-building among political, economic and civil society leaders;
modernization of defence and security forces; enhancing the independence and
impartiality of the justice system in order to increase citizens’ confidence in the
State’s commitment to the rule of law; and access of women and youth to political
participation and economic opportunities. The total value of the Plan is $15 million.
On 23 June, the Peacebuilding Support Office approved $10 million of funding for
the Peacebuilding Priority Plan in Guinea-Bissau.

IV. Cross-cutting issues
A.

Integration of the United Nations system
68. During the reporting period, and under the leadership of the Government, the
United Nations integrated system in Guinea-Bissau, including resident and
non-resident agencies and UNIOGBIS, developed a new partnership framework for
the period 2016-2020. This is aligned with the national Strategic and Operational
Plan. It is expected that the framework will be signed by the Government in the
third quarter. The United Nations system in Guinea-Bissau will support the
Government through the new partnership framework between Guinea -Bissau and
the United Nations (the United Nations Peacebuilding and Development Assistance
Framework 2016-2020) with an estimated budget of about $381 million, including
$10 million from the Peacebuilding Fund.

15-12964

15/17

S/2015/626

B.

Public information
69. During the reporting period, UNIOGBIS broadcast 18 weekly radio
programmes through the National Radio as well as a private radio with close to
nationwide coverage. Themes covered included human rights; gender equality;
impunity and the rule of law; the international partners’ round table; Ebola public
awareness; environment, climate change and its impact on food security; security
sector reform; governance; and general United Nations activities in Guinea-Bissau.
In addition, 52 articles on similar themes were published on the UNIOGBIS website
in English and Portuguese.
70. On the occasion of World Press Freedom Day on 3 May, UNIOGBIS organized
a conference on press freedom and ethics with the aim of strengthening the capacity
of local journalists. The conference was attended by over 300 participants, including
journalists and 200 university students. As part of this activity a nd with the support
of the Peacebuilding Fund, copies of the media law of Guinea -Bissau were
distributed to local journalists, media organizations, and the Secretariat of State for
Social Communication.

C.

Staff safety and security
71. During the period under review, no direct threats were made against United
Nations staff. Two incidents of petty crime and two minor non -fatal road traffic
accidents involving United Nations staff members were reported.

V. Observations
72. The people of Guinea-Bissau have shown their determination to embrace the
path of peace and development. This was clearly manifested in the enthusiastic
participation in the general elections in 2014 and, more recently, in the popular
support of preparations for the international partners’ round table. Such participation
reflects the genuine expectations of the people. A year after the restoration of full
constitutional order, I call on the political leaders to continue to work closely
together so that Guinea-Bissau progresses on its path towards stability and
development. I remain committed to working actively with national and regional
leaders to support this effort.
73. The resounding success of the partners’ round table has brought Guinea -Bissau
firmly back into the international fold. I thank the partners of Guinea-Bissau for the
commitment they have demonstrated and encourage them to work with the
Government to rapidly deliver on the generous pledges made in support of the
national Strategic and Operational Plan 2015-2020.
74. The Government of Guinea-Bissau and its international partners must now
seize this momentum to cement the foundations for durable peace and sustainable
socioeconomic development. I welcome the adoption of the new partnership
framework — based on the principles of mutual accountability and effectiveness —
between the United Nations and the Government of Guinea -Bissau that is aligned
with the national plan. My Special Representative will continue to rally and
coordinate international support for the implementation of the partnership framework.

16/17

15-12964

S/2015/626

75. I welcome the resumption of the work of the Organizing Commission of the
National Conference towards the Consolidation of Peace and Development, whose
mandate is to reactivate an inclusive national dialogue for reconciliation. I call on
all national stakeholders to use this platform to devise collective and consensual
solutions to the problems afflicting the country. The United Nations stands ready to
provide political and technical support to the authorities an d the Commission as
they work to create an environment conducive to frank dialogue among a ll the
people of Guinea-Bissau.
76. I am concerned about the deep-rooted political and social factionalism
pervasive among the country’s political parties and State institutions. Such divisions
continue to pose a serious threat to long-term stability and development in GuineaBissau. The need for cooperation between the organs of sovereignty has been made
more pressing by the lack of clear separation of roles and resp onsibilities in the
Constitution. I appeal to the leaders of Guinea-Bissau to show strong political will
to overcome this challenge through meaningful dialogue. Against this backdrop,
inclusive political dialogue and the ongoing review of the Constitution will be
critical processes. I urge the organs of sovereignty to work together, set aside their
differences in good faith, and nurture a constructive relationship within the
parameters of the Constitution for the sake of stability, sustainable peace and
durable development.
77. Reform of the defence and security sectors is a sine qua non for durable
progress in Guinea-Bissau. In this regard, I note with satisfaction the enactment of
the Decree Law on the Special Pension Fund for members of the armed forces and
security institutions, which will facilitate demobilization. This is a critical step in
modernization and civilian oversight of the military. Now is the time for the leaders
of Guinea-Bissau to demonstrate their commitment by fast-tracking this process and
mobilizing the required funding, with the cooperation of international partners.
78. I am concerned about the continued weakness of Guinea-Bissau’s criminal
justice institutions. Justice sector reform is a prerequisite to ensuring the basic
rights of the people of Guinea-Bissau and fighting serious and organized crime,
including trafficking in drugs and persons. In this regard, I urge the authorities of
Guinea-Bissau to implement the National Programme for Justice Reform (2015 2019), the national plan to tackle transnational organized crime and the
recommendations made in the Human Rights Council’s universal periodic review of
Guinea-Bissau of January 2015.
79. The consolidation of the rule of law, the fight against impunity, organized
crime and corruption, and the protection and promotion of international human
rights are part and parcel of addressing the root causes of instability and building
the social contract between the State and people of Guinea -Bissau. I am particularly
concerned about the lack of progress in the investigation of, and in establishing
accountability mechanisms for, past cases of serious human rights violations.
80. To conclude, I wish to express my appreciation to the staff of UNIOGBIS and
the United Nations country team under the leadership of my Special Representative,
Miguel Trovoada, as well as to regional and international partners for their
continuing contributions to peacebuilding in Guinea -Bissau.

15-12964

17/17
