S/PV.7640

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7640

th meeting
Wednesday, 2 March 2016, 11.40 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Gaspar Martins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Angola)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Zhao Yong
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Okamura
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Taula
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Gasso Matoses
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison
Mr. Rosselli
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation in Libya
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (S/2016/182)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-05787 (E)
*1605787*

S/PV.7640

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 11.40 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
Report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (S/2016/182)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Libya to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Martin
Kobler, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Martin Kobler, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya, and Ambassador Ramlan
Bin Ibrahim, Permanent Representative of Malaysia, in
his capacity as the Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya.
I now give the floor to Mr. Kobler.
Mr. Kobler: First of all, let me congratulate Angola
on taking up the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of March.
The members of the Council have before them the
latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2016/182) on
the activities of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL), which details the work of the Mission
over the past six months.
The process towards a democratic transition has
continued to achieve a number of milestones, but at the
same time remains very precarious. Two weeks ago, on
17 February, Libya marked the fifth anniversary of the
2011 revolution. However, five years on, the current
political and military vacuum is allowing terrorist
groups and criminal networks to establish deep roots.
It must be said in all clarity that Libya today has no
effective State institutions.
2/7

02/03/2016

It is with a very heavy heart that I begin my
briefing noting that the humanitarian situation in
Libya has deteriorated further, against the background
of poor funding for the humanitarian response plan.
Libya is a country of 6 million people, with significant
resources, but across the country 2.4 million people are
in need of some form of humanitarian assistance. More
than 40 per cent of the health-care facilities in Libya
are not functioning. Over 1 million children under the
age of five are at risk of being affected by a vaccine
shortage. Some 1.3 million people are food insecure.
It is now imperative that Libyan political actors take
responsibility, in the higher interest of the Libyan
people, to stop the human suffering.
The overwhelming majority of the Libyan people
are in favour of the Libyan Political Agreement. The
overwhelming majority support the formation of a
Government of National Accord that would effectively
address the existing threats. The overwhelming
majority want and deserve peace now. Some of those
who are politically responsible on both sides, however,
still refuse to listen to the voices of the Libyan people
and pursue their own narrow political interests.
In my most recent briefing to the Security Council
(see S/PV.7577), I promised to broaden the basis
of support for the Libyan Political Agreement. My
colleagues, myself and the international community
have persistently reached out to those who are opposing
the Libyan Political Agreement. However, until now we
have been unable to convince them to go the way of
peace and unity.
On 15 January, the Presidency Council presented a
Cabinet for approval by the House of Representatives.
The House voted to endorse the Libyan Political
Agreement in principle, which was good news, but it
requested the Presidency Council to nominate a new
and smaller Cabinet. After days of tireless deliberations,
on 14 February the Presidency Council finalized a new
list of candidates for a streamlined Cabinet. A few days
ago, on 22 February, the House of Representatives met
to consider the Presidency Council’s second Cabinet.
However, its session was interrupted by a minority of
parliamentarians who opposed the vote and resorted to
threats and intimidation, preventing the majority from
freely expressing its vote. Nonetheless, this majority
gathered 100 signatures in support of the endorsement
of the new Cabinet and its programme.
16-05787

02/03/2016

The situation in Libya

I am convinced that a positive vote could have
taken place on 22 February had the leadership of
the House of Representatives shown the resolve and
determination to put the Government of National
Accord to a vote. I have therefore written to the Speaker
of the House of Representatives to register the will of
the democratic majority and formalize its endorsement
of the Government of National Accord. Failing such
recognition and a positive endorsement by the House of
Representatives by early next week, Libyans have to go
on. I intend to reconvene the Libyan Political Dialogue
to explore the way forward in line with the Libyan
Political Agreement.
Libya cannot be held hostage by minorities in the
House of Representatives and the General National
Congress. In both those forums, there are clear
majorities who are in favour of moving ahead quickly
with the establishment of a Government of National
Accord. The country needs to move ahead now or risk
division and collapse. I therefore intend to proceed
along the following lines.
First, together with the Libyans and the international
community, we will continue to advocate for the
implementation of the Libyan Political Agreement. This
is the plan; there are no alternatives. The Government
of National Accord, as proposed by the Presidency
Council, must be allowed to take up its duties in Tripoli
as soon as possible. Those who are threatening the
Presidency Council and actively preventing it from
assuming power in Tripoli should be held accountable
on the basis of Security Council resolutions. Branches
of the Government, however, should be established
in eastern Libya, where Benghazi requires particular
attention, and in the South.
I thank Prime Minister Fayez Serraj for his
perseverance and steadfastness in recent weeks. I
encourage all members of the Presidency Council to
stand together in unity. I call on the country’s political
leadership to support and stay the course outlined in
the Libyan Political Agreement, and I welcome the
preparatory meetings of the State Council. I look
forward to the convening of the first official meeting of
the State Council in Tripoli as soon as possible.
Secondly, given the security situation and the
expansion of Da’esh, it is imperative to unify and
reform Libyan security forces. I urge the Presidency
Council and the Government of National Accord to
immediately establish a mechanism to achieve that

S/PV.7640

goal. The international community and UNSMIL stand
ready to assist.
Thirdly, support for the Libyan Political Agreement
has to be broadened. This will require a parallel,
complementary and bottom-up approach. The support
of civil society, youth, and women organizations
has to be further deepened. Tribal dignitaries and
municipalities have a crucial role to play. I intend to
work with the relevant authorities responsible for
national reconciliation in the new Government of
National Accord to arrange for regional forums of
tribal leaders and mayors to accompany the process of
nation-building. This may later result in a nation-wide
Grand Shura.
Fourthly, in parallel, the Constitution Drafting
Assembly should present the draft constitution on time
for a referendum. To this end, I am grateful that the
Government of Oman has offered to host a retreat. I urge
all members of the Constitution Drafting Assembly,
including the boycotters, to seize this opportunity and
resolve the outstanding problems.
Both in eastern and western Libya, there are those
who are committed to doing everything in their power
to undermine the political process, as well as the
formation of a Government of National Accord and its
instalment in the capital. These actors must be told in no
uncertain terms that enough is enough. It is high time
that they stand by the interests of the Libyan people and
not against them.
With respect to security questions, while the
political process is extremely slow, Da’esh takes
advantage of the political and security vacuum and
is expanding to the West, East and the South. While
Libya’s financial resources are dwindling, the criminal
networks, including human smuggling, are booming.
The conflict in Benghazi has escalated in recent days
when forces under the banner of the Libyan national
army commenced new offensive operations against the
Benghazi Revolutionaries Shura Council and Da’esh.
These forces have since gained control of several areas
previously held by the Shura Council and succeeded in
dislodging Da’esh from a number of key neighbourhoods
it previously controlled. Many displaced as a result
of the conflict in Benghazi have returned to their old
neighbourhoods and reclaimed their homes. However, I
am deeply concerned at unconfirmed reports of human
rights violations in some areas overtaken by the Libyan
national army.

16-057873/7

S/PV.7640

The situation in Libya

Let us not forget that as a result of the violent
conflict, significant parts of Benghazi today lie in
ruins. The establishment of a humanitarian ceasefire,
the delivery of humanitarian aid and a reconstruction
fund for Benghazi must be priorities of the new
Government. In southern Libya, the national-level
conflict and absence of a functioning security apparatus
continues to exacerbate local intercommunal tensions.
Intermittent clashes continue in Sabha and Kufra.
The fragmentation of security actors and their
preoccupation with consolidating their influence in
areas under their control have allowed Da’esh to operate
unchecked in many places. The airstrike against Da’esh
in Sabrathah on 19 February has been followed by
escalating clashes as local security forces and armed
groups sought to evict Da’esh from the town. During an
assault last week, Da’esh killed 17 people, beheading
several of them. Da’esh has also continued to carry out
multiple beheadings and atrocities in its stronghold of
Sirte. Da’esh in Libya constitutes an urgent and growing
threat to Libya, the region and beyond. However, the
fight against violent extremism can be sustainable only
if it is led by a national unity Government that puts in
place and prioritizes a national agenda to address the
country’s most immediate challenges and works to meet
the aspirations and expectations of the Libyan people.
On 13 January, the Presidency Council established
a Temporary Security Committee to facilitate the
implementation of the security arrangements outlined
in the Libyan Political Agreement. UNSMIL is
supporting the Committee in its efforts to formulate a
viable security plan that will enable the Government of
National Accord to establish itself in Tripoli. In western
Libya, however, our efforts have been severely impeded
by the consistent denials of United Nations overflight
and landing permission by the Tripoli-based authorities.
Since the beginning of December 2015, practically all
our requests to travel to Tripoli and surrounding areas
have, with few exceptions, been refused.
With respect to human rights, the Mission continues
to document numerous cases in which armed groups
across the country have abducted civilians on account
of their identity, political affiliations or simply for
ransom. Those seized are often at risk of torture and
other ill-treatment. I welcome the recent establishment
of a committee by the General Prosecution to review
the cases of all those detained at the Mitiga airport
in Tripoli.
4/7

02/03/2016

I have continued to strongly advocate increased
women’s participation in Libyan political life, in
particular by calling for a 30-per cent share of ministerial
posts in the Government of National Accord. Sadly, my
calls have not been heeded.
Libya’s neighbours are suffering the direct
consequences of the country’s instability. I am
committed to fully engaging with them in reaching a
political solution to the crisis. I would like to thank
Tunisia for continuing to host UNSMIL temporarily
in its capital, and other countries of the region for
playing an important role in building consensus. I am
deeply appreciative of the efforts of the African Union,
the European Union and the League of Arab States. I
congratulate President Kikwete on his appointment as
High Representative of the African Union for Libya.
I met him a few days ago, on 26 February, and I look
forward to our close cooperation. I would like to thank
in particular the Council for its close engagement and
unanimous support for a political resolution of the
problems in Libya.
Finally, I would like to thank the staff of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya for their
tireless efforts and dedication in supporting the Libyan
political process. Despite the many hurdles, difficulties
and frustrations in their daily work, they are highly
professional and committed colleagues, and I am very
grateful to them.
The President: I thank Mr. Kobler for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Ibrahim.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): In accordance with
paragraph 24 (e) of resolution 1970 (2011) of 26 February
2011, I have the honour to report to the Security
Council on the work of the Committee established by
the same resolution. The report covers the period from
11 December 2015 to 2 March 2016.
On 11 December, the Committee wrote to the
Permanent Representative of Libya, bringing to his
attention a recommendation, contained in the interim
report of the Panel of Experts, regarding the unity of
the National Oil Corporation and the neutrality of the
Central Bank of Libya.
On 21 December, the Committee responded to
a request for guidance from a Member State on the
implementation of the arms embargo as it relates to the
disposal of seized military materiel.
16-05787

02/03/2016

The situation in Libya

On 7 January 2016, the Committee issued its fourth
Implementation Assistance Notice to assist Member
States in their implementation of the travel ban in
relation to the Libya sanctions regime. As with the other
such notices that relate to the arms embargo and the
assets freeze, this notice can be found on the website of
the Committee in all official languages.
On 15 January, the Committee informed the
Permanent Representative of Libya about a forged
document, purporting to come from the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011)
concerning Libya, and claiming the authorization of the
unfreezing of frozen assets owned by the Central Bank
of Libya. In this context, it is worth noting that the
Central Bank of Libya has not been subject to United
Nations sanctions since December 2011.
On 22 January, the Committee received a
notification under paragraph 19 (b) of resolution
1970 (2011) in relation to the assets freeze measure,
which was subsequently put on hold by a member of
the Committee.
On 22 February, the Committee approved a request
for extension of a travel ban exemption for an additional
six months. Let me note in this connection that more
information on granted travel ban exemptions can be
found on the website of the Committee.
Lastly, on 29 January the Committee received the
final report of the Panel of Experts, in accordance with
resolution 2213 (2015). The Committee will discuss
it and its recommendations in informal consultations
tomorrow, 3 March. Via a letter dated 9 February,
the Committee has also invited the Permanent
Representative of Libya, or members of his delegation,
to read the report in the offices of the Secretariat after
the discussion in the Committee.
The President: I thank Ambassador Ibrahim for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Libya.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I am
pleased to be able to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I thank Mr. Martin Kobler,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
for his important briefing. I commend him for his
determination to bring the positions of the various
Libyan parties closer with the aim of speeding up
implementation of the Libyan Political Agreement,

S/PV.7640

signed on 17 December. I would also like to thank
Ambassador Ramlan Bin Ibrahim for his presentation
of the report of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011).
Libyans have welcomed the signing of the Political
Agreement, which they see as auguring well, and which
has been endorsed by the House of Representatives.
While we have been hoping to see the establishment of a
Government of National Accord, there are spoilers who
have continued to use tactics designed to derail every
attempt to form such a Government, both within and
outside the House of Representatives. No one can deny
the fact that Libyans and the House of Representatives
are positive that there is a clear majority in the House in
support of the formation of a Government of National
Accord under the Prime Minister-designate, Fayiz
Al-Sarraj. If the House had been permitted to vote
on it, the Government would now be able to carry out
its functions. I hope those members of the House will
reconsider their position and that the Security Council
will not fail to sanction those who have stood in the way
of implementation of the Political Agreement.
Unfortunately, there are Libyans who believe it is in
their interest to prevent the formation of a Government
of National Accord and to foment problems and discord
among the country’s institutions. Some think they
can control and lead Libyans through the use of force.
Others are trying to use the Libyan army’s successes to
prevent the formation of a Government, with no thought
for the suffering of Libyans both inside and outside the
country or the threats that surround it.
Libyans have once again shown that nothing can
divide them when they know that their country is under
siege. We have recently seen young patriots coming
from every city to surround the city of Sabratha in
western Libya in order to fight Da’esh together and to
try to drive its soldiers out. They have forgotten all their
previous political differences and some of them have
died as martyrs alongside the residents of Sabratha in a
decisive battle aimed at purging the area of terrorism.
They have achieved a great deal despite the obstacles
placed in their way by the local leaders, who are under
the thumb of the Libyan Islamic Fighting Group. I
commend all the patriotic residents of the towns of
Zawiyah, Serman, Ojailat, Jamil and other areas who
have responded to their country’s call in the absence
of any support from the Government of the extremist
militias in Tripoli, which instead of fighting terrorism
has been aiding Da’esh and its wounded by using

16-057875/7

S/PV.7640

The situation in Libya

members of the Libyan Islamic Fighting Group, and
has hastened to declare the city liberated from Da’esh
in order to cover for Da’esh leaders who are still trying
to escape, and some of whom are hiding in the capital
of Tripoli.
The clashes with Da’esh in the western region of
the country have shown that the militia authorities in
Tripoli, which claim to constitute a Government of
security, do not possess an army, and that they actually
provide the basis for terrorism, since they cannot
combat it. We have seen that the only regular army in
Libya is made up of those units fighting terrorism in
Benghazi, who have been able to liberate Ajdabiya, are
working to liberate Derna and are in the Jabal Al-Gharbi
region preparing to carry out orders if the vote in the
body politic is blocked or if the militias prevent the
Government of national accord from working in Tripoli.
I would like to take this opportunity to commend
the Libyan army and the forces supporting it on its
success in Benghazi, which for the first time in two
years has enabled families that had to flee to return
to their homes. It is time that the Government, with
the help of the international community, put together a
comprehensive plan for the reconstruction of Benghazi.
Some Libyans are opposed to the army’s leadership,
while others insist that they should not be interfered
with, which shows clearly that all Libyans recognize
that the army exists. It is therefore incumbent upon the
international community to help the army to develop
on a professional basis that aligns with international
standards, as well as to furnish it with the equipment it
needs to fight terrorism and protect the State’s borders.
There can be no question that establishing a programme
aimed at reintegrating into the army all soldiers who
have committed no crimes or human-rights violations
and those fighters who wish to join the army should
be the Government of National Accord’s top priority
and the main goal for international assistance. In that
regard, I should warn against any efforts to strengthen
the capacity of the militias on the pretext of helping to
prepare them to fight Da’esh in Sirte. That can only
have the effect of complicating the Libyan crisis even
more, particularly in view of the fact that since the fight
began we have seen the militias retreat from Sirte and
put it back in the hands of Da’esh.
It will be difficult to unite Libyans in the effort
to fight and eliminate terrorism in the country if we
continue to ignore the fact that elements of the Libyan
6/7

02/03/2016

Islamic Fighting Group and the Muslim Brotherhood in
Libya are supporting and protecting Da’esh. They are
allies of the Islamic State and have provided them with
weapons and financing. They have made it possible
for them to control Sirte and Derna and some areas of
Benghazi. They have also made it possible to establish
pockets of control in other Libyan cities.
Therefore, the time has come to ask those who use
religion as a slogan to say something we have never
heard from them before, namely, the condemnation
of Da’esh and Ansar Al-Sharia. They must declare
that they are not linked to the ideology of Al-Qaida
or Da’esh, or at least that they have rejected it. They
must accept what Libyans agree upon with regard to
the sponsorship of the United Nations and accept the
national State and respect the institutions and symbols
of democracy, the rule of law and equality among all
Libyans. They must demonstrate this in fact so that
Libyans can believe them, trust them, vote for them and
integrate them in the conduct of the affairs of the State.
Otherwise, Libyans will remain suspicious of those
two organizations.
No force will be able to impose its authority on
the Libyan people. Over the past four years, terrorist
organizations have controlled the levers of the State.
Unfortunately, they are sowing division among
Libyans and encouraging them to kill each other. They
do so by using two television channels — Al Nabaa
and Tanasoh — to disseminate propaganda. If the
international community is serious about resolving the
Libyan crisis, it must prevent the broadcasting of those
two television channels and punish those responsible. It
is worth noting that the Tanasoh channel is broadcasted
from the United Kingdom and that its owner holds
British nationality, while one of its main officials is a
Canadian mufti of Libyan origin.
During the 11 February meeting on sanctions (see
S/PV.7620), I referred to the losses suffered by Libya
because the Board of the Libyan Investment Authority
was unable to manage the country’s investments. We
have been in consultations with members of the Board
to determine what measures need to be adopted to
prevent losses without lifting the assets freeze. We feel
that Council members understand this problem and we
hope that itwill lead to a draft resolution to be adopted
soon by the Security Council.
Libyans aspire to a Government that unites them,
manages their affairs, provides them with security
16-05787

02/03/2016

The situation in Libya

and basic services and makes it possible for them to
return to their homes. Their hopes are based on the
establishment of the Government of National Accord,
which is working out of Tripoli. We hope that Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Kobler will
be able to help Lybians achieve their goals with the
Council’s assistance. But it is up to Libyans to set aside
their political alliances and join together to confront the

S/PV.7640

greatest danger, namely, terrorism and the possibility
of a break-up of the State and a division of the territory.
The President: I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

16-057877/7
