A/RES/75/1

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
28 September 2020

Seventy-fifth session
Agenda item 128 (a)
Strengthening of the United Nations system:
strengthening of the United Nations system

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on
21 September 2020
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/75/L.1)]

75/1.

Declaration on the commemoration of the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the United Nations
The General Assembly
Adopts the following declaration:

Declaration on the commemoration of the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the United Nations
1.
We, the Heads of State and Government representing the peoples of the
world, have gathered on 21 September 2020 at the high-level meeting of the General
Assembly to commemorate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations. We
do so with a sense of awe and deep respect for the founders who created this
Organization. There is no other global organization with the legitimacy, convening
power and normative impact of the United Nations. No other global organization
gives hope to so many people for a better world and can deliver the future we want.
The urgency for all countries to come together, to fulfil the promise of the nations
united, has rarely been greater.
2.
Born out of the horrors of the Second World War, the United Nations, as a
common endeavour for humanity, was established to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war. Even in times of great global challenges and tension, our
Organization has catalysed decolonization, promoted freedom, shaped norms for
international development and worked to eradicate disease. The United Nations has
helped to mitigate dozens of conflicts, saved hundreds of thousands of lives through
humanitarian action and provided millions of children with the education that every
child deserves. It has worked to promote and protect all human rights and fundamental
freedoms for all, including the equal rights of women and men. The Charter of the

20-12589 (E)

300920

*2012589*

Declaration on the commemoration of the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the United Nations

A/RES/75/1

United Nations, which is the cornerstone of international law, has declared the
principle of sovereign equality of all States, respect of their territorial integrity,
political independence and the right to self-determination of peoples. It has affirmed
the principles of non-intervention in the internal affairs of States and the resolution
of international disputes by peaceful means and in conformity with the principles of
justice and international law. It has determined th at all States shall refrain from the
threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any
State, or in any other manner inconsistent with the purposes of the United Nations.
3.
The achievements are many, and we owe the United Nations and its
personnel much gratitude and respect, not least to those who have paid the ultimate
price in the line of duty. Over the years, more than 1 million women and men have
served under the United Nations flag in more than 70 peacekeeping operations. Every
day, countries, citizens, private sector and civil society representatives use the
platform provided by the United Nations to make life better for all of humanity.
4.
However, the United Nations has had its moments of disappointment. Our
world is not yet the world that our founders envisaged 75 years ago. It is plagued by
growing inequality, poverty, hunger, armed conflicts, terrorism, insecurity, climate
change and pandemics. People in different corners of the world are forced to make
dangerous journeys in search of refuge and safety. The least developed countries are
falling behind, and we still have not achieved complete decolonization. All this calls
for greater action, not less. When Member States lend their will and resources to the
collective efforts of the Organization, powerful results have been seen. Through the
global conversation launched by the Secretary-General in 2020, we have listened to
the concerns and aspirations of the people. We are here to respond.
5.
Our challenges are interconnected and can only be addressed through
reinvigorated multilateralism. As we meet, the coronavirus disease (COVID -19)
pandemic continues to reverberate around our world. In a matter of weeks, the
pandemic manifested itself as the largest global challenge in the history of the United
Nations. It has not only caused death and serious illness, but also global economic
recession, increased poverty, anxiety and fear. It has put enormous pressure on our
societies, economies and health systems. While none of us have been left untouched,
people in vulnerable situations and the most vulnerable countries have been the
hardest hit. The COVID-19 pandemic has reminded us in the most powerful way that
we are closely interconnected and only as strong as our weakest link. Only by working
together and in solidarity can we end the pandemic and effectively tackle its
consequences. Only together can we build resilience against future pandemics and
other global challenges. Multilateralism is not an option but a necess ity as we build
back better for a more equal, more resilient and more sustainable world. The United
Nations must be at the centre of our efforts.
6.
Strengthening international cooperation is in the interest of both nations
and peoples. The three pillars of the United Nations – peace and security, development
and human rights – are equally important, interrelated and interdependent. We have
come far in 75 years but much more remains to be done. We have the tools and now
we need to use them. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development 1 is our road map
and its implementation a necessity for our survival. Urgent efforts are required.
Therefore, we are not here to celebrate. We are here to take action. Guided by the
purposes and principles of the Charter, we are here to ensure the future we want and
the United Nations we need.
* * *
__________________
1

2/5

Resolution 70/1.
20-12589

Declaration on the commemoration of the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the United Nations

A/RES/75/1

7.
We will leave no one behind. The next 10 years, which have been
designated as the decade of action and delivery for sustainable development, will be
the most critical of our generation. It is even more important as we build back better
from the COVID-19 pandemic. We need a strong United Nations development system
and effective collaboration between the United Nations and the international financial
institutions. We support the Secretary-General’s efforts and measures in this regard.
We are determined to implement the 2030 Agenda in full and on time. There is no
alternative. The peoples have to be at the centre of all our efforts. Particular attention
must be given to people in vulnerable situations. Humanitarian access to those in need
of assistance must be granted without obstacle or delay and in line with the
humanitarian principles. We are guided by the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights 2 and international human right treaties and instruments and will ensure the
human rights and fundamental freedoms of everyone.
8.
We will protect our planet. Without more determined action we will
continue to impoverish our planet with less biodiversity and fewer natural resources.
We will see more environmental threats and climate-related challenges, including
natural disasters, drought, desertification, food shortages, water scarcity, wildfires,
sea level rise and depletion of the oceans. The time to act is now. Many countries, not
least small island developing States, least developed countries and landlocked
developing countries, are already among the most affected. We need to adapt to the
circumstances and take transformative measures. We have a historic opportunity to
build back better and greener. We need to immediately curb greenhouse gas emissions
and achieve sustainable consumption and production patterns in line with applicable
State commitments to the Paris Agreement 3 and in line with the 2030 Agenda. This
cannot wait.
9.
We will promote peace and prevent conflicts. The ongoing armed
conflicts and threats against international peace an d security must be urgently
resolved through peaceful means. We reiterate the importance of abiding by the
Charter, principles of international law and relevant resolutions of the Security
Council. International arms control, non-proliferation and disarmament agreements
and their architectures need to be upheld. The United Nations must better address all
forms and domains of threats. Terrorism and violent extremism conducive to terrorism
are serious threats to international peace and security. The diplomati c toolbox of the
Charter needs to be used to its full potential, including preventive diplomacy and
mediation. We call upon the Secretary-General to enhance this toolbox to prevent the
outbreak, escalation and recurrence of hostilities on land, at sea, in space and in
cyberspace. We fully support and promote the Secretary-General’s initiative for a
global ceasefire. International humanitarian law must be fully respected. To build,
keep and sustain peace is now one of the main responsibilities of the United Nations.
10. We will abide by international law and ensure justice. The purposes
and principles of the Charter and international law remain timeless, universal and an
indispensable foundation for a more peaceful, prosperous and just world. We will
abide by the international agreements we have entered into and the commitments we
have made. We will continue to promote respect for democracy and human rights and
to enhance democratic governance and the rule of law by strengthening transparent
and accountable governance and independent judicial institutions.
11. We will place women and girls at the centre. Conflicts will not be
resolved, and sustainable development not occur, without the equal and active
participation of women at all levels. Human rights can never be fully upheld unless
they are also enjoyed by all women and girls. Persistent gender inequalities and abuse,
__________________
2
3

20-12589

Resolution 217 A (III).
See FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21, annex.
3/5

Declaration on the commemoration of the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the United Nations

A/RES/75/1

including sexual and gender-based violence, have deprived us of a more just and
better world. We will accelerate action to achieve gender equality, women’s
participation and the empowerment of women and girls in all domains.
12. We will build trust. Growing inequality within and among countries is
jeopardizing our efforts to ensure the future we want. Inequality leads to mistrust
between countries and to people’s mistrust in institutions of governance. It also
contributes to acts of xenophobia, racism, intolerance, hate speech and
disinformation. We condemn all such acts. We will address the root causes of
inequalities, including violence, human rights abuses, corruption, marginalization,
discrimination in all its forms, poverty and exclusion, as well as lack of education and
employment. It is our responsibility.
13. We will improve digital cooperation. Digital technologies have
profoundly transformed society. They offer unprecedented opportunities and new
challenges. When improperly or maliciously used, they can fuel divisions within and
between countries, increase insecurity, undermine human rights and exacerbate
inequality. Shaping a shared vision on digital cooperation and a digital future that
show the full potential for beneficial technology usage, and addressing digital trust
and security, must continue to be a priority as our world is now more than ever relying
on digital tools for connectivity and socioeconomic prosperity. Digital technologies
have a potential to accelerate the realization of the 2030 Agenda. We must ensure safe
and affordable digital access for all. The United Nations can provide a platform for
all stakeholders to participate in such deliberations.
14. We will upgrade the United Nations. The world of today is very different
from what it was when the United Nations was created 75 years ago. There are more
countries, more people, more challenges but also more solutions. Our working
methods need to keep pace and adapt. We support the ongoing reforms by the
Secretary-General. They are creating a more agile, effective and accountable
organization that can deliver better in the field and adapt to global challenges. We
reiterate our call for reforms of three of the principal organs of the United Nations.
We commit to instil new life in the discussions on the reform of the Security Council
and continue the work to revitalize the General Assembly and strengthen the
Economic and Social Council. The review of the peacebuilding architecture has our
full support.
15. We will ensure sustainable financing. Realizing our aspirations will
require sustainable and predictable funding of the Organization. We will pay our
assessed contributions in full and on time. Measures to better ensure this should be
explored. We will further enhance transparency, accountability and efficient use of
resources. The full and timely implementation of the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of
the Third International Conference on Financing for Development 4 is key for the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda. Joint public-private financing plays a central
role in our efforts to make the United Nations deliver better on its purposes.
16. We will boost partnerships. Today’s challenges require cooperation not
only across borders but also across the whole of society. We have to make the United
Nations more inclusive and engage with all relevant stakeholders, including regional
and subregional organizations, non-governmental organizations, civil society, the
private sector, academia and parliamentarians to ensure an effective response to our
common challenges.
17. We will listen to and work with youth. Youth is the missing piece for
peace and development. As we benefited from the foresight of the founders of the
United Nations, young people today will have to live with the consequences of our
__________________
4

4/5

Resolution 69/313, annex.
20-12589

Declaration on the commemoration of the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the United Nations

A/RES/75/1

action and inaction. For too long, the voices of youth have been sidelined in
discussions about their future. This has to change now through meaningful
engagement with youth.
18. We will be prepared. The COVID-19 pandemic caught us off guard. It
has served as a wake-up call for improving our preparedness for not only healthrelated crises but also other challenges and crises. We need to strengthen international
cooperation, coordination and solidarity. It is important to learn and share experiences
and information to reduce risks and make our systems more resilient. While
improving our global crisis prevention and response systems, the re is an urgent need
to accelerate development, production, as well as equitable and affordable global
access to new vaccines, medicines and medical equipment. We applaud all health care and other front-line workers who put their own safety at risk when saving others,
and pledge to put people at the centre of our response.
* * *
19. What we agree today will affect the sustainability of our planet as well as
the welfare of generations for decades to come. Through reinvigorated global action
and by building on the progress achieved in the last 75 years, we are determined to
ensure the future we want. To achieve this, we will mobilize resources, strengthen our
efforts and show unprecedented political will and leadership. We will work together
with partners to strengthen coordination and global governance for the common future
of present and coming generations.
20. We request the Secretary-General to report back before the end of the
seventy-fifth session of the General Assembly with recommendations to adva nce our
common agenda and to respond to current and future challenges.
21. We commit to take the present declaration to our citizens, in the true spirit
of “We the peoples”.
3rd plenary meeting
21 September 2020

20-12589

5/5
