S/2011/319

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
18 May 2011
English
Original: French

Letter dated 18 May 2011 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General
I have the honour to inform you that the members of the Security Council have
decided to send a mission to Ethiopia, Sudan and Kenya from 19 to 26 May 2011.
The Addis Ababa segment of the mission will be led by Ambassador Gérard Araud
of France. The Khartoum, Abyei and Juba segment of the mission will be co-led by
Ambassador Susan Rice of the United States of America and Ambassador Vitaly
Churkin of the Russian Federation, and the Nairobi segment will be co-led by
Ambassador Mark Lyall Grant of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland and Ambassador Baso Sangqu of South Africa. The members of the Council
have agreed to the attached terms of reference for the mission (see annex).
The composition of the mission is as follows:
Ambassador Ivan Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina)
Ambassador Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti (Brazil)
Counsellor Tian Lin (China)
Ambassador Néstor Osorio (Colombia)
Ambassador Gérard Araud (France)
Ambassador Nelson Messone (Gabon)
Ambassador Peter Wittig (Germany)
Ambassador Hardeep Singh Puri (India)
Ambassador Nawaf Salam (Lebanon)
Ambassador Raff Bukun-Olu Wole Onemola (Nigeria)
Ambassador João Maria Cabral (Portugal)
Ambassador Vitaly Churkin (Russian Federation)
Ambassador Baso Sangqu (South Africa)
Ambassador Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland)
Ambassador Susan Rice (United States of America)
I should be grateful if you would have the text of the present letter and its
annex circulated as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Gérard Araud
President of the Security Council

11-34784 (E) 190511 190511

*1134784*

S/2011/319

Annex
Security Council mission to Africa (May 2011)
Terms of reference
Mission to the African Union, Addis Ababa
Led by Ambassador Gérard Araud (France)
1.
To continue to develop an effective partnership and enhance cooperation
between the African Union and the United Nations through an exchange of views on
issues of interest to both the United Nations Security Council and the African Union
Peace and Security Council.
2.
To exchange views on situations of interest to both the United Nations
Security Council and the African Union Peace and Security Council, which include
but are not limited to the following:
2.1

A brief overview of the peace and security situation in Africa;

2.2

Situation in the Sudan:
• African Union/United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID):
– Humanitarian and security situation/implementation of UNAMID mandate;
– Peace process;
• Comprehensive Peace Agreement/United Nations Mission in the Sudan:
– Remaining Comprehensive Peace Agreement issues/implementation of
the mandate of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS);
– Situation in Abyei;
– Security situation in South Sudan;
– Prospects for South Sudan;

2.3

Situation in Somalia:
• Humanitarian and security situation/progress made by the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and Transitional Federal Government forces;
• Status of implementation of transitional tasks and of the process on posttransitional agreements;
• Piracy/implementation of resolution 1976 (2011);

2.4

Situation in Libya:
• Challenges of establishing a ceasefire and a political process: strengthening
coordination between the United Nations and regional initiatives;
• Humanitarian situation in Libya;

2.5

Situation in Côte d’Ivoire:
• Political and security developments;
• Challenges to stabilization and national reconciliation;

2

11-34784

S/2011/319

• Coordination between the United Nations, the African Union and the
Economic Community of West African States to solve the crisis and help the
reconstruction.
Mission to the Sudan
Led by Ambassadors Susan Rice (United States of America) and Vitaly Churkin
(Russian Federation)
1.
To congratulate the parties to the Comprehensive Peace Agreement and the
people of the Sudan for a peaceful and successful referendum.
2.
To reaffirm the Security Council’s commitment to and the international
community’s support for the full implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement, and the continued negotiations between the parties to the Agreement,
including under the auspices of the African Union High-Level Implementation Panel
and its Chair, President Thabo Mbeki. To emphasize that the conclusion of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement interim period, on 9 July, is soon approaching;
thus, the parties need to meet at the highest level, as necessary, to reach agreement
on outstanding Agreement issues and post-Agreement arrangements, and to engage
with the United Nations on the future of the Organization’s presence in the Sudan.
3.
To assess ongoing preparations for independence in Southern Sudan and to
emphasize the importance of addressing the challenges faced by Southern Sudan,
including security, humanitarian and development needs and capacity-building. To
emphasize the importance of continued cooperation between the parties to the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement after the independence of Southern Sudan, to
recall both parties’ commitment not to take any action or to support any group that
would undermine the security of the other and to underline that the Security Council
will not tolerate any support to proxy militias by either party.
4.
To reiterate the importance of the parties to the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement reaching an agreement on Abyei’s post-Agreement status and to
acknowledge that it is the responsibility of the parties, including during their
negotiations under the auspices of the African Union High-Level Implementation
Panel and its Chair, President Thabo Mbeki, to reach agreement on the status of
Abyei. In this regard, the Security Council acknowledges the July 2009 ruling by
the Permanent Court of Arbitration, which defines the borders of Abyei.
5.
To reiterate the importance of increased participation of women at all stages of
the Sudanese peace process and the need for effective and appropriate means to
engage women in Sudanese public life. To stress the importance the Security
Council attaches to the protection of civilians and to reiterate the need for the
parties to fulfil their responsibility to respect and ensure the human rights of all
individuals and to take all feasible steps to meet their basic needs. In this regard, to
call on the parties to give attention to the specific needs of women and children —
especially regarding their protection against sexual violence — refugees, internally
displaced persons, as well as other civilians who may have specific vulnerabilities,
including persons with disabilities and older persons.
6.
To underline the need for the parties to the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
to promote calm, including by providing immediate and ongoing assurance to
people of all nationalities in the Sudan, including Southerners in the North and

11-34784

3

S/2011/319

Northerners in the South, that their rights, safety and property will be respected. To
urge the parties to the Agreement to respect their obligations in this regard.
7.
To reiterate the Security Council’s support for UNMIS, to underline the
importance of the Governments of the Sudan and of Southern Sudan and all relevant
parties providing full and unhindered access, including to Abyei, to assess its
performance, within its current mandate and capabilities, and to consider options for
configuring the United Nations presence in the Sudan after 9 July 2011. To express
concern about recent violence between the Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA)
and local militias in Southern Sudan, specifically in Jonglei, Upper Nile and Unity
states, and to call on the Government of Southern Sudan to find peaceful solutions
to the violence, prevent further clashes and restore calm.
8.
To emphasize the importance of continuing efforts to support the people of the
Sudan, democratic governance, rule of law, accountability, equality, respect for
human rights, justice and economic development, in particular the establishment of
the conditions for conflict-affected communities to build strong, sustainable
livelihoods.
9.
To stress the responsibility of all central and local authorities of the Sudan for
the safety of members of peacekeeping missions, humanitarian workers and all those
working under local contracts.
10. To express the Security Council’s deep concern about the level of violence
over the past several months in Darfur, including ceasefire violations, attacks by
rebel groups and aerial bombardment by the Sudanese armed forces; the number of
civilian casualties and displacements; the illegal arms flow into Darfur; and the
continued restrictions on humanitarian access.
11. To reiterate the Security Council’s support for UNAMID, including the
increasingly full implementation of its chapter VII mandate. To reiterate its demand
that the Government of the Sudan and the armed movements cease hostilities and
ensure full and unhindered access, by land and by air, for UNAMID and
humanitarian workers.
12. To reiterate the Security Council’s support for the African Union-United
Nations-led peace process, hosted by the State of Qatar, to strongly urge all other
rebel movements to join the peace process without further delay or preconditions
and to underline the importance of all parties in Doha making the necessary
concessions urgently to conclude a ceasefire and political agreement. To emphasize
the potential complementary role that a Darfur-based political process could play to
ensure the participation and support of the people of Darfur and better enable them
to be involved in the outcome of the Doha peace process, and to express concern
that important aspects of the enabling environment necessary for a Darfur-based
political process, including those set out in the statement of the President of the
Security Council of 21 April 2011 (S/PRST/2011/8) are not in place. To underline
the importance of the Government of the Sudan and the armed movements
contributing to the creation of such an enabling environment for a Darfur-based
political process, working closely with UNAMID, as appropriate, and to call, in
particular, on the Government of the Sudan to fulfil its stated commitment to lift the
state of emergency in Darfur.
13. To call on the Government of the Sudan to release all political detainees, to
allow free expression and to undertake effective efforts to ensure accountability for

4

11-34784

S/2011/319

serious violations of human rights and international humanitarian law, by
whomsoever perpetrated the acts.
14. To underline the need to ensure that Security Council resolutions are
implemented.
Mission to Nairobi
Led by Ambassadors Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland) and Baso Sangqu (South Africa)
1.
To reiterate its grave concern at the continued instability in Somalia, which has
led to a multitude of problems, including terrorism, acts of piracy and armed
robbery at sea off the coast of Somalia, hostage-taking and a dire humanitarian
situation, and to reiterate the need for a comprehensive strategy to encourage the
establishment of peace and stability in Somalia through the collaborative efforts of
all stakeholders.
2.
To reaffirm the Security Council’s support for the Djibouti Agreement as the
basis for the resolution of the conflict in Somalia; to reiterate the importance of
political outreach, reconciliation and the development of broad-based, representative
institutions reached through a political process ultimately inclusive of all.
3.
To reaffirm the Security Council’s support for the work of Augustine P.
Mahiga, Special Representative of the Secretary-General, the United Nations and
the African Union to promote peace and reconciliation in Somalia. To encourage an
increased United Nations presence in Mogadishu and other parts of Somalia and to
call upon the United Nations to work in a coordinated manner.
4.
To reiterate the Security Council’s support for the work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to facilitate the consultative process among
Somalis in their efforts to reach agreement on post-transitional arrangements, in
consultation with the international community, including the United Nations, the
African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, and within the
framework of the Djibouti Agreement. To urge the Transitional Federal Institutions
to engage fully, constructively and without further delay in the consultative process
facilitated by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and to stress the
importance of wide participation by Somali stakeholders in this process, including
the upcoming consultative meeting to be held in Mogadishu.
5.
To reiterate the primary responsibility of Somalis to achieve peace, security
and reconciliation in Somalia. To urge the Transitional Federal Institutions to refrain
from further unilateral action regarding their mandates. To emphasize the
importance of the Institutions focusing on implementing reforms to build their
legitimacy, representativeness and credibility, and to reach agreement as soon as
possible on the holding of elections for the positions of President and Speaker of
Parliament, without which there can be no extension.
6.
To urge the Transitional Federal Institutions to demonstrate tangible results on
the completion of the core transitional tasks before the end of the transition,
prioritizing progress on reconciliation, the constitution and the delivery of basic
services. To note the Security Council’s intention to keep the situation under review
and to note that its future support to the Institutions will be contingent upon the
delivery of tangible results.

11-34784

5

S/2011/319

7.
To express concern at the discord between the Transitional Federal Institutions
and its impact on the political process and the security situation. To encourage the
Institutions to ensure cohesion, unite and focus on the completion of the transitional
tasks set out by the Djibouti Agreement and the Transitional Charter.
8.
To stress the need for the international community to support further
stabilization, peacebuilding and socio-economic reconstruction in Somalia,
particularly in areas of relative stability throughout Somalia.
9.
To reiterate the Security Council’s full support for AMISOM, to strongly
commend the progress made by AMISOM and the Somali National Security Forces
in the consolidation of security and stability in Mogadishu, and to commend the
contribution of AMISOM to lasting peace and stability in Somalia. To stress the
need for the international community to make contributions urgently and without
caveats to the United Nations Trust Fund for AMISOM or directly in support of
AMISOM and to stress the importance of predictable, reliable and timely resources
for AMISOM in order for it to better fulfil its mandate. To note the
recommendations on Somalia of the African Union Peace and Security Council of
15 October 2010 and to underline its intention to keep the situation under review.
10. To emphasize the importance of strengthening the Somali security forces,
including the development of effective command and control, and to stress the need
for assistance and support to the Somali security forces by the international
community.
11. To express the Security Council’s condemnation of all attacks, including
terrorist attacks on the Transitional Federal Government, AMISOM and the civilian
population by armed opposition groups, and foreign fighters, particularly
Al-Shabaab.
12. To express serious concern about the worsening humanitarian situation in
Somalia and the impact of the current drought; to stress the need for the
international community to support the United Nations consolidated appeal and
other appeals urgently; and to express its condemnation of the targeting and
obstruction of the delivery of humanitarian aid by Al-Shabaab and other armed
groups in Somalia.
13. To stress the responsibility of all parties and armed groups in Somalia to
comply with their obligations to protect the civilian populations from the effects of
hostilities, in particular by avoiding any indiscriminate or excessive use of force.
14. To reiterate the importance of increased participation of women at all stages of
the Somali peace process and the need for effective and appropriate means to
engage women in the public life of Somalia.
15. To express deep concern about the continuing violations and abuses committed
against children in Somalia by parties to the conflict and to urge the immediate
implementation of all conclusions of the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict in Somalia.
16. To recognize that the ongoing instability in Somalia contributes to the problem
of piracy and armed robbery, to stress the need for a comprehensive response to
tackle piracy and its underlying causes, and to note the importance of cooperation
between Member States on the issue of hostage-taking.

6

11-34784

S/2011/319

17. To underline the importance of enhancing work to address the problems caused
by the limited capacity of the judicial system of Somalia and other States in the
region to effectively prosecute, detain and deter suspected pirates.
18. To emphasize the need to ensure effective coordination of anti-piracy efforts
and, in that regard, to recall the Security Council request to the Secretary-General to
strengthen the United Nations Political Office for Somalia as the United Nations
focal point for counter-piracy, including the Kampala process.
19. The Security Council calls upon all States, particularly in the region, to fully
implement the Somalia and Eritrea arms embargoes, bearing in mind that strict
enforcement of the embargoes will improve the overall security situation in the
region.

11-34784

7
