S/2019/319

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
16 April 2019
Original: English

The situation in Abyei
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 33 of Security Council
resolution 2445 (2018), in which the Council requested to be informed of progress in
implementing the mandate of the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
(UNISFA). It covers the period since the issuance of my previous report ( S/2018/923),
from 16 October 2018 to 15 April 2019. The report provides an update on and a n
analysis of the security situation, the relevant political developments and the
operating environment of the mission. It also outlines the progress made to
reconfigure the mission, including a reduction in troops and an increase in police
personnel, as well as recommendations for further revisions.

II. Abyei
Conflict dynamics and security situation
2.
During the reporting period, the security situation remained generally calm, with
sporadic incidents of violence. The conflict in Abyei continued to be characterized by
layers of parallel dynamics, namely intercommunal violence primarily between the
Ngok Dinka and the Misseriya, criminality and the presence of armed elements. There
were reports of 13 violent incidents involving the use of small arms, in which nine
persons were killed. They included three armed robberies, all of which were
perpetrated against those travelling to or from the Amiet common market. One violent
incident included shooting aimed at a UNISFA patrol, although there were no
casualties. Criminality remained the greatest challenge, with 1,675 incidents during
the reporting period, comprising 1,409 petty crimes and 266 serious crimes, including
murder and robbery. Most of the criminal incidents remained intracommunal and were
a consequence of the adverse economic situation in Abyei and surrounding areas, as
well as the prevalence of small arms.
3.
Intercommunal tensions between the Ngok Dinka and the Misseriya normally
peak during the annual migration of the Misseriya and their cattle southwards through
the Abyei Area. The migration season began in October, with 37,000 seasonal
Misseriya herdsmen having entered the Area. Most of the intercommunal violence
noted during the season stems from animal rustling incidents. There were 16 such
incidents during the reporting period, resulting in two fatalities. Because the incidents

19-06201 (E)

180419

*1906201*

S/2019/319

of rustling have the potential to cause wider intercommunal tensions, UNISFA
responds to each incident promptly by dispatching patrols and initiating an
investigation. In seven of the incidents, UNISFA was able to track and retrieve some
of the stolen animals, and in two incidents, all of the animals were recovered.
4.
While the joint peace committee remains the essential community-led
mechanism for bringing together both communities for dialogue to dissipate anxieties
and prevent violence, UNISFA also plays a key role in this regard. Following an
animal rustling incident on 17 February, intercommunal tensions between the
Misseriya and Ngok Dinka increased at the Amiet common market, and a
confrontation ensued. As a result of its presence at the market, UNISFA was able to
intervene swiftly and prevent violence.
5.
During the current migration season, intercommunal tensions rose following the
killing of a Misseriya herdsman and the theft of his cattle near the Amiet common
market on 17 November. A joint peace committee was convened to discuss the
incident, on 22 November. The Ngok Dinka denied any involvement, adding that the
perpetrators came from outside the Abyei Area. Nevertheless, the Misseriya held the
Ngok Dinka responsible for not having intercepted the cattle, which were reportedly
taken to Twic County, in South Sudan, through Ngok Dinka areas. Tensions came to
a head at a subsequent joint peace committee meeting, on 6 December, when the Ngok
Dinka refused to pay compensation, or blood money, for the aforementioned killing
of the Misseriya herdsman. Furthermore, the Ngok Dinka accused the Misseriya of
carrying out a retaliatory attack on 10 December near Kol -Ngol-Nyang-Colognal, a
village situated between Rumamier and Marial Achak, Sector South, in which two of
their community members had been killed. The Misseriya threatened the Ngok Dinka
with harm if they were to go to the Amiet common market. In addition, the Misseriya
boycotted the annual pre-migration conference until the compensation was paid.
6.
On the following day, 7 December, Misseriya traders refused to open their shops
in the Amiet common market and prevented the market from functioning, with the
exception of the sale of perishable goods. On 9 December, the Ngok Dinka confronted
the Misseriya at the market, although there was no violence. In the following days,
UNISFA held separate meetings with the two communities to calm tensions. On
12 December, the acting Head of Mission and Force Commander convened a joint
peace committee meeting with both communities, at which they continued to blame
each other. Nonetheless, the market resumed all trading activities on 12 December,
which highlighted the shared need for the market of both communities. The
interdependent relationship continued to be demonstrated during the reporting period,
including on 30 December, when Ngok Dinka and Misseriya community leaders were
able to de-escalate tensions between the two groups following a subsequent incident
at the market, in which a member of the Ngok Dinka was killed by a member of the
Misseriya.
7.
With the Amiet common market having become an economic hub between
Sudan and South Sudan, Abyei has risen in importance. There are reported to be some
30,000 people who use the market, which has also drawn in communities from the
neighbouring areas in the Sudan and South Sudan. Periodically, there are tensions in
the Abyei Area among communities who enter the Area. During the rep orting period,
tensions with the Nuer, who entered the Abyei Area from Unity State, in South Sudan,
continued. Violence broke out between the Nuer and the Ngok Dinka in the Amiet
common market on 19 February, when 3 Ngok Dinka were killed and another
10 wounded, in addition to one UNISFA peacekeeper who was injured while
intervening.
8.
The presence of armed elements in the Abyei Area also continued to have the
potential to trigger intercommunal tensions. During the reporting period, UNISFA
2/15

19-06201

S/2019/319

received eight reports from residents regarding the presence of armed elements. Most
of the sightings were in Sector Centre and Sector South. UNISFA was able to confirm
the presence of one possible armed group of 51 men, who were suspected to be rebel
elements from South Sudan. The group stated that it was returning to Wau, in South
Sudan, under the terms of the revitalized peace agreement. The mission conducted an
investigation and allowed the group to proceed to South Sudan.
9.
UNISFA also continued to confiscate weapons in the Abyei Area. During the
reporting period, the mission seized nine small arms from three members of the
Misseriya and two members of the Ngok Dinka.
Local peace efforts
10. While the communities are able to weigh in against spoilers, in particular to
ensure that activities continue at the Amiet common market, fundamental political
issues relating to the dispute over Abyei remained unresolved. One of the issues,
namely the Ngok Dinka assertion that Misseriya may not convene in Sector Centre
and Sector South, and in particular in Abyei town, continued to be raised during the
reporting period. It is important to note that the assertion dates back to 2013, when
the Ngok Dinka Paramount Chief was killed, in Abyei town. Consequently, UNISFA
instituted a disengagement line between the communities, in particular during the
migration season. The line prevented the Misseriya from entering Ngok Dinka areas,
thereby avoiding intercommunal tensions. Intercommunal relations markedly
improved over the years and culminated in the establishment of the Amiet common
market in 2016, after which the mission started to relax the enforcement of the
disengagement line, as communities stayed within the agreed areas to avoid conflict.
During the 2017/18 migration season, instead of enforcing the disengagement line,
the mission undertook robust patrolling of flashpoints. Given the improved relations,
the Misseriya have come to expect that access would also be granted to Abyei town,
but the Ngok Dinka continue to resist. On 10 January, the Misseriya again raised the
idea of moving joint peace committee meetings from Todach, Sector North, to
Rumajak, near Abyei town. Disagreement over the matter triggered a suspension of
the weekly joint peace committee meetings on 24 January. UNISFA engaged with
both communities, attempting to resolve the impasse. The two groups resumed the
joint peace committee meetings independently on 21 February, a move initiated by
the community leaders to address and de-escalate tensions following the killing of a
Ngok Dinka trader on 13 February.
11. In an effort to prevent intercommunal tensions during the migration season,
UNISFA, in collaboration with United Nations agencies, funds and programmes, has
facilitated the annual pre-migration conference since 2017. Usually held in December,
the conference allows the communities to agree on the modalities of the Misseriya
movement through the Abyei Area, specifically including areas that can be accessed
by the Misseriya for grazing, and compensation for animal rustling and deaths. For
the most recent migration season, however, the conference was only held on
25 March, owing to the Misseriya position that the conference must be held closer to
Abyei town, specifically Rumajak. In actuality, however, the conference was held in
Todach.
Political developments
12. No progress was made in implementing outstanding commitments agreed upon
by the parties in the Agreement between the Government of the Republic of the Sudan
and the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement on temporary arrangements for the
administration and security of the Abyei Area of 20 June 2011. The Abyei Joint
Oversight Committee did not convene during the reporting period. The last meeting
of the Committee was held on 13 and 14 November 2017.
19-06201

3/15

S/2019/319

13. In a worrying trend, UNISFA has noted heightened political rhetoric from the
Misseriya community. It was reported that, on 7 January, at the celebration of the
independence of the Sudan in Goli, Sector North, there was some discussion of
recapturing the Abyei Area for the Sudan. A few days later, however, on 10 J anuary,
Misseriya leaders rebuffed the notion of recapturing the Area, stating that their goal
continued to be peaceful coexistence with the Ngok Dinka. The Misseriya community
leaders added subsequently that their community was facing pressure from the Su dan
on the matter. Furthermore, a Sudanese national monitor had insisted on being part of
the joint peace committee meeting on 20 December, claiming that he had been
authorized by his Government to do so. The Ngok Dinka suspended the meeting,
stating that the joint peace committee was a mechanism between the two
communities, not the two Governments. National monitors, who are military officers
from the Sudan and South Sudan, are deployed to the Abyei Area with UNISFA to
observe the demilitarization of the Area. Their only role is observation.
14. From 28 to 30 January, the newly appointed Sudanese Co -Chair of the Abyei
Joint Oversight Committee visited Abyei. The visit, which, it is important to note,
occurred at a time when intercommunal tensions were high, following the 7 January
celebration of the independence of the Sudan, had only been verbally communicated
to UNISFA on 24 January. There was no subsequent official correspondence on the
details thereof. The details were only known after the Co -Chair had already arrived
in the Abyei Area. Some of the Ngok Dinka community leaders viewed the visit as a
provocation and threatened violence. In order to prevent intercommunal violence,
UNISFA requested the Co-Chair to refrain from visiting the Amiet common marke t,
but the Co-Chair proceeded to visit the market despite warnings from UNISFA of the
potential for violence. The visit concluded without incident.
Rule of law issues
15. The UNISFA police component continued to provide training and advice to
community protection committees in Sector Centre and Sector South, as well as to
the joint peace committee based at the Amiet common market. A total of 172 members
of the community protection committee and the joint peace committee (154 men and
18 women) received basic police training. Owing to the increase in criminality, the
police component began to recruit more members to serve with the community
protection committees, with a focus on engaging with women. Corrections officers
who were part of the police component provided advisory and monitoring services to
72 members of the community protection committee and the joint peace committee at
the three existing detention facilities, in Abyei town, Agok (Sector Centre) and the
Amiet common market. Owing to the limited number of detention facilities in the
Abyei Area, UNISFA renovated the facility in Abyei town and is in the process of
assisting in the construction of the facility at the common market. The work was done
through the use of quick impact project funds.
16. The continued reluctance of the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan to
agree on handover procedures for criminal suspects apprehended in the Abyei Area
remains a challenge for the mission. In the meantime, UNISFA continues to facilitate
the handover of arrested suspects to the relevant national authorities of the Sudan and
South Sudan through the national monitors and the traditional judiciary. During the
reporting period, two Misseriya suspects were handed over to the Government of the
Sudan through their national monitors. The first suspect was arrested on suspicion of
having killed a member of the Ngok Dinka community and the second was held for
attempting to burn a Ngok Dinka home.
17. On three occasions, in December 2018 and January and March 2 019, UNISFA
invited the parties to take part in an integrated planning exercise for the establishment

4/15

19-06201

S/2019/319

of the Abyei Police Service, a stipulation of resolution 2445 (2018). While the Sudan
responded positively, South Sudan has not responded to the invitations.
Humanitarian situation and recovery activities
18. Limited or non-existent basic services in the Abyei Area, coupled with high
inflation and economic crises in the Sudan and South Sudan, co ntinued to create
significant humanitarian needs in the Abyei Area. United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes, as well as non-governmental organizations, continued to provide
humanitarian and recovery assistance to 182,000 vulnerable people. They inclu ded
102,000 people from the Ngok Dinka community, 9,000 people displaced from
neighbouring states in South Sudan, 34,000 people from the Misseriya community
and 37,000 seasonal Misseriya migrants who had entered the area in October.
19. More than 111,000 vulnerable people benefited from various food assistance related activities, including the supplementary feeding programme in the central and
southern parts of Abyei. Efforts to support community livelihood activities continued
during the reporting period, with 126,000 livestock vaccinated against various
diseases and 17,600 livestock treated, thereby benefiting 9,400 households. Training
in basic animal health, the handling and processing of fish, post -harvest handling, the
establishment of fruit tree nurseries and vegetable production were provided. Other
key activities included the provision of assorted vegetable seeds and fishing kits.
20. A total of 17 primary and 2 secondary health-care facilities throughout the Abyei
Area remained operational thanks to support from the humanitarian community. In
addition, humanitarian organizations provided routine immunizations and essential
drugs, benefiting more than 100,000 people during the reporting period. Construction
commenced on two new clinics in Goli, Sector North, and Majak, Sector South.
Mobile health clinics provided primary health services to the communities in the
remote areas of northern Abyei. Nutrition screening and support for patients with
moderate and acute malnutrition covered a monthly average o f 10,000 children under
5 years of age, as well as pregnant and lactating women, in the Abyei Area. In
addition, awareness-raising and capacity-building activities were conducted,
including on-the-job training for clinical staff and health awareness sessio ns.
21. A total of 9 new handpumps and boreholes were drilled, 14 handpumps were
rehabilitated, 3 handpumps were upgraded to mini solar-powered water yards and
3 water yards were repaired, benefiting 25,000 people throughout the Area. A new
water yard in the Amiet market, which will provide safe water to at least 3,000 people,
was constructed. UNISFA has initiated 19 small-scale quick impact projects,
including the installation of new handpumps and the rehabilitation of existing water
yards. To date, 65 per cent of the projects have been completed, and the remaining
projects are scheduled to be completed in May.
22. Kits containing education materials, including textbooks, early child
development kits and tents for classrooms, were distributed in 42 primary schools
throughout the Area. The food-for-education programme supported meals for
22,000 schoolchildren in 30 primary and secondary schools in southern and central
Abyei. Other major activities included the establishment of children ’s clubs in
northern Abyei, the provision of school recreational activities and psychosocial
support to students and the upgrading and renovation of schools in the Area.
23. Recovery initiatives undertaken during the reporting period included the
construction of a grinding mill in Athony, Sector South. The absence of development
projects and the limited provision of basic services continued to pose challenges for
the humanitarian community, with limited capacity and resources to address the
needs.

19-06201

5/15

S/2019/319

III. Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism
Progress on benchmarks
24. Notable progress has been made by the parties on five of the seven benchmarks
outlined in Security Council resolution 2438 (2018) as conditions for the renewal of
the support provided by UNISFA for the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism. Progress on each benchmark is outlined below.
United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei and Joint Border Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism patrols
25. The Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism received 100 per cent
approval for all aerial patrol requests from both parties. Clearance for ground patrols
and landing in the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone was also given as and when
requested, without delay. Of the 96 aerial patrols planned from April 2018 to February
2019, 80 were conducted and 16 cancelled owing to the non-availability of air assets
or poor weather conditions. Of the 113 planned ground patrols, 95 were cond ucted
while 18 were cancelled owing to adverse weather and poor road conditions.
Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism team sites
26. Three team sites have been set up in their permanent locations and are fully
operational: As Sumayah/Wierayen, Safaha/Kiir Adem and Tishwin. For the
Safaha/Kiir Adem team site, the Governor of Lol State successfully raised the
awareness of the Paramount Chiefs, the County Commissioner of Gok Machar and
the local community on 2 November. As a result, on 11 November, the County
Commissioner met with the local authorities, who agreed to release land for the
establishment of the team site. Subsequently, the land was released to the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism on 13 November. Preparation of t he team
site commenced on 14 November, and a ground monitoring patrol started on
31 January. With regard to As Sumayah/Wierayen, on 7 December, the Deputy
Governor of Aweil East and other state assembly members unanimously agreed to the
release of land for the establishment of the team site. On 16 December, preparations
for the team site began, and ground monitoring patrols commenced on 31 January.
27. The intended team site location at Abu Qussa/Wunkur was observed to be
occupied by armed elements who identified themselves as belonging to the Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement-Army in Opposition. Pending the withdrawal of the
elements, a temporary team site was established at El Amira, 38 km from the selected
location. On 7 January, an advance team from the temporary base at El Amira
conducted another reconnaissance visit to Abu Qussa/Wunkur, where they were
denied access and threatened with violence, should they return. UNISFA brought the
issues to the attention of the parties, and they were discussed at t he 18 March meeting
of the Joint Political and Security Mechanism, where the parties agreed to engage
with the group’s leadership.
Community sensitization to enable ground movement by the United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei from Gok Machar into the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone
and the establishment of the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism
team sites as per benchmark 2
28. As stated above, efforts to raise awareness were made by local authorities and
two team sites in the 14 Mile Area were successfully established during the reporting
period.

6/15

19-06201

S/2019/319

Convene at least two meetings of the Joint Political and Security Mechanism, and for
both parties to completely withdraw from the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone
29. The Joint Political and Security Mechanism met twice in ordinary sessions on
12 October, in Juba, and 18 March, in Khartoum. With regard to the red eployment of
forces outside the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone, the parties agreed, at the meeting
of the Joint Political and Security Mechanism on 18 March, that any forces left in the
Zone would be withdrawn within 30 days.
30. Until 9 December, the Sudan maintained a military camp at Lafa Mayon, located
some 500 m from the Tishwin team site. The military were relocated 600 m from the
northern limit of the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone and replaced by Sudanese police
personnel. There are also two South Sudanese police camps in the Zone around
Tishwin. Ground monitoring patrols from the Safaha/Kiir Adem and As
Sumayah/Wierayen team sites observed the two camps of the South Sudan People ’s
Defence Forces at Wierayen and Riankuel, although they do not appear to be well
equipped. The mission has also observed a suspected South Sudanese police camp
near As Sumayah.
Border crossing corridors
31. Neither Government has made an effort to develop a timeline for verifying the
functioning of the 10 border crossings and free movement across the border. UNISFA
can only confirm the operation of the Al-Hijelij/Bentiu and the As Sumayah crossings
through monitoring by the Tishwin and As Sumayah/Wierayen team sites. A timeline
of 30 days to open six of the border crossing corridors was agreed upon by the parties
at the meeting of the Joint Political and Security Mechanism on 18 March.
Customs and migration
32. Neither Government has made any effort to establish customs and immigration
offices and migration offices for at least two of the four phase I border crossings
between the Sudan and South Sudan.
Hold at least two meetings of the Joint Border Commission and Joint Demarcation
Committee, with one meeting of each occurring prior to 15 March 2019
33. The Joint Border Commission was reactivated and met in Juba on 11 and
12 February. It directed the Joint Demarcation Committee to prepare and demarcate
agreed sections of the boundary line between the Sudan and South Sudan. The Joint
Border Commission also directed the Joint Demarcation Committee to complete a
detailed description of boundary lines on agreed, disagreed and claimed areas. From
23 to 25 February, the ninth meeting of the Joint Demarcation Committee was held in
Khartoum. There, the parties agreed to prepare a budget for demarcating the agreed
areas. At the tenth meeting of the Joint Demarcation Committee, held in Juba from
6 to 8 March, a budget was prepared for reconnaissance and demarcation of the agreed
areas. The Joint Demarcation Committee presented this budget to the Joint Border
Commission from 12 to 14 March in Addis Ababa. The Joint Border Commission
requested the Joint Demarcation Committee to prepare a boundary delimit ation
document for the agreed boundary sections to complement the budget, as well as a
detailed workplan for the demarcation.
Challenges
34. UNISFA has successfully established team sites in the Safe Demilitarized
Border Zone and is able to determine the location of forces in the Zone. However, the
mission is not mandated to instruct the forces to redeploy. The Joint Political and

19-06201

7/15

S/2019/319

Security Mechanism remains the mechanism for bringing together the Ministers of
Defence to resolve these and other issues. The infrequency of the meetings creates a
challenge for UNISFA, as despite its observation of violations, the mission is unable
to persuade the parties to withdraw unilaterally.
Notable developments
35. In August 2018, South Sudan announced the resumption of oil production at the
Toma South oilfield in the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone, following assistance from
the Sudan to repair and operate the field. This stemmed from the Khartoum
Declaration of 27 June 2018, in which South Sudanese parties agreed to collaborate
with the Sudan to rehabilitate the Unity and Tharjiath oilfields. In January, South
Sudan had reported that oil production had resumed further south in the Unity
oilfields and that, along with Toma South, the combined production was at
35,000 barrels per day.

IV. Mission reconfiguration
36. In accordance with resolution 2445 (2018), a reduction of the troop ceiling
through the withdrawal of 655 UNISFA troops from the Abyei Area will be
implemented in two phases. In the first phase, 360 troops had been planned to be
repatriated by 15 March. However, owing to the helicopter crash on 9 February (see
para. 52 below) and the resulting shortage in air assets, the troops will now be
repatriated from 22 April to 8 May. The second phase of troop reduction will
commence once the formed police unit is deployed to the Abyei Area.
37. In February, the Police Division selected Jordan as the contributing country for
the formed police unit on the basis of rigorous suitability criteria, including capability,
ability to deploy during the current mandate period, language skills and the inclusion
of female officers. Before the deployment of the formed police unit, Jor dan must send
a delegation to the mission area to conduct a technical reconnaissance visit. UNISFA
sought visas for the delegation on 12 March and has yet to receive a reply from the
Government of the Sudan. The reconnaissance visit is essential and part o f the
deployment procedures to ensure that the unit is deployed to the area with all the
requisite equipment and items.
38. With regard to the increase in individual police officers, the Police Division
screened 214 nominees from 12 police-contributing countries. In accordance with
standard selection requirements, 141 were recommended for deployment with
UNISFA. Nevertheless, the delay in the issuance of visas has resulted in no increase
in the deployment of individual police officers.
Proposed civilian component
39. Through the independent review undertaken by General Martin Luther Agwai,
in 2018, it was recognized that UNISFA needed to be given a more significant role in
supporting the political process. Subsequently, in the reconfig uration proposal,
submitted to the Security Council on 20 August (S/2018/778), it was recommended
that a strong link be created with the African Union High -level Implementation Panel
in order to follow up on commitments and to help to organize and support the
meetings that are essential for political progress. In line with the request made in
resolution 2445 (2018), a civilian component is proposed, as described below, to
allow the mission to address the current realities by supporting the parties, the African
Union High-level Implementation Panel and the African Union Commission to
advance day-to-day solutions. In order to achieve this, the mission needs political
affairs capability, and we it is recommended that a small political affairs section be
8/15

19-06201

S/2019/319

created, with nine posts at various levels. Three posts of political affairs officer
(P-3/P-4) are proposed, one in Khartoum, one in Juba and one in Addis A baba. The
officers in the Sudan and South Sudan would monitor relevant political developments
and establish a good relationship with their counterparts in the Governments. The
officer based in Addis Ababa would be the link to the African Union High -level
Implementation Panel and the African Union Commission to bridge the gap with the
mission on the ground and provide support, as needed.
40. Two political officers (P-3/P-4) are proposed to be based at the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism sector headquarters, one at Kadugli and the
other at Gok Machar. The officers would monitor developments on the Safe
Demilitarized Border Zone and border demarcation activities. It is envisaged that they
would be the focal points for the mission’s assistance to the African Union Border
Programme as it attempts to demarcate the agreed areas of the border, in accordance
with the recent decisions of the Joint Demarcation Committee. Another three political
affairs officers (P-3/P-4) would be based at mission headquarters in Abyei town, and
all eight political affairs officers would report to the head of the Political Affairs
Section (P-5), the ninth post. The main responsibilities of the Section would be to
monitor developments, in particular those having an impa ct on border issues, to
provide analysis and to advise the senior management of UNISFA on the best ways
to support the political process.

V. Operations
41. As at 8 April, the UNISFA military component stood at 4,504 personnel,
composed of 4,050 men and 454 women (4,239 troops, 141 military observers and
124 staff officers) against an authorized ceiling of 4,140. The UNISFA police strength
stood at 40 individual officers, 29 men and 11 women, against an authorized total of
345. With regard to the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism, the
UNISFA military component stood at 585 personnel, comprising 512 men and 73
women (557 troops, 17 military observers and 11 staff officers). The number of
civilian staff stood at 139 international staff, 33 United Nations Volunteers and 76
national staff, against authorized totals of 161 international staff, 33 United Nations
Volunteers and 86 national staff. During the reporting period, the mission completed
the rotation of two infantry battalions and one utility helicopter unit, with a total of
2,101 troops (1,023 inbound and 1,078 outbound) and the transportation of 128 tons
of inbound and outbound troop luggage through Kadugli airport.
42. During the reporting period, UNISFA conducted 16,618 ground patrols in Abyei,
10,931 during the day and 5,887 at night, including 1,391 joint patrols by the military
and police components. The mission also conducted 21 joint aerial patrols with the
national monitors of the Sudan and South Sudan over the Abyei Area duri ng the same
period. For the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism, the mission
undertook 43 aerial monitoring missions over the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone. It
also conducted 43 ground monitoring patrols from the Tishwin team site, and the
newly established team sites at Safaha/Kiir Adem and As Sumayah/Wierayen
conducted six ground monitoring patrols each.
Issuance of visas
43. The Government of the Sudan issued 148 visas for UNISFA personnel from
16 October to 8 April, while 168 visas remained pending (20 for military personnel,
116 for police personnel, 2 for Mine Action Service contractors, 19 for official
visitors, 4 for international consultants and 7 for contractors). Mission leadership

19-06201

9/15

S/2019/319

followed up regularly with government officials in Khartoum and sent formal
correspondence to urge the issuance of visas.
Gender
44. UNISFA continued to seek opportunities to increase the number of women in
the mission, including by shortlisting all qualified female applicants for vacancies.
During the reporting period, a civilian Women and Child Protection Adviser was
deployed to the Abyei Area. The adviser has already engaged with women leaders
from the Ngok Dinka and Misseriya communities as part of the mission ’s efforts to
build partnerships and collaborate with the communities on issues relating to gender
and women’s rights.
45. UNISFA, in collaboration with United Nations agencies, funds and programmes,
held two events in Abyei and Diffra, on 9 and 19 March, respectively, to
commemorate International Women’s Day. Aimed at UNISFA personnel and local
women leaders from both communities, the events included two workshops for 16
women leaders from the Ngok Dinka community and 25 community leaders
(17 women leaders, 6 girl leaders and 2 male community leaders) from the Misseriya
community. Through the workshops, awareness was raised of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and security, and practical roles for
women as agents for peace in conflict and post-conflict situations were highlighted.
In addition, the police component undertook 35 gender awareness campaigns with
male and female members of the community protection committee and the joint peace
committee. The campaigns were focused on gender equality, gender mainstreaming,
the impact of gender on conflict resolution and the inclusion of women in the peace
process. The campaigns were aimed at empowering women to take an active role in
community conflict resolution mechanisms, in particular the community protection
committee and the joint peace committee. The police component worked actively with
community leaders to encourage more women to join such mechanisms.
United Nations Mine Action Service operations
46. During the reporting period, 13 explosive remnants of war and one
anti-personnel mine were recovered by Mine Action Service teams in the Abyei area
and subsequently destroyed in controlled demolitions. The Mine Action Service is
also clearing a reported minefield in southern Abyei. In the Abyei Area, the Mine
Action Service destroyed 16 weapons and 362 rounds of small arms ammunition
confiscated by UNISFA troops in line with the mission ’s mandate and continued to
maintain the UNISFA storage facility for weapons and ammunition.
47. At the start of every dry season, the Mine Action Service clears the most
strategic roads and routes, identified by the mission management. This is necessary,
as a majority of the routes are waterlogged during the rainy season, creating the
possibility that explosive remnants of war may move or be uncovered. As a result of
the survey and clearance operations, 293,801 m 2 of land and 120.48 km of roads were
assessed as safe from explosive hazards. In addition, the Mine Action Serv ice
conducted 53 mine risk education sessions for the Abyei population, reaching 1,643
people (447 boys, 366 girls, 467 men and 363 women) during the reporting period.
48. The Mine Action Service remained essential for the operations of the Joint
Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism, demining and preparing locations
for the establishment of the new team sites, as well as patrol routes. In this regard,
the Mine Action Service cleared 255,302 m 2 of land and 40.885 km of routes. In
addition, the Mine Action Service supports the ground monitoring missions from the
three team sites in the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone.

10/15

19-06201

S/2019/319

Infrastructure
49. As is its usual practice, to expand the mission’s footprint, at the onset of dry
season, UNISFA established temporary operating bases at Um Khariat and Alal.
Company operating bases remained deployed at Farouk, Diffra, Goli and Todach
(Sector North), Dokura/Rumajak, Noong and Abyei (Sector Centre) and Marial
Achak, Athony, Banton, Tajalei and Agok (Sector South). In the Safe Demilitarized
Border Zone, UNISFA maintained the Tishwin team site and established the As
Safhah and As Sumayah Wierayen team sites during the reporting period.
50. Infrastructure and environmental installations upgrades continued at all
UNISFA locations. New accommodation facilities for military staff officers and
observers and the police component at the mission headquarters are at an advanced
stage of completion. Drainage in the Abyei camp is being improved as the
construction of concrete drainage is continuing. Other infrastructure work, carried out
to improve conditions in the Abyei camp, has been suspended, owing to a shortage of
marram and fuel deliveries from the Sudan. Two major road renovation projects have
not commenced, although contracts have been awarded, as clearance by the
Government of the Sudan has yet to be granted. This will continue to jeopardize the
mission’s ability to move and resupply, in particular during the rainy season, which
will commence in June or July.
51. Of the 33 wastewater treatment plants planned for all UNISFA bases, 18 were
installed during the financial year 2017/18. The installation of the remaining 15 plants
in the current financial year, 2018/19, was completed substantially during the current
dry season. The remaining electrical and water connections and backfilling in eight
locations were completed on 31 March.
52. During the reporting period, UNISFA reduced its fleet by one fixed wing
aircraft, in line with the United Nations initiative to lower the aviat ion budget. As of
1 November, the mission operated two dedicated fixed-wing aircraft and one regional
jet on a cost-sharing basis, with the United Nations Mission in South Sudan paying
60 per cent and UNISFA paying 40 per cent. This has negatively affected the ability
of the mission to maintain flexibility, in particular for medical evacuations. The
mission continued to operate four helicopters, two of which were through a letter of
assist from the Government of Ethiopia. On 9 February, one of the aircraft provided
through the letter of assist crash-landed in Abyei town, killing three peacekeepers,
injuring another three and damaging a parked helicopter. Subsequently, the mission
had to request additional helicopters. The United Nations Mission in South Suda n
provided UNISFA with one helicopter, and an additional aircraft was received from a
contractor on 17 March.
53. UNISFA is improving its technology operation and services continuously by
enhancing its infrastructure. Upgrades, fail-safes and redundancies of equipment have
been initiated to ensure that incidents have a minimal impact. Through coordination
with the Global Service Centre and Service for Geospatial, Information and
Telecommunications Technologies staff at other missions, the Service was able t o
repair in a timely fashion critical damage to wireless Internet services caused by a
lightning strike in September 2018. A major objective of the Service ’s infrastructure
enhancement is to address welfare concerns, including limited capabilities for
emergency medical evacuation, as UNISFA is located in an isolated environment,
with minimal facilities and communication services.
Culture of performance
54. UNISFA developed a performance management system closely aligned with its
enterprise risk management framework. The intention is to measure and improve

19-06201

11/15

S/2019/319

outcomes relating to force mobility, the environment, infrastructure development and
mandate implementation. The mission has developed metrics and targets that are
tracked and reported upon to end users, managers, mission leadership and United
Nations Headquarters.
Other operational issues
55. Since 3 January, in Abyei town, some local employees of the camp management
contractor have been on strike over their perceived lower wages and have at times
blocked the entrance of the UNISFA headquarters. The employees had previously
worked as local individual contractors hired to operate and maintain the wastewat er
treatment plant. However, the mission found that relying on local individual
contractors for such operations exposed the mission to risk, owing to a lack of
adequate skills and the lack of an accountability framework. In order to address this
risk, a camp management contractor was deployed and started work in January.
56. Once the camp management contractor was deployed, many of the locals who
had previously been individual contractors were taken on by the camp management
contractor as its employees. The local employees of the camp management contractor
are paid more than local employees of similar United Nations contractors in other
peace operations in the Sudan and South Sudan. However, their grievance remains
that the wages are lower than those that they were being paid as individual
contractors. Despite the continued strike, all life support functions, such as power
generation, water purification, wastewater treatment and waste disposal, have been
sustained through contingency plans. The absence of the employees has had an impact
on minor improvements to camp infrastructure that require large numbers of skilled
and semi-skilled workers.

VI. Financial aspects
57. The General Assembly, by its resolution 72/289, appropriated the amount of
$263.9 million for the maintenance of the Force for the period from 1 July 2018 to
30 June 2019. As at 26 March, unpaid assessed contributions to the Special Account
for UNISFA amounted to $47.5 million. Total outstanding assessed contributions for
all peacekeeping operations as at that date amounted to $2,246.9 million. Troop costs
have been reimbursed for the period up to 30 September, while the costs of
contingent-owned equipment have been reimbursed for the period up to
30 September, in accordance with the quarterly payment schedule.

VII. Observations and recommendations
58. UNISFA has continued to play a stabilizing role in the Abyei Area and along the
border region between the Sudan and South Sudan. I comme nd the Mission for its
proactive stance, in particular its continued efforts towards engagement and
mediation between the Ngok Dinka and Misseriya communities. This demonstrates
the mission’s commitment to the well-being of the people of the Abyei Area and the
border areas.
59. I also reiterate my praise for the commitment of the two communities in the
Abyei Area to peace and reconciliation. In particular, I commend the community
leaders who have weighed in against spoilers and continued, undeterred by the lack
of strong engagement between the two Governments, to achieve a good degree of
peaceful coexistence. The communities, supported by UNISFA, have created a
conducive environment for the two countries to create enduring peaceful relations by
resolving their border issues. Nonetheless, the Abyei Area continues to face law and
12/15

19-06201

S/2019/319

order challenges and, in this regard, I urge South Sudan to move forward with the
joint planning exercise for the establishment of the Abyei Police Service. In the same
regard, I urge the Sudan to issue visas expeditiously, in particular to allow the increase
in UNISFA police personnel in order to address rule of law issues in the Abyei Area.
60. While the commitment of the local population to preserve the peace is evident,
neither the Government of the Sudan nor that of South Sudan has made any significant
efforts to consolidate the gains achieved. Furthermore, recent reports of heightened
political rhetoric in communities is gradually becoming a worrying trend. I urge the
Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan to discourage the communities from
taking any action that could jeopardize the fragile peace achieved in the Abyei Area.
61. Notable progress has been made by the two countries on five of the seven
benchmarks set by the Security Council to advance the border demarcation. However,
the lack of meaningful progress by both Governments in addressing critical issues,
such as the completion of the withdrawal of forces from the Safe Demilitarized Border
Zone and the full establishment of border crossing corridors, as well as customs and
migration offices, has continued to create challenges for UNISFA in providing support
for the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism. Both countries should
focus on consolidating the gains achieved by UNISFA and resolve the deadlock over
the border issues.
62. Notwithstanding the difficult internal circumstances that both countries face,
relations between the Sudan and South Sudan have improved significantly in the past
year, in particular through the role of the Sudan in facilitating the revitalized peace
agreement reached by the South Sudanese parties in September 2018, as well as the
resumption of joint oil operations. I urge the two countries to further this positive
trajectory for the benefit of their border communities. The efforts of both countries
remain essential to progress, and I ask the two Governments to conduct discussions
at the ministerial level to review the implementation of their agreements. I pledge the
support of the United Nations for such an endeavour. I also call upon the members of
the Security Council to pursue diplomatic efforts to impress upon the two countries
the importance and urgency of progress towards resolving their border issues. An
open-ended mandate for UNISFA should not be acceptable, nor is it affordable for the
international community.
63. UNISFA was established as an interim security force in 2011, and the operating
environment for the mission has changed over the past eight years. In this regard, the
mission must adapt to the situation on the ground, as well as preserve the important
gains that it has achieved and, most important, reinvigorate the political process,
which would allow the mission to develop its exit strategy. The dispute over Abyei
and the border region between the Sudan and South Sudan must be prevented from
becoming another frozen conflict. Our priority must remain improving the lives of
the people living in these areas.
64. The presence of the mission remains essential to the stability of the Abyei Area
and border region, and I therefore recommend that the mandate of UNISFA be
extended for another six months, with the expectation that both Government s make
progress towards the commitments they have set for themselves in their agreements.
I also ask the Security Council to view the progress described in the present report as
only part of what could be achieved if UNISFA were enhanced to provide further
support to the parties and the African Union. In this regard, I request that the Council
positively consider the recommendations on enhancing the mission ’s civilian
component in order to advance its support to the African Union Commission and the
African Union High-level Implementation Panel, as well as to the two parties.
65. Lastly, I extend my sincere gratitude and appreciation to the outgoing acting
Head of Mission and Force Commander, Major General Gebre Adhana Woldezgu,
19-06201

13/15

S/2019/319

under whose tenure the mission has implemented its mandate successfully and further
operationalized the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism by
establishing two team sites in the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone. I am particularly
grateful to all UNISFA personnel for their efforts to maintain peace and stability under
challenging conditions. I also extend my gratitude to the African Union High -level
Implementation Panel and the African Union Commission for their stewardship of the
peace process.

14/15

19-06201

19-06201

S/2019/319

15/15
