A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/50/131
16 February 1996

Fiftieth session
Agenda item 34
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/50/L.65 and Add.1)]
50/131.

United Nations Educational and Training
Programme for Southern Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions on the United Nations Educational and Training
Programme for Southern Africa, in particular resolution 49/17 of 23 November
1994,
Also recalling its resolution 2349 (XXII) of 19 December 1967, by which
it established the United Nations Educational and Training Programme for
Southern Africa by integrating earlier special programmes, and resolution
2431 (XXIII) of 18 December 1968, by which it established the Advisory
Committee on the United Nations Educational and Training Programme for
Southern Africa,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General of 7 December
1995 1/ containing an account of the work of the Advisory Committee and the
administration of the Programme for the period from 1 September 1994 to 31
August 1995,
Recognizing the valuable assistance rendered over the years by the
Programme to disadvantaged students in South Africa, its support for
institution-building in that country and the measures it has taken to ensure
that commitments made with regard to educational and training assistance can
be met in full,

1/
96-76771

A/50/750.
/...

A/RES/50/131
Page 2

Fully recognizing the need for the Government of South Africa to lay a
proper foundation, in particular in the field of human resource development,
during the transition and post-apartheid period,
1.
Endorses the report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa;
2.
Agrees with the recommendation of the Advisory Committee on the
United Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa that the
Programme be extended for three to five years beyond April 1994; 2/
3.
Decides, for the purpose of integrating the goals of the Programme
with the overall multilateral development programmes of the United Nations
Development Programme, to transfer, no later than 1 May 1996, management of
the Programme and its funds and decision-making authority to the Administrator
of the United Nations Development Programme through the Executive Board of the
Development Programme which will be entrusted with the following:
To continue the United Nations Educational and Training Programme
(a)
for Southern Africa Trust Fund as an identifiable entity for three to five
years beyond April 1994;
(b)
Programme;
(c)

To undertake fund-raising and mobilization of resources for the
To monitor and review the Programme;

4.
Also decides to endorse the activities of the Programme, and
requests the United Nations Development Programme to continue to place the
primary focus of the Programme on human resource development aimed at
capacity- and institution-building by contributing to South Africa’s human
resources during this critical period of development through:
(a)
Expanding arrangements for co-sponsored training for the
disadvantaged majority in sectors previously neglected;
(b)
Continuing to utilize the catalyst function of the Programme by
expanding the co-sponsorship and job-placement arrangements with corporations,
non-governmental organizations and educational institutions;
5.
Recommends administrative streamlining with the objective of
strengthening the office of the Programme in South Africa;
6.
Endorses the recommendation that the Advisory Committee should be
discontinued; 3/
7.
Expresses its appreciation to the Governments that have supported
the Programme and to the organizations and agencies that have cooperated with
it;

2/

Ibid., para. 27.

3/

Ibid., para. 32.

96-76771

/...

A/RES/50/131
Page 3

8.
Expresses its gratitude to the Secretary-General and the staff of
the United Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa and
to the Advisory Committee for their persistent efforts, and congratulates them
for their outstanding achievements since the start of the Programme.
96th plenary meeting
20 December 1995

/...
