S/PV.9417

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9417th meeting

Wednesday, 13 September 2023, 10.25 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Hoxha. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Albania)

Members:

Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. França Danese
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mr. Olmedo
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Hamamoto
Ms. Gatt
Mr. Irachande Gouveia
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Mr. Kariuki
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in the Sudan and the activities
of the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan
(S/2023/644)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-26663 (E)
*2326663*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9417

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in the Sudan and the activities of
the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan (S/2023/644)
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Mr. Volker Perthes, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Sudan and Head of the
United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance
Mission in the Sudan; Ms. Edem Wosornu, Director of
Operations and Advocacy, Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs; and Ms. Mayada Adil, civil
society representative.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2023/644, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in the Sudan and the
activities of the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan.
I now give the floor to Mr. Perthes.
Mr. Perthes: I thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to brief the Council once more on the
situation in the Sudan.
Almost five months have passed since the deadly
conflict erupted between the Sudanese Armed Forces
and the Rapid Support Forces (RSF). The fighting
shows no sign of abating, while neither side appears
close to a decisive military victory. Fierce fighting
continues in the capital, with the main battles around
strategic installations and recurrent attempts by the
Sudanese Armed Forces to drive the RSF out of civilian
neighbourhoods. At least 5,000 people have been killed
since the start of the conflict, and over 12,000 injured.
Those are conservative figures — the actual number is
likely much higher.
In Darfur, the violence has worsened dramatically,
and the warring parties have demonstrated blatant
2/18

13/09/2023

disregard for human rights and international
humanitarian law. Civilians have been targeted on an
ethnic basis and driven out of El Geneina and other
locations in Darfur. The cross-border mobilization of
Arab tribes is further fuelling the conflict and having
an impact on regional stability. In South Kordofan
and Blue Nile, fighting between the Sudanese Armed
Forces and the Sudan People’s Liberation MovementNorth faction, Al-Hilu, has left many people displaced
and caused civilian casualties.
While the situation is relatively calm in the east,
tensions have risen amid ongoing tribal mobilization.
The mobilization by former regime elements advocating
for the continuation of the war is of particular
concern. All of those developments add to the risk of a
fragmentation of the country. What started as a conflict
between two military formations could be morphing
into a full-scale civil war.
As the war is entering its sixth month, let me take
a step back and reflect. The descent into fighting on
15 April could have been avoided if the warring parties
had heeded the multiple calls by both Sudanese and
international actors for de-escalation and continued
with dialogue. Sudanese civilians and the United
Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in
the Sudan (UNITAMS), along with our regional and
international partners, all made efforts to help the
parties resolve their differences through negotiations.
The framework agreement of December 2022,
which had been negotiated by the military leadership
and civilian actors without any external presence,
outlined the contours of a political agreement to lead
the country towards civilian rule. It also stipulated
further consultations on contentious subjects, such as
transitional justice and security sector reform. Following
a request by the military and civilian signatories, the
trilateral mechanism composed of the African Union,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) and UNITAMS facilitated those consultations
in a series of workshops, with broad participation from
across Sudanese society.
As the consultations proceeded, however, the
Sudanese Armed Forces and the RSF were irresponsibly
building up their forces in the capital while assuring the
international community and the Sudanese people of
their commitment to peace. Until the last moment, our
trilateral mechanism partners and I had warned that it
would take only a spark to ignite armed confrontation.
And sadly, that is what happened. Let me be clear, for
23-26663

13/09/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the benefit of history, that regardless of who fired the
first shot, both sides were clearly setting the stage for
war. The warring parties have chosen to settle their
conflict by fighting, and it is their duty to the Sudanese
people to end it.
The leadership of the Sudanese Armed Forces, as
well as the Ministry for Foreign Affairs, insist that the
conflict is a struggle between the Government, on the
one hand, and a rebel force, on the other. We, along
with other international and regional actors, continue
to speak of the two parties to the conflict, or the two
warring parties, that need to end the war. Notably,
the two parties constituted what used to be called the
military component of the civilian-military partnership
under the Constitutional Declaration of 2019. That
partnership was ended by the coup of October 2021,
jointly undertaken by the Sudanese Armed Forces and
the RSF. The onus is on the leaderships of those two
formations to stop the fighting. The military leaders
on both sides are needed to negotiate and implement a
cessation of hostilities. But military leaders should not
continue to rule the country.
International partners, including the United
Nations, the African Union, IGAD, the European
Union, neighbouring States, Saudi Arabia and the
United States — all of us — have continued to press the
parties to halt the fighting. UNITAMS has remained in
close contact with both sides to urge them to commit to
a ceasefire in earnest and move towards a permanent
cessation of hostilities. While the Jeddah talks,
co-facilitated by the United States and Saudi Arabia,
have been formally adjourned, the Jeddah format, which
has been accepted by both parties, remains an important
avenue for them to reach a ceasefire. However, previous
ceasefires have been only partially honoured and have
often been used for repositioning and resupply. A
durable cessation of hostilities requires political will,
robust monitoring mechanisms and the ability to hold
the parties responsible for non-compliance.
I am encouraged that the African Union and IGAD
have harmonized their respective road maps and efforts
to facilitate a political solution. I also commend the
summit of the neighbouring States of the Sudan and
the resultant ministerial mechanism. We still need the
regional and international efforts to cohere, though,
and the international and regional actors also need to
coordinate their ways and means of influencing the
parties to accept a sustainable cessation of hostilities.
Most important in this context, I urge Member States to

S/PV.9417

halt the flow of weapons into the Sudan and to refrain
from resupplying either side. In that regard, I would like
to commend the armed-struggle movements — both
the signatories to the Juba Peace Agreement and the
non-signatories that decided to stay neutral and use their
forces for the protection of civilians in Darfur. And let
me express my appreciation for all those civilians and
civilian initiatives that have not taken sides and are
advocating for ending the war and working for peace
at the local level.
Each side is still waiting for the other party to be
weakened into surrender. That is futile. The war is
destroying the lives of the men and women of the Sudan,
violating their basic rights and depriving them of the
future they deserve. Since my colleague from the Office
for the Coordination for Humanitarian Affairs will brief
the Council on humanitarian developments, I will not go
into detail in that regard. Let me say, however, that the
conflict is leaving behind a tragic legacy of human rights
abuses. Indiscriminate attacks on civilians committed
by the warring parties constitute gross violations of
human rights. The Masalit community in particular
has been living in pervasive fear of attacks based on
its members’ ethnicity, following the heinous murder of
the Governor of West Darfur and other Masalit leaders
in mid-June. Hundreds, if not more, have been killed in
El Geneina and other parts of West Darfur.
The United Nations Joint Human Rights Office has
received credible reports of the existence of at least 13
mass graves in El Geneina and its surrounding areas,
as a result of the RSF and Arab militias’ attacks on
civilians, with the majority of the civilian victims being
from the Masalit community. UNITAMS and our United
Nations colleagues are documenting those violations
and point out that if verified, they may constitute
war crimes. I remain appalled by the widespread
acts of sexual violence and other forms of violence
against women. We need credible investigations,
accountability for those crimes and the provision of
services for survivors. Sudanese women’s groups are
rightly calling for our collective condemnation, as well
as for prevention and justice.
Despite the lack of the protection of civilians
on the ground, Sudanese women and communitybased support groups, such as emergency rooms and
resistance committees, continue to put their lives on the
line to provide urgent humanitarian assistance. Civilian
activists, including women, are making laudable
efforts in leading several anti-war initiatives. They

23-266633/18

S/PV.9417

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

are choosing peace. Those initiatives urge the parties
to cease their violence, address urgent humanitarian
needs and relaunch a political dialogue. Despite a host
of logistical difficulties and security risks, they are
intensifying their efforts to coalesce around a common
platform. The plurality of the civilian initiatives reflects
the diversity of the Sudanese society. They need our
collective support and encouragement if they are to
establish a common platform. In particular, women-led
initiatives have underlined the importance of women’s
participation in ceasefire negotiations and any future
political process.
The United Nations will never stay neutral when it
comes to war and human rights abuses. We are on the side
of the Sudanese civilians, women and children and the
vulnerable populations that are bearing the brunt of the
conflict. There is little doubt about who is responsible
for what. Aerial bombing, often indiscriminate, is
conducted by those who have an air force, which is the
Sudanese Armed Forces. Most of the sexual violence,
looting and killing happens in areas controlled by the
RSF and is conducted or tolerated by the RSF and its
allies. Both sides are arbitrarily arresting, detaining
and even torturing civilians, and there are reports of
extrajudicial killings of detainees. We need to impress
on the warring parties that they cannot operate with
impunity and that there will be accountability for the
crimes committed. UNITAMS continues to maintain
contact with all sides, including through the Permanent
Ceasefire Committee for Darfur, and it is supporting
Sudanese, regional and international efforts to
re-establish peace, because the Sudan cannot and must
not endure the costs of the war indefinitely.

13/09/2023

and empowering civilians for an eventual transition
towards democratic governance.
I would like to thank the United Nations staff in the
Sudan for their unwavering commitment and dedication
in supporting the Sudanese people, and I would like to
thank the members of the Security Council for their
engagement and support for our work.
The President: I thank Mr. Perthes for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Wosornu.
Ms. Wosornu: I thank you, Mr. President, for
this opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
humanitarian situation in the Sudan.
It is no hyperbole to say that after five months of
brutal and merciless war, as the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General just noted, the people of the
Sudan are facing a crisis of epic and tragic proportions.
Since I briefed the Council last month (see S/PV.9394),
the conflict has continued to intensify again around
Khartoum, Darfur and Kordofan and is unfortunately
expanding into more areas, including Al-Jazirah state,
the Sudan’s bread basket. Fierce and relentless fighting
is trapping civilians in Khartoum and other epicentres,
including Nyala in South Darfur, increasing yet again
the death toll and the numbers of injured.

Let me end on a personal note. I have had the
privilege to serve as the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Sudan for more than two and
a half years. I am grateful to the Secretary-General for
the opportunity and for his confidence in me, but I have
asked him to relieve me of that duty. This will therefore
be my last briefing in this function.

Those who are able to escape the fighting continue
to do so, with the number of civilians displaced
now standing at more than 5 million. That equates
to 1 million newly displaced persons every month,
with 4.1 million displaced within the Sudan, while
more than 1 million have crossed the border into
neighbouring countries, including the Central African
Republic, Chad, Egypt, Ethiopia and South Sudan. That
displacement and insecurity have driven cases, as the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, again,
said, of sexual violence to absolutely distressing levels.
Alarming reports of ethnic-based violence in Darfur
continue to emerge. As I am sure Council members and
we all can agree, this could be a harbinger of a return to
horrors we hoped we had left in the past.

I have come to know the Sudan as a country of
tremendous potential, indomitable spirit, cultural
richness and diversity. The Sudanese people inspired
the whole world when they bravely upended three
decades of dictatorial rule in 2019. They need our
support and solidarity more than ever; they need our
support and solidarity in pressuring the military
leaderships to end the war, holding them to account

It is not only direct hostilities that are killing the
people of the Sudan. Civilians are also dying due to an
almost complete breakdown of the health system, with
the vast majority of people having no access to health
services. This lack of health care and the fighting are
making it almost impossible to control increasing
outbreaks of diseases, including measles, acute watery
diarrhoea, malaria and dengue fever. More than 4,300

4/18

23-26663

13/09/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

suspected cases of measles have been reported in 12 of
the 18 states. Just to compare, by September 2022, that
number stood at 963 measles cases across three states.
Let me again stress that almost half the population
of the Sudan — more than 20 million people — are
experiencing high levels of food insecurity, in a country
with a very healthy bread basket. We are seeing
a substantial rise in malnutrition rates, and more
than 6 million Sudanese are now just one step away
from famine.
With these enormous challenges, the humanitarian
community is struggling to scale up operations and
meet the growing needs; the needs are enormous.
Thus far, we have coordinated the delivery of more
than 2,400 trucks of relief supplies, carrying over
110,000 metric tons of aid to various parts of the
Sudan. More than 3.2 million people have received
some form of humanitarian assistance in the past four
months — approximately 300,000 more since my last
briefing. However, that, unfortunately, is only close
to 18 per cent of the 18 million people we are trying
to reach.
As I reported in my previous briefing, following
intensive negotiations with the armed groups controlling
the routes, we made some progress in restoring the flow
of humanitarian supplies to the states of Darfur, with
the movement of the first 10 trucks during the first
week of August carrying 500 metric tons of supplies.
We have now moved a total of 3,100 metric tons of aid
to the Darfur region. Those operations included four
cross-border deliveries of humanitarian supplies from
Chad to West Darfur, carrying 390 metric tons of food,
non-food items and medicines.
Severe access challenges continue to hamper the
delivery of aid. Currently, it takes huge amounts of
time and effort to run the humanitarian operations.
For example, on average, it takes two to six weeks,
or 16 to 42 days, to move supplies from Port Sudan
to the Darfur states. That response, however, is not at
scale to meet the enormous needs of the people of the
Sudan. Accordingly, on 29 August, the Inter-Agency
Standing Committee activated a system-wide scale-up
for the Sudan aimed at addressing the rapidly growing
number of people in need of assistance in the country.
However, we can only do that if we have unhindered
and unfettered access, if bureaucratic impediments are
removed and if we have sufficient resources.

S/PV.9417

Rampant insecurity — again, as the Special
Representative
of
the
Secretary-General
outlined — is a significant obstacle to humanitarian
action. More than 900 access incidents have been
reported since mid-April — around six incidents a day
on average. More than 70 per cent of those incidents
have involved hostilities or violence directed against
humanitarian personnel and assets. The highest
number of incidents — more than 30 per cent, or
288 incidents — have been recorded in and around
Khartoum, where humanitarian access continues to
deteriorate. Since late June, humanitarian organizations
have been able to reach Khartoum with only two
convoys of 22 trucks, out of a total of close to 100 trucks
that have moved more than 4,800 metric tons of relief
supplies since mid-May. That is a drop in the bucket,
a drop in the ocean. Food security organizations have
reached fewer than 280,000 people with relief — a very
low 11 per cent of the 2.5 million targeted, 280,000 of
the 2.5 million targeted.
I want to flag in particular the critical role
played by Sudanese civil society — again, as the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
mentioned — and local humanitarian workers and
associations, including the emergency response rooms
in Khartoum. I spoke to them when I was in Khartoum
and Port Sudan, and I was extremely impressed by what
they have done and continue to do. Throughout this
period, they have continued to deliver to those in need,
despite the ever-present risks to their lives.
It is imperative that all actors show full respect for
international humanitarian law and protect civilians
and civilian infrastructure, including by ensuring the
safe passage of civilians fleeing violence in Khartoum,
Darfur and other areas of active hostilities. Again,
as Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Perthes mentioned, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights reports that, in
the past week alone, more than 103 civilians were killed
during military operations by both parties in Khartoum
and Omdurman. At least 51 were killed just two days
ago in an attack on a market in the Janoob Al-Hazim
district in South Khartoum, one of the highest tolls in
a single incident since the fighting started on 15 April.
If we are to scale up these life-saving operations,
we desperately need the parties to the conflict to
recommit to regular direct humanitarian dialogue with
us, at a senior level. The Under-Secretary-General
and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. Martin

23-266635/18

S/PV.9417

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

13/09/2023

Griffiths, and the Resident Coordinator in the Sudan,
Ms. Clementine Nkweta-Salami, are actively reaching
out to the leaders of the Sudanese Armed Forces and the
Rapid Support Forces to put our humanitarian forum
into action. The Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral referred to that. We urge the Member States to
support our efforts to secure those commitments. This
is a lifeline for the humanitarian operation.

deepen and the more lives will be lost and livelihoods
destroyed. I therefore urge the international community
to spare no effort in seeking a negotiated solution to
bring this war to an end.

I also call on the Sudanese authorities to continue
to redouble their efforts to facilitate humanitarian
operations by fast-tracking visa processes, easing travel
restrictions and expediting the customs clearances that
will enable us to respond at the speed and scale required.

Ms. Adil: I would like to thank the Albanian
presidency for inviting me to address the Security
Council today. I will focus on two main topics: first,
accountability for the victims of war, specifically
victims of conflict-related sexual violence during
this tragic time in the Sudan and secondly, efforts to
strengthen the participation of women in the political
sphere in the Sudan and the importance of such efforts.

We have been in continuous dialogue with the
Sudanese authorities, both in Port Sudan and in New
York. We are grateful for the 70 visas we received over
the past two weeks alone. We would ask the Sudanese
authorities to continue fast-tracking the remaining 240
pending visas, to grant longer visas — required for
smooth project implementation — to our humanitarian
partners and to continue working with us to establish a
clearer and more predictable process. We count on the
support of the Council for those urgent requirements.
Even if those internal access obstacles were
removed, a lack of funding for humanitarian operations
would leave millions without the assistance they
desperately need. Unfortunately, the $2.6 billion
revised humanitarian response plan for this year is
but 26 per cent funded. That is already affecting the
ability of humanitarian operations and organizations
to provide critical services such as water, sanitation,
health and hygiene. If we are to meet the urgent needs of
the people of the Sudan, we desperately need increased
donor support. We are grateful for the funding received
so far, but we urge more to be done at speed and at scale.
We thank the co-hosts of the ministerial event
coming up on 20 September in the margins of General
Assembly high-level week on the cost of inaction in the
Sudan. That will be an important opportunity to show
the people of the Sudan that we have not forgotten them
and that the international community is committed to
supporting them in their gravest time of need.
I started my remarks by stating that the people of
the Sudan were facing a humanitarian crisis of epic
proportions. But I want to make one thing absolutely
clear — the situation can and will get immeasurably
worse unless urgent action is taken. The longer this
conflict continues, the more this catastrophe will
6/18

The President:
her briefing.

I

thank

Ms.

Wosornu

for

I now give the floor to Ms. Adil.

It is a real honour to be here in the Chamber. I
am here to represent all Sudanese women from all the
regions of the Sudan. I speak on behalf of my sisters,
brave mothers and colleagues in Sudanese civil society.
We are all united in our demands and goals for the
Security Council — the war must end now.
However, condemning the war is not enough.
I am speaking up today for all the Sudanese women
and girls fighting for freedom and survival, fighting
for themselves and their families and loved ones. I
am speaking up for those who were raped, sexually
assaulted and exploited as sex slaves. I am speaking up
for those still missing.
Today I am not just a young woman activist, today
I am S.A., a 24-year-old victim of rape on July 2023, in
Khartoum, who said:
“I have been raped in front of my family members,
and they could not save me from the hell of the war
criminals who viciously forced themselves on me”.
Today I am Also D.Y., who was sexually assaulted
in one of the refugee camps in Darfur. She said:
“I have been raped multiple times by a man dressed
in formal attire. He threatened me that if I bring it
to the ear of other women, he will know and will
rape them too. He considered me his sex slave”.
The predators behind those crimes are walking
freely as we speak, without accountability, threatening
and treating women’s bodies as their personal
battlefields. Pursuant to resolution 1820 (2008), on
sexual violence as a weapon of war and a direct threat
to international peace and security, we demand a team
23-26663

13/09/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

of experts to work with grassroots organizations in the
Sudan to provide mechanisms to investigate, prosecute
and hold individuals accountable for their involvement
in criminal activities committed in the Sudan and
take those cases to the International Criminal Court.
We demand international lawyers to defend victims of
sexual violence and to provide legal assistance under
the principle of extraterritorial jurisdiction, which
allows Member States’ courts to prosecute individuals
for crimes committed outside the country’s borders,
including acts of genocide, war crimes and crimes
against humanity. We demand support for women’s
rights organizations and women’s rights defenders.
In the Security Council, the security and protection
of Sudanese women must be a priority. Preserving
Sudanese women’s dignity and rights must be prioritized
today more than ever. As a Sudanese gender activist put
it so eloquently: “men create the war, and women step
in to make the peace.”
I have the obligation today to remind Member
States that Sudanese women are making peace and
are peace advocates. They were the ones on the front
lines of the 2019 peaceful civilian revolution, with
their resilience and outstanding efforts to reinforce
stability and peace — and now by actively engaging
in the humanitarian assistance in emergency rooms
or community-based organizations while mobilizing
resources to meet the urgent needs of vulnerable women
and girls.
But since this war erupted, their political spaces
have been diminished. In the Sudan, No Oppression
against Women Initiative groups have been targeted
by security forces, and women have been forbidden
from participating in demonstrations. They have been
excluded from all regional and international discussions
and all institutions taking initiatives to end this war.
We demand from the Council that their political
participation be considered a priority and for Sudanese
women to be part of all decision-making processes.
Finally, I have to point out that the injustice and
humanitarian crisis we have faced as the Sudanese
people has been neglected as the global humanitarian
financial system continues to focus its aid on countries
in the global North.
The Council should therefore be responsible for
providing humanitarian relief, including health-saving
assistance. Women and different population categories
need this in other States, as do the Sudanese refugees in

S/PV.9417

the neighbouring countries. Leaving them to face death
is a crime; we urge the Council to take effective, quick
decisions and actions.
I leave the Council with urgent questions, and I
would like all the member States to answer them in
their next words:
What will it take for the international community to
effectively pressure the two parties to end the war? How
will the Security Council guarantee women’s political
participation in peace negotiations in all international
institutions? Now we have all the reports of the sexual
violence that women are facing, and the Council has
not formed any investigation committee yet. When will
it do that? In accordance with resolution 1820 (2008),
how will the Council provide justice for all the victims
of war? What is the situation for refugees at the borders
and for displaced people? Are they receiving urgent
assistance that is equal to the dire situation they are in?
We do not want promises, only action, and urgent
action is the Council’s obligation to the Sudanese people.
The President: I thank Ms. Adil for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Perthes and
Ms. Wosornu for their briefings and Ms. Adil for
her powerful testimony. I also thank the Permanent
Representative of Ghana for his report on the work of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1591 (2005) concerning the Sudan.
Let me start by paying tribute to Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Perthes and,
through him, to the United Nations staff in the Sudan
and the region for all their work under extremely
challenging circumstances, including strenuous efforts
towards a political solution. Volker Perthes has been
a tireless advocate of peace and a true friend of the
Sudan. We thank him for his service.
The conflict is now entering its sixth month. During
that time, neither the Sudanese Armed Forces nor the
Rapid Support Forces have acted in the interests of the
Sudanese people. In urban areas, civilians are trapped
without access to food, water or basic services owing
to continued aerial bombardments largely, as we have
heard, by the Sudanese Armed Forces. While in Darfur,
reports of widespread sexual violence, ethnically
motivated killings, forced recruitment of child soldiers

23-266637/18

S/PV.9417

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

13/09/2023

and the burning of villages by the Rapid Support Forces
and its allied militia are truly abhorrent.

all parties of their obligations under international law
and that humanitarian workers must never be a target.

The bloodshed needs to end. We call on the
Sudanese Armed Forces and the Rapid Support Forces
to negotiate in good faith in the interests of the people
of the Sudan.

We deplore in the strongest terms the increasing
use of sexual and gender-based violence as a tactic of
war. Women and girls continue to face the most horrific
impacts of the conflict. Reports of abductions have
raised serious concerns that women and girls are being
forced into slavery.

The rich tapestry of the Sudan’s civilian groups,
supported by neighbours and the United Nations, can
play a vital role in support of the aspirations of the
Sudanese people for a better future. And we need
collective international action to help end the violence,
secure humanitarian access and establish a credible
political process. In that regard, we support a leading
role for regional actors, including the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, the African Union and the
Sudan’s neighbours.
The United Kingdom remains committed to the
Sudanese people. We will continue to work with
international partners to ensure that those responsible
for this brutal conflict are held to account.
Ms. Gatt (Malta): I thank Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
Director Wosornu for her briefing and the Permanent
Representative of Ghana for his report. I also thank
Ms. Adil for her insightful and courageous words. She
has given a voice to many women and girls today and
has empowered them in doing so. In particular, I also
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Perthes for his professionalism and tireless efforts over
the past couple of years. Meanwhile we remain firm
in our belief that blaming United Nations officials and
scapegoating the United Nations will not bring us closer
to reaching a just and lasting peace.
As the conflict in the Sudan now enters its sixth
month, we remain deeply concerned by the vicious cycle
of violence, which we strongly condemn. We call on
both parties to cease hostilities without preconditions
and work towards negotiating a credible, lasting and
inclusive ceasefire.
We are disturbed by the way that violence has
moved from Khartoum into the depths of Darfur, with
the conflict escalating into systematic, ethnically based
violence. All that bears terrifying similarity to the
situation 20 years ago.
Malta deplores the loss of life and the indiscriminate
targeting of critical infrastructure and humanitarian
and medical personnel, premises and assets. We remind
8/18

More than 4.2 million people need gender-based
violence prevention and response services. With 80 per
cent of medical infrastructure across the country no
longer functional, we call for the scale-up of medical
and psychosocial support and monitoring. Crucially, we
call on the parties to ensure safe and unimpeded access
for all those who need it.
Justice to survivors must be accompanied by
thorough investigations. Perpetrators must be held
accountable. We reiterate our support to the efforts
of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court in investigating incidents in Darfur in the
current hostilities.
We are troubled by the almost tenfold increase in
grave violations against children, including killings,
maiming, recruitment and sexual violence. The
suffering inflicted on children is unacceptable and
must stop.
We are also concerned about the forcible
displacement of over 5 million people within the Sudan
and across its borders into neighbouring countries. The
catastrophic humanitarian situation in the Sudan should
serve only to guide the parties to lift any impediments
to the humanitarian response. Humanitarian aid
must reach those most in need in a safe, rapid and
unhindered manner.
We commend OCHA and humanitarian partners
for their facilitation of food delivery. We are playing
our part by contributing to the Sudan emergency
supplementary appeal of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, together
with the European Union’s commitment of €256 million
for humanitarian and development assistance in 2023.
Malta calls for coherence in ongoing mediation
efforts to unlock the deadlock and provide a unified
platform to de-escalate and cease hostilities and return
the Sudanese actors to the transitional drawing board.
The efforts by the African Union, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development and the League of Arab
23-26663

13/09/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV.9417

States, as well as by neighbouring and other parties,
must remain complemented by unified messages by the
Security Council.

are tired of the war and are calling on the parties to
unconditionally cease hostilities, silence the guns and
resort to dialogue.

We urge that women’s groups and women’s rights
activities be included in the ceasefire negotiations,
mediation efforts and any future dialogue process. Their
inclusion is integral to ensure that a settlement reflects
the voices of the Sudanese people in a holistic manner.

In that context, the A3 also joins the strong
condemnation of the ongoing conflict issued by
the quartet of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) at the end of its second meeting
and its call for the warring parties to immediately
halt all hostilities, reiterating that there is no military
solution to the conflict in the Republic of the Sudan.

We recognize the value that the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the
Sudan holds in providing its good offices in support
of peace efforts. We also commend its stepped-up
capacity to monitor and document alleged human
rights violations and abuses, as well as delivering
humanitarian assistance.
In conclusion, Malta urges both parties to adhere
to peace and to bring the Sudan back to the path of
security and stability. We must spare the Sudanese
people further pain and suffering.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the three African members
of the Security Council (A3).
We thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Volker Perthes and Ms. Edem Wosornu for
their briefings and commend the efforts of the United
Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission
in the Sudan and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs to help the Sudanese people at
this difficult moment in their national history. We also
thank the Ms. Mayada Adil for her perspective. I would
also like to acknowledge the work carried out by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General during
his tenure in the Sudan under difficult circumstances
and wish him well in his future endeavours.
Since the start of the conflict in the Sudan on
15 April, the people of the Sudan have continued
to witness a worsening security and humanitarian
situation, including in Darfur, and with impacts on
neighbouring countries such as Chad, the Central
African Republic and, to a lesser extent, South Sudan.
With no decisive victory in sight and the reality of
a protracted and widespread national conflict looming,
the A3 wishes to once again appeal to the leaders of the
Sudanese Armed Forces and the Rapid Support Forces
to give peace a chance as the situation in the Sudan can
be normalized only through dialogue and negotiations.
We echo the voices of the people of the Sudan, who

We worry about the detrimental impact of the war
on the already volatile situation in the Darfur region.
We are dismayed that the intensification of fighting
in El Genina has been accompanied by the deliberate
targeting of camps for internally displaced persons
(IDPs), the use of heavy artillery attacks and the
creation of vulnerabilities for the civilian population,
who remain unprotected.
We are also deeply concerned about the situation in
Kadugli, in South Kordofan, which remains extremely
volatile. Roads connecting Khartoum to Kordofan and
Darfur are blocked, limiting the movement of essential
goods and humanitarian supplies. Schools, hospitals
and places of worship have also been targeted in
several parts of the Sudan, while homes, international
non-governmental organizations and United Nations
compounds have had facilities and assets looted.
The conflict has forced large-scale displacements of
populations, as we have heard, and worsened an already
dire humanitarian situation.
We are also worried about the conflict-related
sexual violence that has been reported as widespread
in Darfur by the Panel of Experts of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1591 (2005) concerning the Sudan, which has received
approximately 100 reports of such incidents. The A3
wishes to state that the perpetrators of all heinous crimes
should be held accountable as soon as the situation
normalizes, while efforts are also undertaken to protect
the most vulnerable, especially women and children.
On the political processes, the A3 fully supports
the efforts of the Heads of State and Government of
the IGAD quartet group to implement the IGAD road
map for peace in the Republic of Sudan, adopted in
Djibouti on 12 June. We also welcome the efforts by the
African Union to establish a credible civilian political
dialogue among the Sudanese people. We further note
the invitation extended to IGAD to participate in the

23-266639/18

S/PV.9417

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Jeddah process for the implementation of short-term
ceasefire and humanitarian arrangements, which
is formally adjourned at the moment, and urge the
Sudanese parties to uphold their commitments.
We urge continuing efforts by the African Union to
facilitate a structured, unified and coherent approach
towards peace by the Sudanese parties and an allinclusive consultation with civilian stakeholders. We
believe that different processes by different actors in
the international community, if not coordinated, can
frustrate the desired results for an early and lasting
peace in the Sudan. We urge coordination and strong
action to also abate the proliferation of arms in the
Sudanese conflict.
On the relationship between UNITAMS and the
warring parties, we encourage UNITAMS to remain
engaged with the Sudanese people by providing
assistance in their greatest moment of need.
Lastly, a review of the present situation in the Sudan
would not leave anyone in doubt of the huge humanitarian
challenges confronting the Sudanese people, especially
women and children. We commend the efforts of the
international community in supplying the needed aid to
IDPs in the Sudan and call for sustained international
support for the humanitarian efforts required in the
Sudan and neighbouring countries. The A3 reaffirms
its solidarity with the people of the Sudan, expresses
its commitment to achieving peace and security in
the country and reiterates the need for respect of the
Sudan’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
chairing this very important meeting. I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Perthes and
Ms. Wosornu for their sobering briefings. I also want to
thank Ms. Adil for representing the voice of women in
the Security Council and for her very compelling appeal.
I would like to take this opportunity to commend
Special Representative Perthes for his extraordinary
efforts and service over the past year. We regret his
departure. I understand that the Sudanese Government
once again warned it would end the United Nations
mission in the Sudan if the Special Representative
participated in this briefing. Those threats are
unacceptable, and the United States stands firmly
behind the work of the Special Representative and
the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance
Mission in the Sudan. We stand with the people of the
10/18

13/09/2023

Sudan. We stand with the United Nations. No country
should be allowed to threaten the Council’s ability to
carry out its responsibilities for peace and security.
Last week, I travelled to Chad to see the devastating
consequences of the conflict in the Sudan first-hand.
While there, I visited a refugee settlement near the
Sudanese border. It was one of the saddest days of
my life. I met refugees who were attacked by warring
parties, thrust into a conflict they had no role in starting
and no ability to end. I met a grandmother escaping
with two small children, without the parents anywhere
in sight. I met young women, some of whom were
victims of unspeakable sexual violence at the hands of
the militia — and we heard that from Ms. Adil today.
I also met a young girl who told me she had lost her
ambition. I really could not fathom that, and I told her
that she has to hold on to her ambition and that no one
could take that away from her. It truly broke my heart.
While in Chad, I visited the Médecins Sans
Frontières hospital, where doctors are treating hundreds
of severely malnourished children. And when I walked
through the hospital, the first thing I noticed was how
eerily silent and quiet it was. The children were too weak
to speak or even cry. I saw a six-month-old baby who
was the size of a newborn and a child whose ankles were
swollen and body blistered from acute malnutrition.
The good news is that thanks to the heroic efforts of
the hospital staff and humanitarian workers, those
children are on the road to recovery. I also note that so
many Sudanese refugees told me how grateful they are
to the Chadian people and Government for welcoming
and supporting them. On behalf of the United States, I
want to express my profound appreciation to the people
across Chad and the Government for their kindness
and generosity.
But while the refugees I met were able to escape
the conflict, millions of people are still trapped and
desperate inside the Sudan and are running out of food
and basic resources. They are running out of hope.
Attacks on health facilities have left more than 80 per
cent of hospitals inside of the Sudan non-functional. And
the public health crisis has been exacerbated by poor
sanitation, a lack of electricity, non-functioning water
treatment options and the over-capacity of morgues. We
also know that clashes and roadblocks are preventing
humanitarian aid from reaching people in dire need
and endangering the lives of aid workers. We call on
the Sudanese authorities to allow for the unhindered
and sustained movement of humanitarian goods and
23-26663

13/09/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

personnel, facilitate the importation of humanitarian
goods and equipment and expedite visa approvals for
international humanitarian workers.
My takeaway from that trip was this — and we heard
this from our briefers: the international community is
failing the Sudanese people. As we speak, the Sudan’s
humanitarian response plan for 2023 is less than 30 per
cent funded. That is shameful, and it is a stain on our
common humanity. For our part, the United States
is committed to supporting the Sudanese people in
their time of need. While in Chad, I announced that
the United States is providing nearly $163 million in
additional humanitarian assistance for the people of
the Sudan and for neighbouring countries. That brings
the total United States humanitarian assistance for the
Sudan emergency to nearly $710 million.
During my trip, I also announced United States
sanctions on Abdelrahim Hamdan Dagalo, a senior
commander in the Sudan’s Rapid Support Forces (RSF)
and the brother of RSF Commander Mohamed Hamdan
Dagalo, also known as “Hemedti”, for his connections
to abuses by the RSF against civilians in the Sudan.
Additionally, we are imposing United States visa
restrictions on Abdul Rahman Juma, the Rapid Support
Forces General and West Darfur Commander, for his
involvement and gross violations of human rights. We
must all condemn and work to prevent and respond
to the ongoing atrocities in the Sudan and hold those
responsible accountable. Such acts of brutality have
been contributing to widespread conflict-related sexual
violence across Darfur, as reported by the interim report
of the Panel of Experts of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005) concerning
the Sudan.
The United States joins its regional and international
partners in calling for the Sudanese Armed Forces
and Rapid Support Forces to end the fighting, respect
human rights and adhere to their obligations under
international humanitarian law. We support coordinated
international diplomatic efforts in pursuit of peace
by the African Union (AU), the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD), the League of Arab
States, the United Nations and other partners from the
Horn of Africa and the Middle East.
Finally, we remain unwavering in our support for
the democratic aspirations of the Sudanese people for
a civilian Government and a stable democratic Sudan.
We will continue to support civilian leaders working
closely with the AU and IGAD and charting a process

S/PV.9417

to establish a transition to democratic civilian rule. As
we do that, we must ensure inclusive, accountable and
transparent processes that reflect the full diversity of
the Sudanese people. I will continue to raise this issue
in the Council. We cannot look away while people suffer
as the conflict rages on. The international community
must do more to address the humanitarian crisis and
secure peace and justice for the Sudanese people — for
the child I saw wasting away in hospital, for the victims
of rape and other atrocities, for all who are trapped
in the violence and struggling to survive, and for that
young woman who looked at me and told me she had
lost her ambition — in the hope that one day we can
help her claim that back.
Mr. Olmedo (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Volker Perthes, Edem Wosornu and Mayada Adil
for their briefings. I would particularly like to thank
Mr. Perthes for his work as Head of the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan
(UNITAMS) for the past two and a half years. I believe
we are all conscious of the subtleties of his analysis and
his consistent personal and professional commitment to
the Sudan.
Five months after the start of the conflict, the
clashes between the Sudanese Armed Forces and
the Rapid Support Forces continue to escalate to the
detriment of the Sudanese people. No military success
is in sight. The spiral of violence is stoking inter-ethnic
tensions, which risk creating a civil war, fragmenting
the country and destabilizing the region. We condemn
all of the violence that has been committed, especially
in Darfur. Those responsible must be held accountable.
Our priority is to implement a cessation of hostilities
and launch a settlement of the conflict. We welcome
all the diplomatic efforts under way. We believe
those efforts can be coordinated and focused on three
areas — a cessation of hostilities, guaranteed safe and
unhindered humanitarian access and the participation
of civilians in a political process that can enable lasting
peace and a return to civilian Government. The story
of the Sudan’s future cannot be written without the
civilian political forces, including women, of course.
The 2019 revolution placed the legitimacy of power in
the hands of civil society. An ambitious vision of the
democratic transition is needed to move beyond the
current deadlock. We urge the members of Sudanese
civil society to prioritize unity in order to ensure that
their voices are heard. The actors supporting one or
the other of the warring parties must stop fuelling the

23-2666311/18

S/PV.9417

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

conflict. In keeping with Security Council resolutions,
the delivery of military equipment to Darfur is subject
to an embargo. We call on the countries of the region to
remain neutral.
France reiterates its support for the work of
UNITAMS. We call on the Sudanese authorities to
issue all the visas required for the Mission’s work
in a timely fashion and to facilitate an improved
humanitarian response. UNITAMS has a role to play
in strengthening all diplomatic efforts, as well as those
of civil society, and in continuing to determine the
facts when human rights violations and violations of
international humanitarian law are observed.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
I would like to thank our colleague from Ghana for
his briefing (see S/PV.9416). I also thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Volker Perthes
and the Director of Operations and Advocacy in the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA), Edem Wosornu, for their briefings. I am
grateful to Ms. Mayada Adil for giving such a strong
voice to the victims.
First of all, like others, I would like to express
my deep and sincere gratitude to Mr. Perthes for his
unwavering commitment to peace in the Sudan. I wish
him all the best for the future. I would also like to thank
all United Nations staff for their efforts to alleviate the
suffering of the Sudanese people. As the SecretaryGeneral says in his report (S/2023/644), it is critical to
ensure that the voices of civilians are not drowned out
by the sound of bullets. Their testimonies remind us
of our collective responsibility to protect civilians and
support them in their aspirations for lasting peace. I
would like to tell Ms. Adil that we have indeed heard
her moving testimony and her appeal to us. I would like
to emphasize three points.
First, as my colleagues have said, the fighting
must stop immediately, and the parties must abandon
their pursuit of a military victory. The high number of
casualties and displaced persons among the civilian
population, the appalling increase in serious violations
of children’s rights and the large-scale destruction of
infrastructure paint a bleak picture. We condemn all
violence against civilians and reiterate our call on all
the parties, especially the Sudanese Armed Forces
and the Rapid Support Forces, to respect international
humanitarian law and human rights law.
12/18

13/09/2023

We continue to hear reports in Darfur of ethnic
killings, summary executions and sexual and genderbased violence. It is all a déjà-vu nightmare for the
people of the Sudan. As the High Commissioner for
Human Rights rightly pointed out in June, yesterday’s
impunity has fuelled today’s cycle of violence. To
break that cycle, those responsible must be prosecuted
and brought to justice. All allegations of human rights
violations and abuses and violations of international
humanitarian law must be investigated thoroughly,
impartially, independently and without delay. We are
grateful to those who continue to risk their lives to
document the facts on the ground, and we encourage
the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance
Mission in the Sudan to continue its support for
those activities.
Secondly, humanitarian efforts in the Sudan and
the region remain at the centre of our concerns. We have
indeed heard the tragic accounts from Ms. Wosornu.
We remind all the parties of their obligation under
international humanitarian law to facilitate safe, rapid
and unimpeded humanitarian access to civilians in need
and to protect medical personnel and infrastructure.
Switzerland urgently calls on the parties to the conflict
to explore all possible options in order to agree on
measures to be taken to that end. We also remain
committed to the humanitarian response in the Sudan,
as well as in the countries affected by the crisis. As
we have just heard from our colleagues, we welcome
the generosity with which countries in the region have
been receiving people fleeing the conflict, which
demands additional resources and requires borders to
be kept open. We also welcome the access to North and
South Darfur that OCHA has managed to negotiate in
recent days.
Thirdly, a return to an inclusive political process
is the only credible and lasting solution to the conflict.
In order to create space for dialogue, we urge the
parties to the conflict to resume negotiations in good
faith towards a sustainable ceasefire. In that respect,
Switzerland welcomes the diplomatic efforts currently
being made, which must be closely coordinated and
complementary in order to achieve lasting results and
put an end to the violence and destruction.
We also support the Secretary-General’s appeal
to all parties to include women, who are committing
themselves to the cause of peace with courage and
determination — of which we have heard many
examples — in the ceasefire negotiations and
23-26663

13/09/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

throughout the future dialogue process. The joint press
stakeout by the signatories to the statement of shared
commitments on women and peace and security this
morning reiterated the call for protection against any
attack on their security.
As the conflict in the Sudan enters its sixth month,
we must redouble our efforts to prevent it from falling
back into the abyss of atrocious violations. I would like
to reiterate Switzerland’s full support for UNITAMS
and for the continued role of the United Nations in the
Sudan. As the Special Representative just said, the
Sudan is
(spoke in English)
“a country of tremendous potential”.
(spoke in French)
Switzerland remains determined to work alongside
the United Nations and the Sudanese people so that
they can realize their aspirations for peace, justice and
democratic governance.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We are grateful to Ms. Edem Wosornu,
Director of Operations and Advocacy, Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, and to
the Permanent Representative of Ghana, Mr. Harold
Agyeman, in his capacity as Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1591 (2005), concerning the Sudan, for their briefings.
We also listened to the statements made by Mr. Volker
Perthes, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, and Ms. Mayada Adil, a representative of
Sudanese civil society.
At the outset, we wish to express our regret that
the representative of the Sudan is not participating
in the quarterly briefing today. Some members of the
Council chose to escalate the situation, forcing our
Sudanese colleagues to distance themselves from
today’s discussion. The implications of such actions for
the future work of the Security Council concerning the
situation in the Sudan are seriously worrisome.
Meanwhile, the situation in the Sudan remains
extremely tense. In the months since 15 April, armed
hostilities have spread over large swathes of the country,
resulting in numerous human casualties and the
large-scale destruction of infrastructure. The country is
on the verge of a humanitarian catastrophe. Outbreaks
of inter-ethnic violence and serious crimes against
civilians have been recorded in a number of regions,

S/PV.9417

including Darfur. The total number of refugees and
internally displaced persons already exceeds 5 million.
Unfortunately, the conflict is becoming protracted.
The Russian Federation has consistently advocated
a peaceful resolution of the Sudanese crisis with
unconditional respect for the unity, sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of the country.
We continue to call on the Sudanese parties to
demonstrate political will and take immediate steps to
end the armed confrontation.
We support international and regional mediation
initiatives aimed at finding political and diplomatic
solutions that enjoy the trust of the Sudanese people.
We see great potential in the ministerial mechanism to
facilitate a Sudanese settlement that was established
following the summit of the Sudan’s neighbouring
countries held on 13 July in Cairo, the next meeting of
which will take place in New York next week. At the first
meeting of the mechanism’s participants, on 7 August
in N’Djamena, key areas of work were identified that,
in our view, correctly reflect current priorities. Among
them are a timely cessation of hostilities, the launching
of a broad inter-Sudanese dialogue and the resolution
of humanitarian issues. The road map promoted by
the Sudanese authorities to normalize the military and
political situation in the country is also aimed towards
that end.
We are in favour of closer cooperation between
the efforts of external players and Khartoum officials
so as to achieve tangible results in a settlement of the
crisis. We oppose any attempts to use the mediation
efforts of regional actors and neighbouring countries
for geopolitical purposes. The main task right now is to
stabilize the country and safeguard State institutions.
We deem foreign interference in the sovereign
affairs of the Sudan, with a view to imposing on
it certain allegedly universal democratization
schemes and non-inclusive solutions, to be entirely
inadmissible. We believe that the external pressure
exerted on the Sudanese leadership by certain Western
States demanding untimely and unprepared reforms
contributed to the aggravation of the internal political
crisis in the country. Unfortunately, the leadership of
the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance
Mission in the Sudan adopted a similar destructive
approach. It therefore came as no surprise that, as a
result, the Sudanese authorities declared the Head of
the Mission, Mr. Volker Perthes, persona non grata.

23-2666313/18

S/PV.9417

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

We believe that the Security Council should respect
the sovereign decisions of the Government of the Sudan
regarding the special political mission deployed at the
request of the host country under Chapter VI of the
Charter of the United Nations. The current situation,
where there is a lack of trust in the leadership of the
Mission, does not allow the United Nations to fully
implement its mandate. We would like to underscore
that this is not a new situation — such trust has been
eroding over many months, and the special political
mission has not fulfilled all of the tasks entrusted to
it, including those that were considered priorities by
the Sudanese. There is also controversy surrounding
the work towards a political settlement, with issues
pertaining to biased mediation arising from all sides
of the political spectrum. Ultimately, the process
completely collapsed.
Finally, we are convinced that, even since May,
when the situation emerged, a responsible solution
could have been found that would have confirmed the
reputation of the United Nations as an honest broker and
put the interests of the Sudanese people first, especially
at the current stage of this unprecedented crisis. We
have also witnessed the destructive influence of a
number of Security Council members who provoked a
further escalation of the differences between Khartoum
and the United Nations.
We trust that, no matter how the course of
events develops, the United Nations will continue to
provide humanitarian assistance to the Sudan and to
neighbouring countries suffering the consequences of
the crisis. Moreover, such efforts should be intensified.
We see no need, in the light of current events, to
expand the Security Council sanctions regime beyond
the existing parameters with a focus on the Darfur
region. As a matter of principle, we have always opposed
the imposition of illegitimate unilateral restrictions,
which Western countries use as a punitive tool to attain
their own interests. It is obvious that Western pressure
and blackmail pertaining to economic assistance do not
work in the Sudan or in other regions of the world.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm the Russian
Federation’s unwavering readiness to continue to assist
the friendly country of the Sudan in successfully
overcoming its current difficulties and returning to the
path of peace and sustainable development.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
the representative of Ghana for his report as Chair of
14/18

13/09/2023

the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1591 (2005), concerning the Sudan, and I
listened carefully to all of the briefers today, including
Ambassador Agyeman in his capacity as Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1591 (2005), concerning the Sudan.
In the light of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2023/644), I would like to make the following
three points.
First, efforts are needed to de-escalate the situation
as soon as possible. The armed conflict in the Sudan
has continued to intensify, accompanied by rising
civilian casualties. There is widespread concern in the
region. As a good friend and partner of the Sudanese
people, China sincerely hopes that, in the interests of
the country and its people, the parties will resolve their
differences through dialogue and negotiations to create
conditions for the return of peace and stability.
The recent period saw initiatives proposed by the
African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development to resolve the Sudanese issue and sustained
efforts to that end by Egypt and Saudi Arabia. Among
other things, China supports the enhanced efforts of
the countries of the region on diplomacy, mediation and
communication with the Sudanese parties to reduce
tensions as soon as possible.
The issue of the Sudan is a product of a multiplicity
of political, historical, communal and other factors.
External pressure and interference are a significant
source of continued instability in the Sudan. The
international community should learn its lessons and
effectively safeguard the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of the country, accommodate
the concerns of all Sudanese parties and constructively
support the easing of the situation.
Secondly, we need to step up humanitarian
assistance. The humanitarian situation is dire in
many parts of the Sudan, with 25 million people in
need of assistance, and the demand for food, drinking
water and medical supplies is urgent. China thanks
the United Nations and international humanitarian
organizations for their outstanding relief work for the
people in distress. We hope that the United Nations
guiding principles for humanitarian assistance are duly
followed in those operations and call on all parties
in the Sudan to facilitate their work. Recently, China
delivered multiple shipments of humanitarian goods,
including life-sustaining goods and medical supplies,
23-26663

13/09/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

to the Sudan. More such shipments will follow. China
is concerned about the grave shortfall in humanitarian
funding. We call on the international community,
especially traditional donors, to resume their assistance
and call on the parties concerned to lift unilateral
sanctions to avoid negative humanitarian repercussions.
During the upcoming high-level week of the General
Assembly at its seventy-eight session, a meeting on
the humanitarian situation in the Sudan will be held.
China hopes that it will provide the opportunity for the
international community to come together to pledge
more significant support to relieve the humanitarian
crisis in the Sudan and neighbouring countries.
Thirdly, the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS) is facing
considerable challenges in its work. China has noted
the concerns expressed in a recent letter from the
Permanent Mission of the Sudan to the President of the
Security Council. As a prerequisite for fulfilling its
mandate, UNITAMS needs to maintain communication
and cooperation with the Sudanese authorities. The
international community and the Council should
encourage the two sides to rebuild mutual trust and
prevent the situation from deteriorating. As the political
and security situations in the Sudan have evolved
significantly in recent years, the Council must reflect
on and assess how UNITAMS can play its role under
the current circumstances. To that end, it should fully
take into account the views of the Sudan, determine the
course of cooperation between the United Nations and
the Sudan vis-à-vis the country’s concerns and needs
and help it to rebuild peace and stability.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): I thank Mr. Volker Perthes for his briefing.
I also thank Ms. Edem Wosornu and Ambassador
Agyeman for their comprehensive briefings. We also
listened carefully to the statement by Ms. Mayada Adil.
It has been nearly six months since the outbreak of
the crisis in the Sudan. As we heard in today’s briefings,
the situation on the ground, including the displacement
of millions of people and the collapse of basic services,
reflects the gravity of the crisis and the urgent need
to end it. It is therefore important for the international
community to focus on urgently responding to the
humanitarian situation. That means intensifying aid
relief to the Sudanese people in order to alleviate their
suffering as much as possible, which requires exploring
all means to strengthen coordination and cooperation
in that regard, such as establishing new partnerships at

S/PV.9417

the local, regional and international levels to achieve
tangible results on the ground. We look forward to the
outcomes of the meeting to be held on the sidelines of
the seventy-eighth session of the General Assembly led
by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the Arab Republic of
Egypt, the State of Qatar and a number of other partners
in the region and international partners to garner
support and strengthen the humanitarian response in
the Sudan and the region.
We are encouraged by the humanitarian efforts of
the Sudan’s neighbouring countries to help facilitate
the delivery of humanitarian aid. We commend the
Sudanese organizations and local community groups
that continue to deliver relief aid under very challenging
circumstances. We also appreciate the efforts of the
United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance
Mission in the Sudan and the broader United Nations
system in the Sudan and encourage them to continue
providing and coordinating humanitarian aid.
In the light of reports of the interruption of certain
humanitarian activities, looting and the destruction of
humanitarian facilities caused by insecurity in some
areas, we reiterate our call on the parties to abide by
international humanitarian law and ensure unhindered
and safe humanitarian access to aid for those in need. A
lasting and immediate ceasefire is essential to protect
civilians and humanitarian workers and mitigate the
humanitarian crisis. The interests of the Sudanese
people must be prioritized over all other considerations.
It is of the utmost urgency to de-escalate the conflict and
cease all hostilities, particularly in the light of reports
of escalating intercommunal violence, which threatens
to destroy the social fabric of the Sudan. We therefore
stress the importance of complementarity between
regional and international efforts and local initiatives
that seek to prevent tensions at the community level. One
example is the Darfur Permanent Ceasefire Committee,
which in the past has contributed to reducing violence,
de-escalating tensions and facilitating efforts to protect
civilians, despite the security challenges in the region.
The ceasefire and resuming dialogue remain critical
and positive steps to achieve the necessary conditions
for a return to the political process.
In recent months, we have witnessed diplomatic
momentum giving reason for hope, especially at the
regional level, to address the crisis in the Sudan. We
therefore reiterate the importance of building on those
efforts to reach a lasting settlement that includes the
cessation of hostilities, the protection of civilians, the

23-2666315/18

S/PV.9417

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

restoration of basic services and the unhindered delivery
of humanitarian assistance. The Sudan’s neighbouring
countries play an important role, which requires our
continued support. We hope that the concrete steps that
the Arab Republic of Egypt continues to take within the
framework of the neighbouring countries initiative will
contribute to facilitating cooperation to achieve stability
in the Sudan.
More broadly, the United Arab Emirates supports
regional efforts to end the conflict, including by the
African Union through its road map, the League of
Arab States and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development. In order for such efforts to succeed, it
is necessary to continue coordination on all mediation
tracks, as unity of purpose is key to achieving an
immediate and permanent ceasefire and the resumption
of the political process.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates reaffirms
its solidarity with the fraternal Sudanese people during
this difficult time. We remain committed to providing
them with relief assistance and supporting all diplomatic
efforts to end the crisis. We hope that a national consensus
will be reached that puts the country on the path leading
to sustainable security and stability.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for the Sudan, Mr. Volker Perthes; the Director of Operations and Advocacy at the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Edem Wosornu; and the civil
society representative, Ms. Mayada Adil, for their informative briefings. I would like to underscore the work done
by Mr. Perthes, which has made it possible to promote
peace and which Ecuador therefore supports. We wish
him every success in carrying out his future responsibilities. We are also grateful for the information provided to
us by the Permanent Representative of Ghana.
The armed violence and its adverse effects on the
civilian population must be condemned. Conflictrelated crimes of sexual violence, indiscriminate attacks
on civilians, forced disappearances, extrajudicial
executions, terror campaigns, attacks on schools and
hospitals, attacks on camps for internally displaced
persons, ethnically motivated killings, the selective
burning of villages, the lack of basic services and
arms trafficking, among other things, run contrary
to international human rights law and international
humanitarian law. Therefore, the Security Council
cannot remain silent. The perpetrators of such crimes,
including crimes against humanity, must be investigated
16/18

13/09/2023

and brought to justice. We support the work of the
International Criminal Court so that it can act according
to its mandate, if necessary, and prevent atrocities such
as the ones we just mentioned from reoccurring. There
can be no impunity.
The situation involving 24 million people in need of
humanitarian assistance is of great concern. Coupled with
the lack of access to services, that situation presents a
bleak outlook, given the entrenchment of the conflict. The
international community’s support is therefore essential.
The unceasing work of humanitarian providers and
the presence of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, who recently visited the
country, attest to the need to continue working to protect
civilians with the support of countries in the region,
such as that provided by the Government of Chad,
which has received approximately 400,000 Sudanese
refugees in recent weeks. We hope for the continued
support of the countries in the region that have kept
their borders open in spite of the difficult situation they
are dealing with. It is time to combine our efforts in a
single, inclusive and consolidated peace process that
will make it possible to put an end to this conflict, which
has claimed so many lives and continues to worsen the
country’s already deteriorating humanitarian, economic
and social situation.
We urge the Sudanese Armed Forces and the Rapid
Support Forces to end the bloodshed and the suffering
of the Sudanese people. There can be no military
solution to any conflict. We also urge the authorities
to facilitate access for humanitarian workers and
allow conflict-affected populations the freedom to seek
safety. The Security Council must act in line with the
current mandate and use all the tools at its disposal, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
Mr. França Danese (Brazil): I thank Ambassador
Agyeman for his 1591 Committee briefing. I am
also grateful to Special Representative Perthes,
Director Wosornu of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs and Ms. Adil for their
comprehensive and compelling presentations. I especially
commend and thank Mr. Perthes for his tireless work in
the Sudan on behalf of the United Nations.
The fighting in the Sudan has gone on for far too
long. The parties must immediately withdraw their
forces from civilian areas, cease their hostilities and
engage in good-faith negotiations. A political solution to
the conflict that fully respects the Sudan’s sovereignty,
23-26663

13/09/2023

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

independence and territorial integrity is the only
pathway to a peaceful transition in the Sudan and is also
key to stability in the region. We commend the efforts
by the United Nations, the work done by the United
Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in
the Sudan and the leadership displayed by the African
Union and its Peace and Security Council. We support
the continued engagement of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development and the League of Arab
States, the initiatives led by the Heads of State and
Ministers of the Sudan’s neighbouring States, and other
efforts aimed at resolving the conflict peacefully. We
stress the importance of coordination among the peace
initiatives. The Security Council must provide timely and
effective support for such efforts.
The conflict in the Sudan continues to cause widespread death, injury and displacement. The humanitarian situation is nothing but catastrophic, with millions of
women, men, girls and boys in need of food, water, shelter and medical care. Civilians are facing dire conditions
in Khartoum, Omdurman, Nyala, El Geneina and other
urban centres and rural areas. As we heard in the joint
press stakeout earlier, women and girls continue to be the
object of horrific acts of sexual abuse and aggression. The
mounting inter-ethnic clashes throughout Darfur, and the
tribal mobilization in Kordofan, are especially disturbing. Those responsible for violations of human rights and
humanitarian law must be held accountable and brought
to justice. The conflict is also devastating the country’s
infrastructure, and its impact on the Sudan’s economy
is already severe, with many serious social implications.
The people of the Sudan deserve a future of
peace, progress and dignity. We urge all the parties
to the conflict to face up to their responsibilities to
the Sudanese population and begin the complex task
of building a political transition. We also call on the
Council to fulfil its responsibilities and step up its
efforts to find a solution to the current crisis in the
Sudan.
Mr. Hamamoto (Japan): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Perthes and
Director Wosornu for their updates. Japan greatly
appreciates the tireless work of the United Nations in
an extremely difficult situation. I would especially
like to thank Mr. Perthes for his professional work
and wish him all the best for the future. I am also
grateful to Ms. Adil for her insights and His Excellency
Ambassador Agyeman for his input as the Chair of

S/PV.9417

the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591
(2005) concerning the Sudan (see S/PV.9416).
The clashes between the Sudanese Armed Forces
and the Rapid Support Forces have now lasted five
months, and the death toll is rising every day. The
Secretary-General’s report (S/2023/644) says that “the
impact of the conflict on the humanitarian situation
in the Sudan is catastrophic.” We are concerned about
the fact that both parties have continued to pursue a
military victory and are scaling up their mobilization.
It is also worrisome that the Secretary-General’s report
describes ethnically motivated attacks and warns that
they carry the potential of expanding the conflict into a
full-blown civil war.
First and foremost, Japan repeats its urgent call
to both parties to stop fighting, allow unhindered
humanitarian access, return to a peaceful and inclusive
political process, uphold international humanitarian
law and ensure the safety of civilians.
Secondly, we appreciate all the regional and
international mediation efforts, including those of the
United Nations, the African Union, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, the League of Arab States
and the Sudan’s neighbouring countries, as well as the
Jeddah talks. Japan urges both parties to commit to those
initiatives.
Thirdly, Japan reiterates its full support for the
United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance
Mission in the Sudan. Three months ago, the Council
unanimously voted to extend the Mission’s mandate (see
S/PV.9337) in view of the Sudanese people’s difficult
circumstances. The four pillars of the Mission’s mandate
have proved all the more important since the fighting
erupted, and Japan is ready to actively contribute to the
upcoming discussions on how the Mission can best adapt
to the changing situation. Japan would like to remind
the Council how much the Mission has contributed to
fulfilling the aspirations of the Sudanese people since its
establishment in 2020.
I would like to conclude by renewing our commitment
to peace and stability in the Sudan and the region.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Albania.
I thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Perthes, Director Wosornu and Ambassador
Agyeman for their briefings. I want to express Albania’s
profound appreciation for Mr. Perthes’s work and tireless

23-2666317/18

S/PV.9417

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

efforts, in particularly challenging circumstances, to
help the Sudan and its people in their quest for a future
of peace. His briefing today reflects his continued
professional engagement in the Sudan, and I thank him
for the accurate report and for calling a spade a spade. We
are grateful for his service. We also thank Ms. Mayada
Adil for her sobering remarks. We are very pleased that
she could be here. Even though hearing her account was
painful, we commend her for giving a voice to all Sudanese
women, especially the victims of this senseless war, and
we encourage her to continue her civic commitment
to helping to overcome the tragic events her country is
going through. I would like to highlight three points.
First, as we have heard, the prolonged, intense and
deadly conflict between the rival forces, spanning six
months, has plunged the Sudan into a catastrophic
humanitarian crisis of unprecedented proportions. That
totally avoidable conflict, a power struggle between
ambitions at the top, is claiming close to 30 victims a
day, including civilians. It has increased ethnically based
violence and fuelled intercommunal clashes and, as we
heard, risks degenerating into a full-scale civil war. In
Darfur, racially motivated attacks on civilians, targeting
non-Arab communities, have led to force, displacement
and killings, as the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General mentioned. The longer this conflict
goes on, the more it becomes clear that there can be no
military solution. Unfortunately, in the meantime, the
country is being destroyed, and the civilian population
continues to endure massive human rights violations
and breaches of international humanitarian law.
Albania remains deeply concerned about reports
on civilians being deprived of food supplies, water
and electricity and falling victim to theft, looting and
widespread sexual assault. As Ms. Adil highlighted, there
have been numerous confirmed cases of rape, sexual
slavery, torture and religion- and gender-based violence.
Just prior to this meeting, 11 members of the Council,
signatories to the shared commitments on women and
peace and security, issued a strong call for protection of
civilians and accountability for perpetrators of sexual
and gender-based violence in the Sudan. We regret and
condemn the use of heavy artillery, artillery fire and
aerial bombardments, destroying civilian infrastructure,
including medical facilities in major cities, particularly in
Khartoum. Heavy armed clashes are preventing civilians
from fleeing the conflicts or using humanitarian corridors.
Violence has spared no one, including United Nations
staff members trying to provide humanitarian assistance.

18/18

13/09/2023

We therefore urge the warring parties and all
armed militias to cease hostilities. We remind them
of their obligation to protect civilians throughout
the country, with a particular focus on women and
children. We call on the Government of the Sudan to
expedite visa applications for United Nations staff and
partners assisting with humanitarian aid delivery. These
people are not going on vacation; they are rushing
to go in order to assist the needy and to save lives.
Secondly, violence in the Sudan is having
ripple effects throughout the region. More than
200,000 refugees have returned to South Sudan and
approximately 700,000 Sudanese have sought refuge
in neighbouring countries, particularly in Chad. We
commend all bordering countries for their ongoing
support in welcoming refugees. As we heard from the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
the crisis has already generated a humanitarian
catastrophe of epic proportions. Urgent need is
required, and urgent need must be provided. We, the
international community and the United Nations, in
particular, cannot fail the Sudanese people — because
their leaders have let them down.
Thirdly, Albania remains committed to supporting
coordinated regional and international efforts, and we
commend the initiatives led by the African Union, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
League of Arab States to reach an immediate ceasefire
and bring the parties to talks on restoring a meaningful
and inclusive political process. That is the only way to
end this nightmare and get out of the quagmire.
Let me conclude by reaffirming our unwavering
support for the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan. We commend the
Mission’s tireless efforts during such an alarming
crisis in the Sudan. We will continue to stand with
the Sudanese people and their aspirations for peace
and justice in their quest to re-establish a civilian
Government.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. I invite now Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the matter.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

23-26663
