TWENTY-SIXTH

YEAR

MEETING:

NEW

24 NOVEMBER

197 I

Y0R.K

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l

Adoption

of the agenda

600)

.. . . . ,. . . .. .. . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . .

. . . . . ,. . . . , . .. . . . .. .. . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . .

Complaint
by Senegal:
Report
of the Special Mission of the Security Council established under
resolution
294 (1971) (S/10308)
. , .. . . . , . . ., , . .. .. . . .. . . .. . . .

SIPV. 1600

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document,
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before I January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SIXTEENHUNDREDTHMEETING
Held in New York

on Wednesday,

President: Mr. Eugeniusz KQ!,AGA (Poland).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, China, France, Italy, Japan,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Syrian Arab
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United
States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1600)
I.

Adoption of the agenda.

2.

Complaint by Senegal : ,
Report of the Special Mission of the Security Council
established under resolution 294 (1971) (S/l 0308).
Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
Complaint by Senegal
Report of the Special Mission of the Security Council
established under resolution 294 (1971) (S/l 03081)
1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): It will
be recalled that at previous meetings devoted to the
consideration
of the present item on the agenda, the
Security Council decided to invite the representatives of
Senegal, Guinea, Mali, Sudan, Mauritania, Mauritius, Togo
and Zambia to participate, without the right to vote, in the
Council’s debate on the question before it. In view of the
limited number of places at the Council table, and in
conformity with usual practice, I shall invite the representatives of countries not members of the Council wishing to
participate in this debate to take the places reserved for
them in the Council chamber, on the understanding that
they will be invited to take a place at the Council table
when called upon to speak. I shall invite the representative
of Senegal to take a place at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. M. Fall (Senegal)
took a place at the Security Council table and Mr. E. H. A.
Tour.4 (Guinea) took the place reserved for him in the
Council Chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT (interpretation porn Pench): Before
we continue our consideration of the item on the agenda, I
1 Qil?ci~l Records

of the Security Council, Twenty-sixth Year,

Special SupplementNo. 3.

24 November

1971, at 11 p.m.

shouldlike to remind membersof the Council that a draft
resolution submitted by Burundi, SierraLeone and SomaIia
hasbeencirculated in document S/10395.
3. Mr. JOUEJATI (Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretation
Porn French): The Security Councilhasbefore it the report
that was prepared by the SpecialMission which went to
Senegal under the provisions of resolution 294 (1971).
Under the chairmanshipof the Ambassadorof Nicaragua,
to whom we pay a most respectful tribute, the Mission
carried out a thorough inquiry into the incidentswhich had
occurred, and were continuing to occur even in its presence,
on the frontiers betweenSenegaland Guinea (B&au). The
mandate of the Missionwasunique sinceit wasentrusted
with the task not only of observingwhat had happenedbut
alsoof peace in the region, The Presidentof the Council at
that time, the Ambassadorof France, deservesour most
sinceretribute becauseat the right time he made clear the
scope of that very important mandate and becausehe
succeeded,in co-operation with the Secretary-General,in
dispatchingthe Missionto the site.
4. From the report a seriesof observationsemergeas a
result of the visits and inquiries carriedout on the sceneof
the incidents tis well as of reports, sometimesby eye
witnesses.The responsibility of the Portuguese colonial
authorities in Guinea (Bissau)for the incidents which have
causedscoresof Senegalese
victims, terrorized the inhabitants of the frontiers between Guinea(Bissau)and Senegal,
and caused very great damageto the economicand social
life of that part of Senegal,which is naturally beautiful,
peaceful and hospitable, is a responsibility ,that has been
clearly established.
5. One did not have to searchfor long to discover the
sinister motives which inspired the Portuguesecolonialist
forces. Overwhelmed by the successof the revoIution in
Guinea (Bissau), seeingtheir region of control becoming
narrower from day to day and finally realizingthat they are
fighting for a causewhich is immoral at its sourceand lost
in advance,they foam with rageand commit their atrocities
in the Senegaleseborder towns and againsttheir peaceful
population.
6. All the pretexts used by Portugal to attribute these
abominableacts to the liberation movementswere revealed
as false and hypocritica1. The Guineanrefugeesin Senegal
enjoy the fraternal hospitality of Senegal and lead a
peaceful life while awaiting the recovery of their national
rights. The national Iiberation movementdoesnot carry out
any activity in the frontier regions.Having liberated most
of the rural areas, it concentrates its struggle on the

Portuguese colonialist presence in the urban centres.
Neither its respect for Senegal,nor its brotherhood with Its
people and Government, nor measured, well-thought*ut
strategy,
nor even its immediate interests give it the
slightest
reason to attack the frontiers with Senegal.These
truths not only are the result of logic but also have been
confirmed by facts and figures. Yet the Portuguese authorities do their best to create an atmosphere of mistrust
between the liberation movement and Senegal; they harbour the jllusion that their colonial presence can still be
tolerated and that they can perpetuate their domination
tJlroug]l the division of African unity. But we observe that
the result has been completely contrary to the one Portugal
expected. The liberation movement is being strengthened.
Senegal, because of its objectivity, sincerity, human qualities and deep perception of these Portuguese colonial
practices is thwarting the conspiracies. Aware of their guilt
and fearijlr: that these conspiracies would be uncovered by
the Missic -1, the Portuguese authorities refused any access
to iuinoa (Bissau).
7. The draft resolution submitted by the African members
of the Council reveals these truths. It merely affirms the
condemnation of these acts committed by Portugal, whose
responsibility was established beyond question. It emphasizes the responsibility of the Security Council to see to it
that the security and territorial integrity of Senegal are
respected, but it goes even further, to the very root of the
problem, just as the Mission had to do because of the logic
of things and because of its mandate. The draft resolution
requests that the people of Guinea (Bissau) be given,
without delay, the right to self-determination; if this right
had not been purely and simply denied by Portugal, there
would have been no problem. By entrusting to the
President of the Council and the Secretary-General the task
of supervising the question of implementation under
review, the draft resolution gives Portugal a last opportunity to act in accordance with equity, morality and
international law, that is to say, to respect the territorial
integrity of Senegal,to recognize the personality of Guinea
(Bissau) and to put an end to a colonial presence which
weighs heavily on the security, stability and development of
the region, a colonial presence which certainly imposes on
the Portuguese people itself vain and sterile sacrifices: the
sacrifice of its sons, resources and prestige and the
friendship which the peoples of Africa would like to
maintain with it only under conditions of mutual equality,
dignity and co-operation.

That is why my delegation WOUNDlike to thank OUT Afri&~
colleagues for their initiative. We also wish t0 thar& ti::
Ambassador of Senegal for his sober and lucid StIlt~lTl~~rl.i?
which he brought out all the injustices that SenegalbL!
suffered. The Council shouldnot disappoint Senegal,which
hasshownpatienceand a devotion to peaceand justice.
g , Mr. NAKAGAWA (Japan): My delegatiorl WeicOnles
tk
draft resolution contained in document S/l 0395, which ii
sponsoredby three African members: Burundi, Sicm
Leoneand Somalia.
10, file six members of the Council, including K+
country, that composed the Special Mission to Sen+l
actively participated in the drafting of the prolh?%J
resolution, My delegation notes with satisfaction that Ike
result of the intensive consultations we held is la&>
reflected in the draft now before the Council.
11, We thought it would be very important for I!.:
Council to adopt a resolution drafted on the basisoftbe
report of the Special Mission. In my view, the Mi&n
accomplishedan exemplary task under the chairmanshipp:‘
the representative of Nicaragua, Mr. Sevilla-Sacasa
I \I,~!c>
guided the work of the Mission with great skill ZiiJ
effectiveness. The Mission produced an objective anS
balancedreport, which was adopted unanimously by jis
members.The recommendationscontained in the rep%
are, in my view, well balanced and, if implemented full:.
will certainly eliminate the causesof tension in the re&n
andcreatean atmosphereof trust, peaceand security.
12. The draft resolution, as the representative of Burundi
pointed out at the 1599th meeting, is based in largi’
measureon the recommendationsof the Mission. I belici<
that this draft provides a constructive step forward in our
joint efforts to achieve a peaceful and satisfactory set&*
ment of the problems involved. My delegation will, therefore, cast an affirmative vote on the draft resolution. Ir!
doing so, my delegation strongly urgesthe Government c;i
Portugal to heed the appealsmadein the draft resolutii?n.
13. Mr. ORTIZ DE ROZAS (Argentina) (irm-prctatitw
ffonz Spanish): The delegation of Argentina has read with
great interest the report submitted by the Special Mission
of the Security Council established under resolulion
294 (1971), which went to Senegal to investigate the
complaint of the Government of that country and t*!
examinethe situation on the frontier with Guinea (Biss4
and which, asrequestedin that resolution,hasmade certain
recommendations
necessaryto guaranteepeaceand securit!in that region.

8. The proposals of President Senghor to allow Guinea
(Bissau) to exercise its right to self-d&termination was
rejectedby Portugal. Will the Portuguese authorities now
once again reject the appeals of the international cornmunitY for the restoration of peace and justice, or will they
have the courage to extend a hand to the liberation
movement whose honourable leader, Mr, Cabral, sponta.
neouslY declares his pride in Portuguese culture and the
willingness of his country to have with Portugal, after the
recognition of Guinean rights, the best possible relations of
friendship and co-operation? The draft resolution justly
requires that the Security Council meet to decide on the
steps to be takeI; if Portugal should turn a deaf ear to these
appeals. Thus, the draft resolution embodies all .the
elements of the situation and the means of remedying
it.

14. 1 wish to pay a tribute to the membersof the Spccizl
Mission and to its distinguished Chairman, Mr. ScvillaSacasa,for the dignified and efficient manner in which tlq
dischargedthe duties entrusted to them by the SecuriO
Council. We know that their work wasnot easy. In a ferv
days, and sometimesin difficult conditions despite the fIllI
co-operation of the Government of Senegal, the Specisl
Mission endeavoured to form the most complete and
impartial judgernent possibleon what had transpired on 111~
frontier between Senegaland Guinea (Bissau). Later, the
drafting of the report and the formulation of conclusion%
2

and recommendations that wvld
be :tdopted unanimously
required, as we all know, goodwill and a spirit of
co-operation from all members of the Special Mission. It is
precisely for those reasons that the recommendations
appearing in chapter IV of the report deserve our most
careful and thoughtful consideration.

22. My next point is a requestfor clarification from the
sponsorsrather than an observation.It refers to operative
paragraph7, whereby the authors of the draft resolution
request the President of the Security Council and the
Secretary-General“to keep this questionunder review and
report on the implementation of the resolution to the
Security Council within an appropriate period and at the
latest within six months”. In the Spanish text the verb
“report” is used in the plural. I would therefore ask the
sponsorswhether they expect a joint report from the
Presidentof the Security Counciland the Secretary-General
or a separate report from each. Secondly I would ask
whether there is any substantive reason why the draft
resolutiondeparts from the recommendationof the Special
Missioncontained in part C of paragraph228 of the report,
entitled “Portugal”. The recommendationreadsasfollows:
“Finally, it recommendsthat the Secretary-Generalreport
to the Security Councilwithin an appropriateperiod and at
the latestwithin six months.”

1.5. As I indicated in the statement I made in tha,; Council
at the meeting of 15 July 1971, any course of action the
Council adopts must be directed to avoiding a repetition of
events such as those that have given rise to the repeated
complaints of Senegal.
16. In this context, nevertheless, one must bear in mind
that the problems which occur on the frontier between
Senegal and Guinea (Bissau) do not constitute a typical case
of conflict between two States. We are certain that were
Senegal and metropolitan Portugal to share a common
frontier there would be no questions between them. At the
root of all these incidents is the colonial situation prevailing
in Guinea (Bissau) and the struggle being waged by those
fighting for their freedom, self-determination and independence ,

23. In the latter referencethe requestis addressed
only to
the Secretary-General,whereas in the draft resolution
before the Council it is addressedto both the SecretaryGeneral and the Presidentof the Security Council. And in
the Spanishtext it is not clear whether what is requestedis
two reports or only one. We should be happy to receive
clarification from the sponsorson the points I have just
raised.

17. It becomes clear, then-and this was repeatedly recognized in the course of the debate of the Security Council in
July last-that there can be little hope for a lasting peace in
ttie region so long as the present status of Guinea (Bissau)
subsists. The Special Mission itself, in paragraph 127 of its
report, states:

24. If my query is clearedup, we shall vote in favour of
the draft resolution, and with its adoption we trust that
moderation and self-control will finally prevail and that
peaceand calm will finally cometo Senegal.

“ [The Special Mission] reaches the conclusion that the
above-mentioned acts of violence and destruction appear
to be the consequence of the special situation prevailing
in Guinea (Bissau), which, as the Mission notes with
regret, is in contradiction to the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples.”

25. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): The Security Council has
resumedits considerationof the serioussituation which has
arisenon the African continent asa result of the aggressive
policy of the Portuguesecolonialists.

18. Without prejudice to advocating all the ?eps necessary
for a change in the present state of affairs to which Ihave
just referred, it is obviousthat Senegal,like any other State
Member of the United Nations and member of the
international community, has an absolute right to have its
sovereignty and territorial integrity fully respectedand to
be free from acts of violence and destruction in its frontier
areas.
19. We believe that the recommendationsof the Special
Mission adequately cover the various aspectswhich characterize the situation in that region of Africa, and for that
reason we consider the draft resolution submitted by
Burundi, Sierra Leone and Somalia to be acceptable,since
it largely reflects the recommendationscontained in the
DZp0l-t.

20. At this stage I shouldlike to make a few remarkswith
regard to the draft resolution before the Security Council.
21. In the first place, it seemsto me that we could
introduce into the draft resolution a paragraphwhereby the
Council would express its appreciation for the work of the
Special Mission. The introduction of such a paragraph
would be only just in view of the very efficient work done
by the Mission which, asI saidearlier, we all recognize.
3

26. Before proceedingdirectly to the item which hasbeen
includedin the agendawith a view to consideringthe report
of the Special Mission of the Security Council which
investigated the acts of aggressionby the Portuguese
colonialists against the Republic of Senegal,the Soviet
delegationwould like to draw attention to a numberof new
facts which demonstratethe seriousness
of the situation. As
is clear from the letter of 1.5 November 1971 from the
PermanentRepresentativeof Senegalto the United Nations
addressedto the President of the Security Council
[S/l 03881, only recently, in late October and early
November, the armed forces of Portugal carried out a
number of new acts of aggression
againstthe Republic of
Senegal,These, to usethe languageof international law, are
direct acts of unprovoked aggression;
they arenew developments, which seriously compound the crimes of the
Portuguesecolonialists. They should unquestionably be
taken into account by the Security Council both when it
discusses
the report of the Council’smissionon Senegaland
whenit takesa decisionon this matter.
27. In accordancewith resolution294 (1971) the Council
has before it the report of its Special Mission, which
investigatedthe facts of the Portugueseaggressionagainst

Senegal. This report contains additional material and
concrete facts exposing the Portuguese colonialists28. At an earlier stage, when the report of the Special
Mission was submitted to the Council, the Soviet delegation
had an opportunity to note that the Mission, composed of
representatives of Nicaragua, Belgium, Burundi, Poland, the
Syrian Arab Republic and Japan, under the Chairmansl~iPof
Mr. Sevilla-Sacasa, successfully completed the task entrusted to it by the Security Council.
29. The practice of establishing such special missions
composed of members of the Security Council and of
sending them to the scene of aggression has fully justified
itself. It is wholly and completely in accord with the United
Nations Charter and with the role which the Security
Council is called upon to play as the United Nations organ
primarily responsible for the maintenance of international
peace and security. Moreover, these activities have been
undertaken by the Council in accordance with precedents
which are already firmly established as part of the system
and practice of the Security Council.

33. The situation is further complicated by the t’& :: .i’
Lisbon, hating several times been cau&t red-handed r( 1””
ktting acts of aggression against African States, is atas-. :?
hg, although unsuccessfully, to turn CV~r~thiIl~
U$i:
down and sllift the blame to OthtXS.
34. But however ~nuch
Lisbon may tr)’ to preE;b?ElrR 1:
matter a a favourable light, the facts eloquently tie/::< i*
strate the opposite. The report of the Security I’VZ .(;
mission is further proof that the sovereignty arld tt’rri!*.,r,k,
integrity
of an independent African State MCI~I~VX ali :.“.:
United Nations, Senegal, ilre being corl.Sta~~tly ViOhkd
3,” :
threatened by Portugal, The representatives !vhn F-*1JP:
spoken here in the Council hVe
already refCrred tl! !I”,:
relevant sections of the report of the Special Mission a!” ?:
Security Council. The Soviet delegation would mcrd) r,a :
to stress the most important of these, and above all the :A:that the Security Council Mission produced facts tiII).g;:’
show conclusively that responsibility
for the aclr
violence and destruction and for the acts of aggrcuiorz
Senegaleseterritory rests squarely with POlf.UgillI
35. The Security Council Mission also carnc lu C-,v:
conclusion that the acts of violence and destruction 11~*.” 7
Portuguese forces are a consequence, as is st:ltecl in :“,:
report, of a “special situation” which has been hrn:24, X
about by the Portuguese colonialists in Guinea (Bissau P.2’+:
which is contrary to the United Nations Declaratiotl uai T’
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries a: :
Peoples. The presence of Portugal and of its triwbpa *
Guinea (Bissau) is an illegal international :I& and rcprc>Jt’ * :
a violation by Portuguese colonialism of IJnited N”;t~l :.-.
decisions on decolonization. At the same time, the C*CW::Z
should bear in mind when considering this problem the L1; (
that the legality of the just struggle of peoples for b?;, *
national liberation and independence has been procl;li~r:i s
and recognized by the United Nations and repc;lrc,‘::,
confirmed by General Assembly resolutiorls, inciudiltg F :
resolutions adopted at the twenty-fifth
anniversary SW:
of the General Assembly.

30. Our experience in establishing and sending to scenes of
aggression Security Council missions, rather than missions
from the thirtyeighth floor of United Nations Headquarters, to perform functions directly on behalf of the
Council in connexion with the maintenance and restoration
of international peace provides us with an instrument which
fully conforms to the spirit and ietter of the Charter and
represents an important step forward in enhancing the role,
the effectiveness and the responsibility of the Security
Council. It is that positive step which the Security Council
was, unfortunately, unable to take for many years from the
time of the cold war because of flagrant and systematic
violations of and serious departures from the United
Nations Charter under pressure from the imperialist forces
which at that time controlled the United Nations. But times
have changed, and we cannot but welcome the restoration
and affirmation of a practice which conforms to the United
Nations Charter and is in full accord with the effort to
strengthen peace and security and with the interests of the
countries which have been victims of aggression by the
forces of imperialism and colonialism,

36. Portugal, which is economically weak, would oat 5,:
able to carry on colonial wars without the support rrf ri.h
NATO countries. The provocation against Senegal is p;ild ! L
a general plan of the imperialist forces to Creiltc 3. base fwwhich to do battle against independent countries J;.,
national liberation movements in Africa,

31. The Soviet delegation, as you know, has already had
occasion to set forth in detail the position of the Soviet
Union on the substance of the question under considera.
tion. It is hardly necessary to refer again in detail to the
facts that expose the Portuguese policy of aggression h
Africa, which for many years has been the subject of severe
criticism and condemnation by the overwhelming majority
of States Members of the United Nations and by this
Organization as a whole.

37. Portugal, in spite and in violation of United Nali~l; g
decisions, continues to maintain large colonial posseair\:::
on the African continent. Today, with the cotonial syslarcollapsing everywhere in the world, Lisbon still holiE>
colonial sway over more than 2 million square kitornetres ,-f
African soil. Portugal maintains nn army of 150,000 men I’>
Africa. The blood of African patfiots, of fighters fc)r tl::
freedom and independence of their peoples, contintlcs 2:~
flow. The Portuguese colonialists are waging wars cif
annihilation against the peoples of hg~la,
Mozambiqu:
and Guinea (Bissau), who are defending their legitims$r
rights. These colonial wars, as has frequently been poinl’cd
out by African countries, are increasingly turning into wars
waged by Portugal against independent African State<
International imperialism and colonialism are deliberate?>
bringing Portugal, alongside the Republic of South Africa.

32. The report of the Special Mission of the Council fully
confirms the fact that the Portuguese colonialists are
Pursuing a Policy of aggression with the support of tile
leading NATO Powers. In paragraph 123 the report flatly
states that “the recurrent armed attacks against Senegal
cause considerable 10~s of human life, as well as material
damage; they create a climate of insecurity and hstabjjity
and are fraught with a threat to peace and security in the
region .”
4

-

41. The plenum notes with satisfaction that the foreign
policy position of the Central Committee meets with
complete understanding and unanimoussupport from all
communistsand from the Soviet peopleasa whole, Therein
lies the principal strength of the entire international policy
of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. This fresh,
clearconfirmation of the classand revolutionary character
of the Leninist foreign policy of the Soviet Union is the
best answerto all slanderousfabrications and speculations
to the effect that the policy of the Soviet Union is not
determined by the socialist, classcharacter of the socioeconomicstructure of the Soviet State but by other factors
which have nothing in common with a Marxist-Leninist
scientific analysis of the domestic and foreign policy of
States and assessmentof the contemporary international
situation.

to the forefront
of the struggle against the national
liberation movement in Africa. B; instigating and supporting Portugal’s colonial wars, by involving the Portuguese
colonialists more and more deeply in armed conflicts with
sovereign States in Africa, imperialism and colonialism are
attempting to create a barrier to the national liberation
movement of the African peoples, to prevent the decolonization of southern Africa, and to maintain on the African
continent a colonialist, racist strategic base against independent Africa.
38. The policy of imperialism, colonialism and racism in
southern Africa is countered by the growing unity of the
African States and peoples, whose goal is the elimination of
the last vestiges of colonialism on African soil. The position
of the African countries is widely supported by the United
Nations and by an overwhelming majority of States and
peoples, who have taken a firm stand in favour of the
immediate elimination of the remaining centres of colonialism in the world.

42. The Soviet delegation supports the recommendation
of the Special Mission of the Security Council that the
Council should take all necessarysteps to ensure that
Porbgd
will respect and fully implementt’le recommendations of the Mission. Effective stepsshouldbe taken to end,
promptly and decisively, the acts of aggressionof the
Portuguesecolonialists who are encroaching on the sovereignty and independence of Senegaland other African
countries. The security and independenceof African States
and, consequently, peace and security on the African
continent asa whole can be consolidatedonly if Portugal’s
colonial wars against the peoplesof Angola, Mozambique
and Guinea(Bissau)are brought to an immediateend andif
all those peoples are granted their freedom and national
independencewithout further delay in accordancewith the
requirements of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independenceto ColonialCountriesand Peoples.

39. As we have frequently pointed out, the Soviet Union’s
approach to the question under discussion is based on its
fundamental policy of giving consistent support to peoples
fighting for their national liberation against imperialism,
colonialism and racism. That position was cIearly and
accurately reflected in the programme for the struggle for
peace, international
co-operation, and the freedom and
independence of peoples which was recently approved by
the twenty-fourth
Congress of the Communist Party of the
Soviet Union. This programme contains a demand for the
prompt and full implementation of IJnited Nations decisions on the elimination of remaining colonial rCgimes, for
universal condemnation
and boycotting of racism and
apurtheid in all their forms and manifestations.Constantly
guided by this programme, the Soviet Union, pursuinga
policy of peace and friendship between peoples, will
continue to carry on a resolute struggleagainstimperialism
and colonialism, to aid peoples fighting for their national
freedom and independence againstimperialist and colonialist aggression,and to administer a rebuff to the intrigues
and diversionary manoeuvresof the aggressors

43. Mr. BUSH (United States of America): I should first
like to join my colleagues
in expressingappreciationfor the
efforts of the SpecialMissionand its members,and I shouId
like in particular to commendits Chairman,the rcpresentative of Nicaragua, not only for the manner in which he
directed this important task, but also for the leadershiphe
gavethe Security Council through many difficult periodsof
consultation as its President.He distinguishedhimself and
he distinguishedthe Security Council. The Mission’sassignment was clearly not an easy one, and it wasmade more
difficult by the limits imposed on the scope of its
investigation by circumstancesbeyond its control or beyond the control of this Council.

40. Further clear proof of the fundamental policy of the
Soviet Union, which calls for supporting the struggleof all
peoples and revolutionary forces againstimperialism,colonialism and neo-colonialism and for peaceand international
co-operation, was provided by the plenum of the Central
Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union
which recently ended in Moscow, In the plenum’sresolution of 23 November 1971 on the international activity of
the Central Committee following the twenty-fourth Congress,it is emphasized that:

44. My Government has consistently urged that this
Council seek to establishthe fact of any compIaint which
may be brought to it before attempting to passjudgement
on the situation or to take n?‘asuresaimedat resolvingthe
problemwhich may exist, Cons&tentwith that position my
Government, at an early stage in the discussionsof the
present complaint brought by Senegal, supported the
concept of a Special Missionwhich would go to the scene
and examineall the pertinent facts. Despitethe reservations
which we had concerning other aspectsof Security Council
resolution 294 (1971), we made clear our support for the
concept of a special mission by requesting a separate
paragraphvote on that paragraphand voting in favour of it.

“The consistent Leninist foreign policy of the Party and
Soviet Government, in which a firm rebuff to imperialism
and support for the revolutionary liberation movement
are unwaveringly combined with a consistent policy of
peaceful coexistence of States with different social
systems, has won the Soviet Union great authority in
wodd affairs, has helped to strengthen the international
position of socialism and of all progressiveforces, andhas
played a major role in changingthe international situation
in a manner favourable to peace and the security of
peoples.”

45. Wehave examined the report submittedby the Special
Mission.Wehave certain reservationsabout it but in general
5

we support the spirit which animated its drafters and many
of its specific aspects. Similarly, we support those aspects
of the draft resolution which are consistent with that spirit.
We agree that the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Senegal should be fully respected and that acts of violence
and destruction along the border of Senegal should cease.
We are in accord that the Government of Portugal should
fully respect the right to self-determination of the people of
Guinea (Bissau) and that it should take the necessnry
measures so that that right can be exercised without undue
delay. In this connexion, however, we do not believe the
Council should decide in advance the choice that the people
of that Territory must make when that right is exercised,
nor should we ignore the practical problems which may
have to be overcome before it is possible. Like the rest of
the Council, we are deeply concerned at the climate of
insecurity and instability in the area.

which might be in a position to investigate border incidents
and to report periodically to the Security Council on such
questions as progress toward self-determination in Guinea
(Bissau) and other elements which could lead to a satisfactory settlement in the region. From our discussions with
other delegations it appeared that such a proposal could not
receive sufficient support at this time, but it seems to my
delegation that this is the kind of further step which would
be consistent with recommendations of the Special Mission’s report.
51. As it has so often done in the past, the Council has
been considering incidents after they occurred, after the
damage has been done. It would be preferable if, through
the establishment of such a commission or other appro.
priate means, this Council could act to prevent incidents
and disputes arising from them. The United States will lend
its best efforts to cooperate with other members to this
end.

46. At the same time’, we believe that this draft resolution
does not do sufficient justice to the care that members of
the Special Mission took in drafting their report. We call
attention tct the fact that the Special Mission was careful to
point out the hearsay nature of much of the evidence which
it considered and to avoid approaching the situation with
preconceived conclusions. We are struck by the fact that
the Mission was unable to determine the responsibility for
the mine-Iaying incidents which were the initial cause of the
present Senegalese complaint to the Council. The conclusions which the Mission did reach are expressed with due
caution consistent with the absence, in many cases, of
concrete evidence and the incomplete nature of the
investigation.

52. The representative of Argentina has asked a question
about reporting; we should like to have the answer to that
question.
53. Amendments have been circulating among members of
the Council and the United States Government is very
much interested in some of them. In the light of this, and in
the light of the fact that we should like to have a small
amount of additional time to consider possible amendments
or to discuss with our colleagues questions that have been
raised privately and one raised publicly here in this meeting,
I should like to make a suggestion. I should like to suggest
to our colleagues on the Council that after the conclusion
of the speeches this morning we have a modest adjournment until this afternoon, perhaps until three o’clock-or
whatever hour would suit the President-to give some of us
a chance to discuss amendments to the draft resohrtion that
we may wish to suggest and to give us a little more time to
consider it. When my delegation came to the meeting
yesterday we did not have the draft resolution; we received
it at yesterday’s meeting. I understand some of the
procedural problems involved in producing draft resolutions, but I hope that our colleagues on this CounciI will
agree to allow a very short period of time during which we
may consider some of the amendments or some of the
questions that have been raised in the debate here this
morning.

47. It is precisely this incompleteness and, frankly, onesidedness which we find troublesome in this draft resolution, Both the report and the draft resolution note that the
Special Mission was unable to implement fully its mandate.
We join in deploring the lack of co-operation of the
Government of Portugal which prevented the Mission from
completing its task. What the outcome of a broader
investigation would have been we simply cannot say. But
the report would have been able to take a more complete
view of the situation and would, in the opinion of our
delegation, have been in a better position to assist this
Council in making a constructive contribution to the
solution of this problem.
48. In turn the draft resolution we are considering makes
no effort to overcome the obstacle admittedly put in the
way of the Special Mission in order to take into account all
the factors involved in the tension which we all know exists
in the region. It shares a deficiency we have noted with
respect to earlier resolutions dealing with comparable
incidents elsewhere in the world of not taking into account
the role which the use of sanctuaries by insurgent groups
plays in the creation of border tensions.

54. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from l+ench): Mernbers of the Council have heard the suggestion that has just
been made by the representative of the United States.
55. Consulting my list, I note that the delegation of
Poland wishes to speak. Thus, if the Council will permit me
to do so, I shall now speak as representative of POLAND,
after which we might revert to the suggestion that has bean
made.

49. Finally, we wonder about the contribution that the
present draft resolution will make to ensuring “prerequisites for eliminating the causes of tension in the region and
creating an atmosphere of trust, peace and security”.

56. On behalf of the representative of Poland, I should
like to express the views of my delegation in regard to the
report of the Special Mission that went to Senegalunder
the chairmanship of our colleague Mr. SevillaSacasa. l’%s
document is a cautious one, the result of lengthy consuhstions and meetings and couched in plain, measured word.

50. My delegation examined the possibility of proposing
the establishment of a commission acceptable to all parties
6

ing. It is very difficult for me to be brief when commenting
upon it, but I shall endeavour to limit myself to the
remarks which my delegation considers to be essential.
57. The first over-all conclusion from the account given by
the Special Mission is that the attitude of Portugal was
totally negative. Its refusal to co-operate with the Mission is
clear from beginning to end, from the letter of the Charge
d’Affaires ad interim of Portugal of 24 July 1971 [see
S/10284/ up to the letter of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Portugal dated 29 September 1971 (S/l 0343].
Before the Mission even started, Portugal rejected any
conclusion which it might arrive at. When such conclusions
were unanimously drawn up by a Mission composed of six
members of the Security Council representing every continent of the world, Portugal rejected them as cotitrary to
the facts and “bizarre” by advancing the argument-which
is really bizarre-that
the Portuguese authorities of Guinea
(Bissau) simply exercised the legitimate right to selfdefence. Thus, in the opinion of my delegation, the lack of
courtesy towards the Special Mission of the Council was
accompanied by an insult to the intelligence of the
members of the Council as an entity. What is more, even
during its stay in Senegal the Special Mission was confronted by a series of incidents, with absolutely every
indication that they were caused by the Portuguese forces
of Guinea (Bissau), incidents which the Special Mission
described in its report as implying a defiance of the
Security Council: negativism and defiance, therefore, on
the part of Portugal, which is totally contrary to the
complete co-operation and assistance of the Government of
Senegal-to wh.ich I wish to pay tribute once again. It is also
totally contrary to the active co-operation of the leader of
the African movement for the liberation of Guinea (Bissau)
and the Cape Verde Islands, Mr. Amilcar Cabral, whose
statements, sincerity and intellectual qualities made so great
an impression on the members of the Mission.
58. The negative attitude of the Government of Portugal,
which the Special Mission, diplomatically, merely “strongly
deplores” in paragraph 122, narrowed down the field’of
action of the Mission to some extent. Nevertheless, it did
not prevent it from finding “the indications such as to
designate the Portuguese authorities in Guinea (Bissau) as
responsible” for the acts of violence and destruction in the
territory of Senegal, such as attacks, bombings, placing of
mines, destruction of villages and so on. The Council will
note that to give a general description of these acts the
Special Mission used the exact wording of resolution
294 (1971) of the Council, which proves once again the
extreme prudence with which it drafted its report. It is
precisely these conclusions which Portugal attacks as being
contrary to the facts and bizarre.
59. This conclusion leads me to another general observation that flows from the conclusion contained in paragraph
127, which describes all these armed attacks and acts of
violence and destruction as a consequence of the special
situation prevailing in Guinea (Bissau), a situation which “is
in contradiction
to the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples”. In other
words, they are the result of the colonial situation in
Guinea (Bissau), the result of the colonial war waged by
Portugal against the people of Guinea (Bissau), a colonial

war which was so aptly described to the Mission by the
representatives of the Government of Senegal and in
particular by the Secretary-General of PAIGC, Mr. Amilcar
Cabral. To attempt to present ‘this colonial war as the
exercise of the legitimate right of self-defence of Portugal
guaranteed by Article 51 of the United Nations Charter, as
Portugal does in the letter contained in document S/10343,
is, as I have already said, an insult to the intelligence of the
members of the Council. In this theory, which claims to
draw its source from the Charter to deny the fundamental
principles and purposes of the United Nations and of the
Charter itself, there is but an additional proof of the
constancy of Portugal in defying the United Nations,
because, if there exists any legitimate right it is that of the
people of Guinea (Bissau) to independence. If there exist
legitimate rights, they are those of Member States of the
United Nations to bring moral and material aid to the
people of Guinea (Bissau) in their struggle to bring about
their independence from any colonial subjection. If there is
any legitimate duty, it is that of Portugal to put an end
immediately to the colonial war which it is waging against
the people of Guinea (Bissau); it is to recognize immediately and in practice its right to independence. Finally, if
there are legitimate duties, they are not to render any
assistance which might strengthen the colonial presence of
Portugal in Guinea (Bissau) and the war which Portugal
wages against the people of Guinea (Bissau).
60. I come now to my fourth observation, which is based
on the conclusion of the Special Mission contained in
paragraph 123, namely, that “the recurrent armed attacks
against Senegal . . . are fraught with a threat to peace and
security in the region”. In my opinion, that is a conclusion
of major importance.
61. Let us recalI that already last year the Special Mission
of the Security Council, which went to the Republic of
Guinea and of which I had the honour to be a member,
unanimously concluded that Portugal was directly responsible for the armed invasion of the territory of the Republic
of Guinea. The Security Council, in its resolution
290 (1470), while strongly condemning the Government of
Portugal for its invasion of the Republic of Guinea,
declared “that the presence of Portuguese colonialism on
the African continent is a serious threat to the peace and
security of independent African States”. That general
observation applies in particular to Guinea (Bissau), where
internal repression is accompanied by active hostility and
external armed attacks against independent African States,
as is amply demonstrated by the complaints of the
Republic of Senegal and the Republic of Guinea.
62. The Special Mission of the Security Council in its
report fully confirms the soundness of these views by
describing the acts of violence and destruction against
Senegal as being a consequence of the refusal of Portugal to
permit the people of Guinea (Bissau) to exercise without
delay its inalienable right to self-determination and independence. I am referring to paragraph 128 of the report,
63, That leads me to the conclusions of my delegation. In
our opinion, there can be no doubt that these conclusions
must be based on the following minimum points. First,
Portugal must be firmly appraised of our condemnation of

its repeated acts of aggression against Senegal, and this all
the more forcefully since these acts of aggression are
continuing, as proved by the information recently submitted to us by the Government of Senegal. Portugal must
also be warned to put an end immediately to its acts of
aggression, as requested by the Special Mission in its report.
Secondly, as the threat to peace and security which weighs
over the region is the result of the existence of the
Portuguese colonial bastion and the colonial war it is
waging against the peoples of that area, we must ensure that
that colonial bastion is eliminated and also guarantee the
right of the people of Guinea (Bissau) to selfdetermination
and independence and the right of the neighbouring peoples
to security and complete respect for their territorial
integrity. Thirdly, Portugal must be persuaded of the
Council’s determination to apply these measures. I am sure
that that is the only way to make the Government of
Portugal finally realize that its colonialist concepts are
definitely obsolete. That is why my delegation considers
that it is necessary for the Council to continue to be seized
of the problem with a view to implementing its objectives.
64. It is in that spirit that my delegation will vote in
favour of the draft resolution submitted by Burundi, Sierra
Leone and Somalia.
65. Mr. KOSCIUSKO-MORIZET
(France) (interpretation
j?om French): Without passing judgement on the various
points made by our United States colleague, I think that
the lateness of the hour and courtesy dictate that we should
defer to the wish he expressed that we should postpone to
this afternoon the continuation of the discussion. Moreover, the representative of Argentina has also made some
interesting suggestions. In any case, I think that agreement
could be readily achieved-agreement for which the African
representatives hope and for which the representative of
Senegal expressed a desire yesterday. I say this all the more
freely since, for our part, we are in Favour of this draft
resolution, subject only to one reservation-but
on that
point too, I believe that things can be worked out.
Accordingly, I support the proposal of the representative of
the United States to postpone our discussion until this
afternoon. As the delay is not long, we should not display
too much impatience in this connexion.

relating to whether the report should be presented by the
Secretary-General alone or by the President alone. Following the consultations which we have carried out, we have
come out in favour rather of a joint report to be presented
by the President of the Council and the Secretary-General,
68. Lastly, I should like to refer to the proposal to
postpone the vote until this afternoon. Of course, the
sponsors and, I am sure, the representative of Senegal as
well, would have preferred the vote to take place this
morning. Nevertheless, bearing in mind the concern that
guides all of us and being aware that the Security Council
assumes collective responsibility-although
we Africans are
the most directly affected-we
welcome all proposals
designed to bring about the best possible solution for all
concerned. We therefore think that the proposal to have the
vote taken this afternoon rather than this morning was
made with the object of improving the present situation
and of reaching unanimous agreement during the vote to be
taken in the Security Council this afternoon. That is why
the sponsors of the draft resolution, of whom I am one,
accept the postponement of the vote until this afternoon.
We would nevertheless like to make an appeal to all the
members of the Security Council that the vote should in
fact be taken this afternoon and not later.
69. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translatedfiom Russian): I do not understand the question
at issue. The point is that the debate is continuing, and
voting usually starts after the debate. The debate has not
been concluded. A number of delegations have not yet
spoken, and presumably they intend to speak. We still have
10 minutes left before 1 p.m., and that is enough time for
one speaker at most. Obviously, then, we will have to hold
a second meeting, and thus the question of voting does not
arise at present. If the representatives of Argentina or the
United States have amendments, let them submit them
formally, in writing, and we shall consider them. It is
difficult to understandthe substanceof thoseamendmeats,
andto vote on them, simply after listeningto them.
70. Therefore, if there areany further speakerson thelist,
they shouldbe given the floor and allowedto speak.Then,
let usreconveneat 3 pm., continue the debateif thereare
any other speakers,and if there arenot, we canproceedto
a vote. I consider that the question of voting hasbeen
raisedprematurely andwithout sufficient justification.

66. Mr. TERENCE
(Burundi)
linterpretntion
from
French): I should like to comment on the proposals that
have been made. In chronological order, I shall start with
that of the representative of Argentina. As my delegation
formed part of the Special Mission that was sent to Senegal,
we feel that a few words recognizing the merits of the
Special Mission would only express the dedication with
which the members of that mission carried out their
responsibilities-and
that of course also represents the
feelings of the other sponsors. I am thinking especially of
Mr. Sevilla-Sacasa, who presided over the team sent to
Senegal by the Security Council. Once again, by coincidence or through the same magical power that I mentioned
yesterday, Mr. Sevilla-Sacasa seems destined to be concerned with African problems. I hope that he will continue
to do so to the extent possible. Africa will be grateful to
him for that.

71. Mr. BUSH(United Statesof America): I shouldlike to
clarify my request. I thought that perhapsthe list af
speakershad been exhausted.As to the amendments
thatI
wasreferring to, I do not know whether anybody planned
to presentthem formally or was trying to garnersupport
for them, but certainly I concur with Ambassador
Malik.
All I wassuggesting
wasthat we could very usefullyemploy
the two hours between now and the reconveningof the
Council at 3 o’oclock. I did not meanto suggestanything
out of the ordinary.
72. In responseto our colleaguefrom Burundi, I certaialy
would concur that the Council shouldconcludeits business.
I amhopeful that in this period betweennow and 3 o’clock
we might find ways to answersomeof the problemsthat 1
raisedin my statement.Certainly, I did not want to suggest

67. The representative of Argentina raised another point,
concerning operative paragraph 7 of the draft resolution,
8

anything out of the ordinary or to keep anyone from
speaking or anything of that nature.
73, Mr. ORTIZ DE ROZAS (Argentina) (interpretation
from Spanish): I fear that either the interpretation into
Russian was not quite accurate or perhaps the representative of the Soviet Union did not understand me, or did
not listen carefully to me. I did not propose an amendment.
I suggested first that we express appreciation of the work
done by the Special Mission. That was merely a suggestion
which is not very difficult to understand or to grasp and
which does not have to be written down on paper in order
for its meaning or its purport to be understood. Secondly,
all I did was to ask for a clarification, and the representative
of Burundi replied to that. Thirdly, I did not ask for any
postponement of the vote nor did I raise any question
regarding procedure.
74. Mr. TERENCE
(Burundi)
(interpretation
porn
&en&j: In the interest of further clarification, I would
point out that we spoke after the President because it
appeared to us that the list of speakers for this morning had
been exhausted. So we fully support the proposal of
Ambassador Malik that the debate should continue, if there
are any speakers on the list.
75. On the other hand, as we understood it, the proposal
of the United States and France was designed to make it
possible for certain other consultations to take place which
might smooth out some of the existing difficulties. That is
why we thought that we were the last to speak, because
there were no other speakers on the list.

explain their vote on the draft resolution. If they wish to
do so now, I shall call on them, of course, but I should like
to point out that it is 1 o’clock and that therefore the
normal time for our adjournment has come. If any
representative wishes to speak now, I shall, of course, call
on him with pleasure, as it is indeed my duty to do. But, if
not, we shall adjourn now and resume at 3.30 this
afternoon.
78. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): When we discuss a matter, I
think there are three stages: first the debate, then the
discussion of the draft resolution and then the vote; but we
seem to skip the second stage-the discussion of the draft
resolution.
79. Would it not be quite in order that when we have
concluded the general debate on the item the draft
resolution should then be put before representatives for
discussion, so that those who wished to move amendments
or to clarify certain points could have the opportunity of
doing so? After having completed that stage we would hear
explanations of vote before the vote, take the vote and then
hear explanations of vote after the vote. But what I find is
that representatives take the opportunity of skipping the
second phase and go straight on to explain their votes
before the vote, without allowing their explanations to be
debated.
80. The PRESIDENT (interpretation fPom French): I am
quite prepared to follow the course proposed by the
representative of Somalia for this afternoon, and I shall
gladly call on any delegation which wishes to explain its
attitude on the draft resolution submitted to the Security
Council.

76. In short, if there are further speakers we shall be very
happy to hear them. If there are none, it is agreeable to the
sponsors that, in accordance with the formal request made
by the United States and France, the vote should be
postponed until this afternoon.

81. Since no one wishes to speak now, I therefore
propose, in view of the lateness of the hour, that we
adjourn and resume this afternoon at 3.30.

77. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I have
a few delegations on my list of speakers which wish to

lIthe meeting rose at 1 p.m.

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

United
Notions
publications
the world.
Conwlt
your

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
bookstore
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
tat United
Notions,
Sales
Section,

LES PUELlCATlONS

DES NATIONS

throughout
New York

or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

ler publications
des Nations
Unier
sent
dipositoirer
du monde entier.
Informez-vous
Nations
Unies, Section
der venter, New York

Litho in United

Nations,

KAK flOflYL(44Tb

ll3/(AHlrFl

COMO

PUBLICACIONES

CONSEGUIR

LJNIES

en vente
dons
ler librairier
oupr&s de votre libroirie
ou
ou GM&Z..

OPrAHM3AUHM

06bEAMHEHHblX

DE LAS NACIONES

en libreriar
a; Nacioner

New York

in other

0.50 (or equivalent

HAULiA

UNIDAS

Los publicocioner
de Ias Naciones
Unidor
estc’m en vento
en todar porter del mvndo.
Conrulte
a IU librero
o diriiore
Ventos, Nue~o York o Ginebra.

Price: 8u.s.

et ler ogencer
adresrcz-vous
6:

y cosas distribuidoras
Unidas,
Sacci6n

currenctes)

de

8217s-August

I973--2,050
