S/PRST/2016/1

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
17 March 2016
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 7650th meeting of the Security Council, held on 17 March 2016, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Reports of the
Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan”, the President of the Security
Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council expresses deep alarm at the situation in South
Sudan. The Security Council notes that while the ceasefire has largely held in
the former theatre of conflict in Greater Upper Nile, it is deeply concerned
with ongoing violence, as reported in briefings to the Security Council on
19 February. The Security Council calls upon the Government of the Republic
of South Sudan to uphold its responsibility for the protection of civilians.
“The Security Council expresses particular alarm at credible reports of
armed men in Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA) uniforms entering the
United Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS) protection
of civilians site and firing on civilians. The Security Council stresses that
attacks against civilians, UNMISS personnel, as well as United Nations
premises are unacceptable and may constitute war crimes. The Security
Council calls upon the Government of the Republic of South Sudan to
investigate and prosecute those responsible for the attack and commends the
United Nations for quickly announcing establishment of a High -Level Board
of Inquiry to be convened by the United Nations Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and Department of Field Support which will conduct an in-depth
investigation into UNMISS’ response to this incident, and awaits with interest
its findings.
“The Security Council condemns reported human rights violations and
abuses and violations of international humanitarian law and in this regard
expresses deep concern over those detailed in the 11 March 2016 ‘Report of
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR)
Assessment Mission to Improve Human Rights, Accountability, Reconciliation
and Capacity in South Sudan’ and the 4 December 2015 UNMISS/OHCHR
report ‘The State of Human Rights in the Protracted Conflict in South Sudan’.
The Security Council expresses deep alarm at the numerous reports of sexual
violence in armed conflict. The Security Council also underscores its grave
concern at the deteriorating economic and humanitarian situation in South
Sudan, with an estimated 2.8 million people who are severely food insecure
and that humanitarian access continues to be restricted.

16-04370 (E)

180316

*1604370*

S/PRST/2016/1

“The Security Council underscores its support for the Joint Monitoring
and Evaluation Commission (JMEC) Chair, Festus Mogae, and calls on all
parties to fully cooperate with him to advance the ‘Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan’ (the ‘Agreement ’).
“The Security Council welcomes some progress in the implementation of
the Agreement, including the commencement of the work of JMEC,
establishment of some of the transitional security mechanisms, agreement on
the selection of ministerial portfolios, the appointment by President Salva Kiir
of Dr. Riek Machar as First Vice-President, and the parties’ endorsement of the
JMEC’s transitional security arrangements proposal.
“The Security Council expresses its deep concern at the failure of the
parties to fully adhere to their commitments to implement the Agreement. In
this regard, the Security Council calls for the following steps to be taken:
1.
The Government of the Republic of South Sudan and the Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement in Opposition (SPLM-IO) fully and
immediately adhere to the permanent ceasefire in accordance with their
obligations under the Agreement.
2.
The Government of the Republic of South Sudan, the SPLM -IO and
all other relevant actors extend their full cooperation to compl ete
implementation of the of Juba security arrangements as decided by the JMEC
Chair and agreed by the parties on 24 February 2016.
3.
The President, the First Vice-President, and Vice-President, as set
out in the Agreement, take up their positions in the Transitional Government of
National Unity (TGNU) in Juba.
4.
The parties to the agreement abide by and take no action
inconsistent with the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
30-31 January 2016 communiqué, which was subsequently endo rsed by the
parties and JMEC, on the issue of the Presidential Decree on the creation of
28 new states.
5.
The Government of the Republic of South Sudan and the SPLM -IO
protect civilians and civilian facilities, including schools and hospitals, allow
people to move freely, and allow in accordance with relevant provisions of
international law and UN guiding principles of humanitarian assistance the
full, safe, and unhindered humanitarian access to help ensure timely delivery
of humanitarian assistance, to all those in need.
“The Security Council expresses its intention to review progress on the
steps outlined above no later than 31 March 2016.
“The Security Council underscores the pressing need for accountability
for violations and abuses of human rights and violations of international
humanitarian law in South Sudan, including ongoing violations and abuses
that have been reported since the Agreement was signed. The Security Council
takes note in this regard of Chapter V of the Agreement, calls for its
implementation, and appreciates the 26 September 2015 AUPSC communique
in which the AUPSC requested that the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission take all necessary steps towards the establishment of the Hybrid
Court of South Sudan, which will have jurisdiction over serious crimes

2/3

16-04370

S/PRST/2016/1

committed through the end of the transitional period. The Security Council
also calls for implementation of the other mechanisms outlined in Chapter V
of the Agreement, including the Commission for Truth, Healing, and
Reconciliation.
“The Security Council expresses deep concern at reports of repeated
violations of the Status of Forces Agreement and underscores the importance
of close cooperation on this issue. The Security Council underscores its
steadfast support for UNMISS and renews its deep appreciation for the
courageous actions taken by UNMISS personnel and troop - and policecontributing countries to protect hundreds of thousands of civilians under
threat of physical violence and to stabilize the security situation across South
Sudan. The Security Council recognizes the need to strengthen cooperation
between the Government of South Sudan and UNMISS to ensure the safety
and security of peacekeepers and other United Nations and associated
personnel, including humanitarian personnel.
“The Security Council reaffirms its unwavering support for the people of
South Sudan.”

16-04370

3/3
