S/PV.7468

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7468th meeting

Tuesday, 23 June 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ibrahim . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Malaysia)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Cherif
Ms. Sapag Muñoz de la Peña
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Hmoud
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Méndez Graterol

Agenda
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali (S/2015/426)
Letter dated 16 June 2015 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2015/444)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-18930 (E)
*1518930*

S/PV.7468

The situation in Mali

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Mali (S/2015/426)
Letter dated 16 June 2015 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2015/444)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Mali to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Abdoulaye Diop, Minister for Foreign Affairs,
African Integration and International Cooperation of
the Republic of Mali.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Mongi
Hamdi, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2015/426, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Mali. I also wish
to draw the attention of Council members to document
S/2015/444, which contains a letter dated 16 June 2015
from the Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council.
I now give the floor to Mr. Hamdi.
Mr. Hamdi (spoke in French): It is an honour for
me to address the Security Council in my capacity as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of Mission of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization in Mali (MINUSMA). The
report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Mali (S/2015/426), which the Council has before it,
follows resolution 2100 (2013) of 25 April 2013, which
established MINUSMA.
As the Security Council discusses renewing the
mandate of MINUSMA, I will also take this opportunity

2/8

23/06/2015

to take stock of the challenges facing the Mission and
short- and medium-term perspectives.
Last Saturday, 20 June, we attended the final
stage of the signing of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali. It was a great day of peace
for Mali, a historic day. Today we have a global and
inclusive agreement, that is to say, signed by all
parties to the conflict: the Government, the Azawad
movements Coordination and the Platform coalition.
The Agreement was negotiated in less than a year,
with the support of international mediation efforts
led by Algeria. It is a political, institutional, security,
humanitarian and development compromise that
will enable Malians to rebuild their nation on strong
foundations.
Of course, the Agreement is not peace itself, as peace
cannot be decreed, but it establishes the conditions for
building peace and lays out the best way to get there.
Of course, the Agreement is not itself reconciliation
among the various communities of Mali, but it provides
a foundation on which to rebuild Mali. Of course, the
challenges ahead are many, because rebuilding is more
difficult than destroying. However, I am convinced of
the goodwill of the majority of women, men and youth
from all regions of Mali, with whom I speak on a daily
basis.
Throughout the negotiation process, we have
consistently reminded the parties to the conflict and
the Malian people of the special nature of this new
agreement as compared with previous ones. We have
stressed, among other things, the involvement of the
international community, either through the presence
of a United Nations mission or in mediation during
negotiations, but also in the implementation of the
Agreement.
Concretely, the people of Mali, particularly those
of the northern regions, ask for only one thing: security
and the return of basic social services, especially
health and education. To get there, a real, ongoing and
animated dialogue must be established among Malians,
one inspired by a spirit of compromise and founded on
trust and mutual respect. In that respect, I welcome the
Government’s inclusion of the Peace Agreement in its
general policy programme, which was presented two
weeks ago to the National Assembly.
The weeks and months ahead will be critical. It is
imperative to begin to take concrete action so that the
Malian people can begin to see and feel the dividends

15-18930

23/06/2015

The situation in Mali

of peace. With that, I launch a strong appeal to the
international community and financial institutions
regarding the need to begin funding the implementation
of the Peace Agreement as soon as possible.
(spoke in English)
In spite of notable progress on the political front, the
security situation remains fragile. The recent violations
of the ceasefire agreements and the clashes are a stark
reminder of the complexity and unpredictability of the
security environment in the northern regions of Mali. I
welcome the withdrawal of the Platform from Ménaka,
where the Mission continues to reinforce its presence
and support arrangements to ensure the protection of
civilians.
The security provisions in the Peace Agreement,
if implemented in a timely, inclusive and consensual
fashion by the parties, could have a positive impact
on our efforts to stabilize the northern regions. They
include interim security arrangements, including
cantonment, as well as disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration and security-sector reform
programmes. MINUSMA and the United Nations
family are expected to play a major role in those areas.
The success of our combined efforts is contingent on the
parties’ commitment and determination to make muchneeded compromises and concessions for the greater
good of all Malians. The continued maintenance of the
ceasefires is an important demonstration of that.
The recent spate of violence in some localities in the
north has caused massive displacements of populations.
That increased caseload puts an even heavier burden
on the resources of host families, health and education
facilities, and on water and sanitation infrastructures.
I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate
the humanitarian community in Mali, including
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes, on
their mobilization and quick response to address the
displacement crisis.
The Peace Agreement opens prospects for Mali’s
recovery and long-term perspectives, with a view to
reversing the setbacks induced by the political and
security crisis. Scores of displaced people and refugees
are returning home in spite of pressing humanitarian
needs. It is therefore crucial to quickly re-establish
basic social services nationwide, particularly in areas
of return. That will facilitate the reintegration of people
within their communities, ease potential tensions over

S/PV.7468

meagre resources, guide early-recovery activities and
support social cohesion.
Northern Mali remains one of the most difficult
environments for peacekeeping. Its size, geographical
environment, harsh climate and extremely poor or
non-existent infrastructure continue to pose significant
challenges to the Mission. To compound the situation,
violent extremists and other enemies of peace continue
to indiscriminately attack our forces and camps. I
would like to take this opportunity to extend my
condolences to the families and Governments of the
fallen peacekeepers. I would also like to express my
gratitude to all the countries contributing troops and
police forces to MINUSMA and salute their courage.
We are likely to continue to face significant
security and operational challenges in the immediate
future despite the Peace Agreement. It is therefore
critical that troop- and police-contributing countries
have the capacities and capabilities required to operate
safely and effectively in such an environment.
As the Security Council initiates discussions on
MINUSMA’s mandate renewal, neither the challenges
nor the risks at hand should be underestimated.
Nevertheless, our efforts to date and the results
achieved thus far suggest that, with commitment,
vision and adequate resources, those challenges are not
insurmountable.
Going forward, it is critical to clearly define the roles
of the international community in the implementation
of the Agreement, based on comparative advantages.
MINUSMA, by virtue of its mandate, and working
together with partners, will naturally play a lead role
in supporting the implementation of the Agreement
on the ground. I see a particularly important role for
MINUSMA in supporting security and defence, as
well as the human rights and justice aspects of the
Agreement. MINUSMA will also provide support to
the functioning of the Comité de suivi de l’accord by
leading its secretariat.
Mali has made significant strides in the last
three years, thanks to a combination of national and
international efforts. I would like to salute the Malian
Government, the armed movements and the population
for their courage and determination to peacefully
resolve their differences. I would like to express
my gratitude to all members of the mediation team,
particularly Algeria, for its commitment and dedication
throughout the negotiations process. And I would

15-189303/8

S/PV.7468

The situation in Mali

like to thank France and the United States for their
unwavering support to Mali and to the Mission.
In conclusion, the Peace Agreement provides
an opportunity to start addressing the multifaceted
challenges facing Mali. The responsibility for the
implementation of the Agreement lies primarily with
the Malians themselves, with the support of MINUSMA
and the international community. It is my hope that the
future mandate of MINUSMA can be oriented fully
behind the peace process, including through continued
good offices, active ceasefire monitoring and a leading
role in the implementation of the Agreement.
The President: I thank Mr. Hamdi for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Diop.
Mr. Diop: Allow me to express our warmest
congratulations to the delegation of Malaysia on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of June. By the same token, I would like
to commend the delegation of Lithuania for the manner
in which it conducted the work of the Council during
the previous month.
(spoke in French)
I would like once again to express the deep
gratitude of His Excellency Mr. Ibrahim Boubacar
Keita, President of the Republic of Mali, and that of
the Government and people of Mali to our common
Organization, the United Nations, and to Member
States for their multifaceted and steady support of the
peace process in Mali since January 2012. In a similar
vein, I would like to reaffirm the confidence of the
Government of Mali in the international mediation
led by Algeria, which included the United Nations,
the African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), the European Union, the
Organization for Islamic Cooperation and neighbouring
nations such as Burkina Faso, Mauritania, the Niger,
Nigeria and Chad.
I would like to particularly thank France for its role
and decisive contribution in Mali and all its sacrifices.
I also commend the United States of America for the
decisive role it has played in helping to restore peace and
stability in our country. I also take this opportunity to
commend the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for
his personal commitment to peace and reconciliation in
Mali, but also to stability in the Sahel region in general.
I extend the heartfelt thanks of the Malian people
to all friendly nations and international partner
4/8

23/06/2015

organizations that have shown their solidarity with
Mali by sending their children, and often their experts,
to defend the values underlying our humanity. I pay
solemn tribute to the memory of all victims — civilians
and soldiers, Malians and foreigners — who fell on the
field of honour in Mali in defence of human dignity,
freedom and democracy.
I reassert the active solidarity of the Government
and people of Mali with the Governments and people
of the Niger, Chad and Kenya, following the recent
terrorist attacks, which caused a high number of
casualties, particularly among the civilian population.
The Government of Mali has taken note of the
Secretary-General’s report on the evolution of the
situation in Mali (S/2015/426) and would like to thank
our friend Mr. Mongi Hamdi, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), for his briefing. At the
outset, I would like to note that the report should be
updated, because it fails to mention the recent positive
developments, including in relation to the peace
process, that have taken place since 15 May.
I am particularly gratified to be meeting with the
Security Council this morning, at this juncture when
the peace and reconciliation process in Mali has made
significant progress in the right direction, as evidenced
by the finalization of the Bamako Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. Indeed, following
the signature on 15 May of the Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali, which came from the
Algiers process, by the Government of Mali, the
Platform coalition and members of the Coordination
coalition, we welcome the signature of the Agreement
on 20 June in Bamako by the other members of the
Coordination that had not previously signed. Mali now
has a consensual peace agreement that will serve as the
general framework for the sustainable resolution of all
dimensions of the most serious crisis in our country’s
history. This Agreement will set the seal once and for
all on reconciliation among Malians.
The Bamako Agreement constitutes a balanced
compromise that takes into account the legitimate
concerns of all the parties while respecting the unity
and territorial integrity of Mali and the secular and
republican character of the State. It also establishes the
conditions for long-term stability, because the reconciled
Malian nation will effectively and relentlessly combat

15-18930

23/06/2015

The situation in Mali

terrorism, drug trafficking and other criminal networks,
particularly in the area of irregular migration.
The signature of the Agreement by all the Malian
parties, however, is not enough in itself. The greatest
difficulty at the moment remains the effective and
full implementation of the provisions of this valuable
and, I must emphasize, historic instrument. For its
part, the Government of Mali, under the authority of
the President of the Republic, Mr. Ibrahim Boubacar
Keita, once again reaffirms its steadfast determination
to honour all its commitments under the Agreement.
We expect the same of the other Malian parties, whose
good faith and commitment in the matter we do not
doubt. We also call upon the international community
to honour its commitments and to continue its support
for thorough and full implementation of the Agreement.
As Council members will remember, on 25 June
2014, the Security Council adopted resolution 2164
(2014), extending the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, or MINUSMA. As the Council once again prepares
to extend that mandate, I would like to emphasize that
the Mission’s future mandate should take into account
the positive developments in the Malian peace process.
In that regard, the Government would like the future
mandate of MINUSMA to be based essentially on
the implementation of the Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali, as highlighted a moment ago by
the Secretary-General’s Special Representative.
In our view, therefore, MINUSMA should
support the following: political dialogue and national
reconciliation; the Government’s efforts in the area
of security, stabilization and the protection of civilian
populations; the re-establishment of the State’s
authority throughout the country; the reconstruction of
the Malian security sector; the promotion and upholding
of human rights; and humanitarian aid. Specifically,
and in view of the lessons learned in recent times,
the Government of Mali requests the members of the
Security Council to take into account certain priorities
in the future mandate of MINUSMA.
First, with regard to support for the political process
designed to resolve the crisis and ensure reconciliation
in Mali, the Government invites the Security Council
to give MINUSMA a mandate to help the Malian
authorities and all the Malian parties to effectively and
fully implement the Agreement. Particularly important
are the continuation of the good-offices missions of

S/PV.7468

MINUSMA, intended to anticipate, prevent, mitigate
and resolve conflicts; support for the Comité de
suivi, led by Algeria, and for the central role that the
Government of Mali will play in the implementation of
the Agreement; enhancement of cooperation between
MINUSMA and the Malian authorities — a point
on which I would place particular emphasis; and the
re-establishment of confidence between MINUSMA
and the people of Mali, who are in no way hostile to the
force’s intervention in the country; quite the contrary.
In addition, the human, material and financial resources
of MINUSMA should be strengthened to meet the
challenges of security, early recovery and development
in the implementation of the mandate of this important
tool.
The Malian Government’s second priority is
security, stabilization and the protection of civilians.
It calls on the Security Council to once again authorize
MINUSMA to help the Malian authorities to stabilize
the main urban areas, in particular in the country’s
northern regions, remove threats and take steps to
prevent the return of armed elements to those areas.
The Council should also renew its authorization for
MINUSMA to support the Malian authorities so as to
coordinate the international efforts to canton the armed
groups; develop and implement the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programme
for former combatants; and dismantle such groups.
The Council should also renew its authorization for
MINUSMA to protect civilians imminently threatened
with physical violence, in particular women and
children threatened by conflict, especially those who
are victims of sexual violence.
To that end, MINUSMA must be invited to expand
its presence in the north of the country, particularly
in areas where civilians are in danger; support the
implementation of the ceasefire and confidence-building
measures on the ground; and enhance its operational
coordination with the Malian defence and security
forces. The DDR programme, which is important to
the implementation of the Agreement, must be taken
in hand, and all combatants from armed groups who do
not join the defence and security forces must be able to
benefit from socioeconomic rehabilitation programmes.
We feel that the Council should demand in particular
that the battalions needed for the establishment of
the MINUSMA rapid deployment force be made
operational, something that has not yet happened even

15-189305/8

S/PV.7468

The situation in Mali

though the force was envisaged in resolution 2164
(2014).
Secondly, the mechanisms for observing the
ceasefire and implementing the Agreement should also
become operational. Next, we will not cease demanding
that resources needed to provide MINUSMA with
surge capability be made available. Then the use of
every available means of preventing and avoiding the
threat and return of terrorist groups, drug traffickers
and other forces hostile to the implementation of
the Agreement — including, I would reiterate, the
establishment of a regional rapid deployment force, as
recently advocated by ECOWAS, the African Union
and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation — must be
authorized. The Security Council should also demand
that the armed groups that signed the Agreement
be clearly distinguished from terrorist groups, drug
traffickers and other hostile forces.
The third priority for the Government of Mali is
support for the re-establishment of the State’s authority
throughout the country, for the reconstruction of
the Malian security sector, for the promotion and
upholding of human rights and for humanitarian
aid. The Government would like the new mandate of
MINUSMA to take the following into account.
First and as a matter of absolute priority is support
for the re-establishment of the State’s authority, the
reconstruction of the security sector and the provision
of basic social services. Such support will be an initial
test of the commitment and credibility of all parties to
the Agreement. The Special Representative referred
just now to the fact that the people are demanding the
restoration of basic social services. That is absolutely
true, but above all they are specifically demanding
the restoration of the Malian State, which will enable
us to create the conditions necessary for restoring the
administration, restoring basic social services and
creating a minimum level of security. Here I should
also stress the importance of assisting the Malian
authorities with training and other forms of support for
demining and the destruction of improvised explosive
devices.
Another issue is ensuring the security of
humanitarian convoys, including by opening
humanitarian corridors and implementing an emergency
humanitarian package. I would like to emphasize that
last issue, setting up the emergency humanitarian
package. This is not a new problem. During the
negotiation process the Government party put on the
6/8

23/06/2015

table the need for all sides to agree on a minimum
humanitarian action package that would make it
possible to ease the people’s suffering. Unfortunately,
that idea did not receive the hoped-for support, but now
that the Agreement has been signed, it is one of the
top priority tasks we should tackle with the help of the
United Nations, and particularly the agencies within
whose purview it falls, along with the assistance of our
financial partners.
Next is combating terrorism and trafficking of
every kind within the framework of cooperation
between, on the one hand, Operation Barkhane and
the Malian armed forces, and, on the other, between
MINUSMA and the Malian armed forces and security
forces. And of course all three should be able to work
together, with the Malian forces in the centre.
Then comes support for the national authorities in
combating organized crime, especially drug trafficking.
In our view, that particular point should be one of the
innovations in the new resolution. It is true that one
can create a framework for countering terrorism with
the help of the Barkhane force. Organized crime,
particularly drug trafficking, is the source fuelling the
conflict, and as long as we do not deal properly with
the issue — which the Agreement does not address
sufficiently — we will never reach a definitive solution
to the crisis, because drugs are feeding every party to
this conflict. Thus I believe it is absolutely essential,
with the help of the United Nations and every partner
involved, that we launch a strong initiative to fight drug
trafficking.
Next is support in organizing and securitizing
elections, particularly those relating to the country’s
territorial and political reorganization through the
regionalization process, as well as in our work on
structural projects designed to benefit the people and
areas affected by the crisis.
Following the decisions taken by ECOWAS and the
African Union at their respective summits, which took
place on 17 and 18 May in Accra and 14 and 15 June
in Johannesburg, the Government of Mali would like
to urge the Security Council in its turn to ensure that
it is the Malian armed forces alone that have the right
and the legitimacy to occupy any area of their national
territory as part of their sovereign mission to secure the
country’s borders, its people and their property. Any
other occupation by irregular forces is therefore illegal
and should end, and the Agreement should support that.

15-18930

23/06/2015

The situation in Mali

Furthermore, in his current report, the SecretaryGeneral recommends the deployment of 40 military
observers. The Government takes note of the
recommendation but asks that posts be created for
liaison officers to work with the Malian armed
forces and security forces so that the deficiencies in
collaboration and cooperation between our forces and
those of the United Nations can be remedied.
Here I hope I may comment on the proposal to deploy
40 military observers, since we believe it important that
the Secretariat clarify the concept and indicate more
specifically how those additional elements will work
with those already in place, including both the Mixed
Technical Commission on Security and the mobile
observation units — how they will work together and
what will be the role of the Government in relation
to the observations they will perform. We are totally
willing to continue our dialogue with our friends in the
United Nations and the Secretariat on the issue, and we
think it should enable us to move forward.
The Government of Mali is also very concerned
about the development of terrorist activities and drug
trafficking in the region. I note that the report addresses
those major concerns only fleetingly, and I was
surprised to see that in fact terrorism is not mentioned
anywhere in the report. That is a serious question. What
has changed in our vocabulary? We know how high a
price the Mission itself has paid, with about 50 troops
killed, basically owing to terrorism. We have all been
asking why terrorism is not mentioned as such in the
Secretary-General’s report.
In order to defend against that threat, the
Government of Mali calls on the Security Council
to thoroughly consider the possibility of authorizing
the deployment of a regional rapid reaction force put
together by the countries of the region. I realize that at
the moment there is no great enthusiasm for the idea,
but I would like to explain. I think we should take a
longer view. The African Union has been tasked with
looking further into that option and approaching the
United Nations and Operation Barkhane regarding
their support.
The basic aim of such an initiative is not to replace
operations already under way — we particularly
welcome Barkhane’s lifesaving action in the fight
against terrorism — but we also know that it is important
to create capacity within a country such as Mali, like
our neighbours Algeria, Burkina Faso, Mauritania, the

S/PV.7468

Niger and Chad, a capacity enabling us to fight these
threats over the long term. As we know, terrorism
has no sell-by date. This is a fight that will continue,
and our countries need help in developing their own
capacities. On the way, we will have to depend on the
capacities that are already there, but it is absolutely
critical for us that we not be denied the opportunity to
consider how to set up a regional intervention force. If
we find something better, so much the better, but the
important thing is that we start to create a regional and
national capacity for countering terrorism, because it
is our soldiers, not just those from foreign countries,
who must put their lives on the line for that cause. We
are ready to make those sacrifices for what we asking
for, but we ask that our units be adequately trained and
equipped to be able to enter that fight.
I would like to end as I began, by once again
emphasizing that the peace process in Mali has
made major, real and significant progress towards
the achievement of national reconciliation and the
harmonious development of the country as a whole,
so that there is a place in it for every one of its sons
and daughters. They are all Malians, and they all have
the right to live in dignity in their own country and to
participate in the political and social life of Mali.
The implementation phase that is beginning will
therefore be the most important step of all. While it
will unquestionably be a difficult and complicated one,
we at least have the good fortune of possessing a road
map, because we have the Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement, which sets out what the next steps must
be. Speaking for the Government of Mali, I would once
again like to reiterate its determination to honour all of
its commitments and to work inclusively with all the
Malian participants to ensure a Malian-owned process,
one including members of civil society, who are also
asking for the right to be at that table to contribute to the
restoration of peace and reconciliation in our country.
In the next few days, the Government will establish
a national mechanism responsible for implementing the
Agreement. The international monitoring committee
provided for in the Agreement, which was established
in Bamako on 20 June on the margins of the signing
ceremony, is ready to begin. In that regard, we expect,
we hope and we demand that MINUSMA will play an
important role.
We think that the national mechanism should assume
the lead in the implementation of the Agreement. It can

15-189307/8

S/PV.7468

The situation in Mali

serve as liaison to the international Comité de suivi
provided for in the Agreement and as the instrument of
national ownership of the process of implementation by
Malian men and women. The Government will make
available all the human and material resources required
to act in that regard.
Before concluding, I would like to call on the
international community to continue its support
and to honour its commitments for the effective
and comprehensive implementation of the Bamako

8/8

23/06/2015

Agreement and a guarantee of lasting stability in Mali
and in the region. I have no doubt that the Security
Council will play its full part in that regard.
The President: I thank Mr. Diop for his statement.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.40 a.m.

15-18930
