S/PV.8307

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8307th meeting

Wednesday, 11 July 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Wallström. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Sweden)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Cordova Soría
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Djedje
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Ashikbayev
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Rhuggenaath
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Lewicki
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Understanding and addressing climate-related security risks

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-21913 (E)
*1821913*

S/PV.8307

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.

continue to centrally integrate climate concerns in our
security considerations.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Understanding and addressing climate-related
security risks
The President: I would like to warmly welcome the
Heads of States and Government, ministers and other
representatives here in the Security Council Chamber.
Their presence here today underscores the importance
of the subject matter we will discuss. I am also delighted
to welcome once again the Deputy Secretary-General,
Her Excellency Ms. Amina Mohammed.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Iraq, Maldives, Nauru, the Sudan
and Trinidad and Tobago to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Baron Divavesi Waqa, President of the Republic
of Nauru. I also wish to welcome His Excellency
Mr. Hassan Janabi, Minister for Water Resources of the
Republic of Iraq.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Hindou
Ibrahim of the International Indigenous Peoples Forum
on Climate Change to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by the Deputy Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Janabi and Ms. Ibrahim.
I now give the floor to the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, Her Excellency Ms. Amina Mohammed.
The Deputy Secretary-General: I would like to
begin by commending the Security Council for focusing
its attention on climate-related security risks.
I would like to address four key issues today:
first, the nature of the challenges to our common
security posed by climate risks; secondly, the impacts
of climate change; thirdly, the actions being taken by
the United Nations system to tackle them; and, lastly,
what we need to ask of all of us to ensure that we
2/29

11/07/2018

It is clear that climate change is a real threat and
is proceeding at a relentless pace. Earlier this year,
the World Meteorological Organization confirmed
that 2015, 2016 and 2017 were the warmest years on
record. The level of carbon dioxide concentration in
the atmosphere continues to rise. That build-up means
that we are at increasing risk from heat waves, floods,
droughts and wildfires, and we are now seeing all those
things happening more frequently.
While the impact of climate change may be spread
unevenly across various regions today, no country will
be spared from its consequences in the long term. But
we see disproportionate effects on socially vulnerable
and marginalized groups. We must act together
with a joint vision and a commitment to multilateral
cooperation. That is our only chance at finding effective
and sustainable solutions to this huge challenge.
The impacts of climate change go well beyond the
strictly environmental. Climate change is inextricably
linked to some of the most pressing security challenges
of our time. It is no coincidence that the countries
most vulnerable to climate change are often those
most vulnerable to conflict and fragility. Fragile
countries are in danger of becoming stuck in a cycle
of conflict and climate disaster. Where resilience is
eroded, communities may be displaced and exposed to
exploitation. That said, the impact of climate change on
security can take many different shapes, as the concept
note for this debate continues to argue. They includes
loss of livelihoods, food insecurity and risks to the
natural resource base. Many of those manifestations
become visible only over time.
The Lake Chad basin is grappling with many of
those challenges. Having just returned from a joint visit
to the region with the African Union and the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Sweden, Ms. Margot Wallström, I
have seen the situation on the ground in all its complexity
and urgency. The basin is experiencing a crisis brought
on by a combination of political, socioeconomic,
humanitarian and environmental factors. The drastic
shrinking of Lake Chad by more than 90 per cent
since the 1960s has led to environmental degradation,
socioeconomic marginalization and insecurity affecting
40 million people. Exacerbated competition over scant
resources and the vicious cycle of risk and vulnerability
18-21913

11/07/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

have decreased the resilience of populations to cope
with the humanitarian crisis.
I personally grew up in the Lake Chad basin, in
Maiduguri. As a child, I would cross the lake on a
hovercraft, thinking that I was going to the United
Kingdom. Today, you can hardly take a canoe across it.
The situation is real. There is no trade. There are only
places for terrorists to hide.
Declining economic activity and agricultural
loss have led to a lack of employment opportunities
across the region. The resulting socioeconomic
marginalization has exposed populations, in particular
the young, to the risk of violent extremism and has
provided a breeding ground for recruitment by groups
such as Boko Haram. The Boko Haram insurgency in
north-east Nigeria and the neighbouring countries of
Cameroon, Chad and the Niger has left over 10 million
people displaced and has resulted in the massive
destruction of basic infrastructure, health-care and
educational facilities, commercial properties, private
homes and agricultural assets.
The multidimensional nature of the crisis underlines
the complex relationship between climate change
and conflict. Climate security-risk assessments and
reporting from the local, national and regional levels
should be considered as an early warning for conflict
prevention. We must understand climate change
as one issue in a web of factors that can lead to and
exacerbate conflict. Within that web, climate change
acts as a threat multiplier, applying additional stress
on prevailing political, social and economic pressure
points. As the Executive Secretary of the Lake Chad
Basin Commission said to me during our visit, “At the
end of the day, what was the origin of this conflict?”
For him, the disappearance of the Lake was a key
factor. In Bol, the Lake has shrunk by more than 90 per
cent in just a few decades. Action on climate change is
urgent and is an integral part of building a culture of
prevention and ensuring peace.
The United Nations system is tackling climate risks
on several fronts. During the past 18 months, the Security
Council has recognized the adverse effects of climate
change on stability in several geographical areas — the
Lake Chad basin, West Africa, the Sahel and the Horn
of Africa. The United Nations system takes seriously
its responsibility to provide integrated analysis to the
Security Council as it discusses those issues.

S/PV. 8307

In that spirit, we are determined to fully mobilize
the United Nations capacity to better understand and
respond to climate-related security risks at all levels.
We are increasing our climate-related security-risk
assessments and management strategies. We are
strengthening our capacity to understand the impact of
climate change on security, to integrate our findings
into assessment and planning processes and to better
coordinate efforts between system entities.
For example, the Secretary General’s forthcoming
report on the United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel will report on recent developments
involving the climate-security nexus in the region.
The recalibrated United Nations Integrated Strategy
for the Sahel is similarly climate-oriented, focusing
on building resilience and improving management
of natural resources. By supporting climate-smart
agriculture and resilient pastoralism at the regional
level, the United Nations will continue to contribute to
strengthening the resilience and capacities to adapt to
the impact of climate change of rural women and their
communities. The United Nations is also supporting
ongoing successful efforts by the member States of
the Lake Chad Basin Commission to implement their
stabilization strategy and programme, which also
includes the development programme for recharging
Lake Chad.
At the international level, the United Nations can
help to connect efforts and ensure that climate-related
frameworks are linked up and complement one another.
We will support efforts to set the global resilience
agenda to achieve sustainable development.
What is our ask? We need to support programmes
that place women and youth at the heart of our efforts.
We know that the impact of climate change is felt
disproportionately by women. I am happy to have
Ms. Hindou Ibrahim here to give us a much clearer view
of what that means on a daily basis. Desertification
means women must travel farther to fetch water and
food, forcing them to miss out on education and
economic opportunities in the long term. Youth without
jobs will take the alternative route, into terrorism. The
United Nations Development Programme, for instance,
is already addressing many of those challenges. This
progress needs urgent investments in scale.
The reality today is a very different one. The
challenge and danger of climate change are today
very clear and present dangers that virtually every

18-219133/29

S/PV.8307

Maintenance of international peace and security

country has accepted and realized. They call for
dramatic actions.
As the Secretary-General has said, climate change
is moving much faster than we are. We count on the
Security Council to do its part to help humankind
keep pace.
The President: I thank the Deputy SecretaryGeneral
I now give the floor to His Excellency, Mr. Hassan
Janabi, Minister for Water Resources of Iraq.
Mr. Janabi (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): It is an
honour to be here today, at the kind invitation of Her
Excellency the Swedish Minister for Foreign Affairs,
to give a briefing on climate-related security risks. This
is a vital issue and today’s debate is a testimony to its
importance. I commend Sweden for the initiative of
convening this open dialogue.
I would like at the outset to convey to the Council
the sincere greetings of the Government and people of
Mesopotamia — my country, Iraq, which aspires to
stability, progress and prosperity, and hopes that these
deliberations will contribute to the promotion of peace
and security worldwide. The Council’s deliberation
on climate-related security risks is an important
step forward in terms of international responses
and a precautionary measure to mitigate risks and to
avoid potential conflicts at the national, regional and
international levels. The United Nations system focuses
on the pillars of peace, development and human rights,
and we believe that climate change has a significant
negative impact on those three pillars.
The rising temperature of Earth’s surface, if
not by itself a direct and concrete threat — and I do
believe that it is — undoubtedly magnifies the threats
of other familiar risks, increases their complexity and
intensity in many regions of the world, including ours,
and impedes the implementation of the Sustainable
Development Goals in our countries. That is particularly
true of Goals 1, 2, 6, 13 and 15. That in turn will lead to
further impoverishment, displacement, food and water
insecurity, and violations of human rights, especially
those of women, children and other vulnerable groups,
amid conditions of instability.
Declining rainfall and the unsustainable use of water
resources exacerbate the problem of water scarcity,
causing the depletion of life-sustaining land resources,
displacement and migration. There is no doubt that the
4/29

11/07/2018

United Nations maintains frightening statistics on the
number of displaced persons and migrants for social
and environmental reasons. Although the number of
those who have drowned in the high seas is unknown,
the causes of their deadly migration attempts are
known to everybody inside and outside this Chamber.
Those reasons include poverty, wars, instability and
the lack of decent means of living resulting from the
spread of desertification, global warming and the loss
of biological diversity. Those are the challenges to the
conclusion of three important conventions: the United
Nations Convention to Combat Desertification, the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change and the Convention on Biological Diversity, in
addition to other international and regional conventions
adopted since the Rio Declaration on Environment
and Development.
The first human civilizations arose in the valleys
of major rivers on various continents. In our part of the
world, that includes the Mesopotamian rivers — the
Tigris and Euphrates, home of the great Sumerian
civilization — and the great Nile river in Egypt. We
are concerned that the great river basins of the Middle
East in particular are being subjected to the greatest
threat and stress ever, resulting primarily from
climate change and then from competition for the use
and control of shared water resources in the absence
of effective bilateral or multilateral conventions or
regional frameworks for the equitable and reasonable
use of shared water. Such stress may result from
indifference towards the application of the principles of
international law and its tools to ensure the rights of all
riparian countries.
That exacerbates the political, economic and social
problems and intensifies the negative impact of climate
change, which, according to our observations, led to the
decline of about 25 per cent of rainfall or snow cover in
the upper river basins of the Tigris and the Euphrates.
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
expected that the reduction in rainfall and snowfall
would be between 10 and 60 per cent in the Tigris and
Euphrates basins. That, of course, translates into a
similar decline in the flow of the two rivers through
my country, Iraq, coupled with increased demand
for shared water due, inter alia, to population growth
and the needs of economic development, which leads
to unfair competition for the downstream countries,
including Iraq. In the uncertain political and security
situation of the Middle East, the refusal to cooperate,
18-21913

11/07/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

non-respect for existing uses and the inequity of access
to water represent a real threat to peace and stability in
the region.
The combined effect of climate change and the
operational modes of large dams have led, for example,
to a decline in the rate of inflow of the Euphrates
river by 50 per cent over the past 20 years. They have
changed the patterns and seasons of the natural water
flow and led to the shrinking of the green cover and
expanding desertification. Consequently, the average
temperature has increased by at least 1.5°C in Baghdad
and southern Iraq, which represents a loss of at least
15 per cent in land productivity, according to the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
and an increase in unused land as a result of water
scarcity or agriculatural marginalization.
Our observations show that nearly 90 per cent
of Iraq’s historically fertile land is threatened by
desertification to varying degrees, resulting from
global warming and water scarcity. The same applies
to the countries of the region. Egypt, and this year
Iraq, have therefore been forced to limit the amount of
cultivated land and prohibit the cultivation of certain
agricultural crops that people historically used to grow,
owing to water scarcity. This undermines deeply rooted
social, economic and cultural traditions and causes
food insecurity for millions of people.
Climate change and the depletion of water resources
destroy the fertility of the soil and make it barren,
forcing people to move to another location where
their living conditions may be just as severe owing
to their inability to adapt and to their vulnerability,
with dwindling water resources and scattered and
unpredictable rainfall due to climate change.
What is more threatening here is that the
displacement of rural populations, who are usually
the food producers, means a double loss: a decrease
in the number of food producers, on the one hand,
and an increase in the number of food-insecure
people on the other. It is therefore only fair for the
international community to intervene positively in
order to enhance resilience and stability in the face
of harsh changes in living conditions in fragile areas
or areas most vulnerable to climate change. This will
require supporting adaptation programmes, which is
environmentally and economically less expensive than
attempts to accommodate migrants elsewhere after

S/PV. 8307

they have abandoned their land because it is no longer
fertile and cannot return to it.
This is in addition to the fact that proactive and
preventive measures can avoid humanitarian tragedies,
which most heavily impact women, children and other
vulnerable social groups. In fact, many of the measures
required may be legally binding on States parties to the
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification
or the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change, as well as covered by the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).
If I had to cite an example, I would point to the
grave deterioration in the environment of the Iraqi delta
at the mouth of the Gulf, the famous waterway known
as Shatt Al-Arab, which is the historical location of the
legend of Sinbad and the Garden of Eden, according to
certain holy books and religions. It is a striking example
of the change in a freshwater ecology characterized
by fertile soil and dense forests of palm trees, and
its transformation into a mainly lifeless environment
due to advancing seawater owing to less fresh water
coming from the river streams of the Tigris, Euphrates,
Karkhah and Karon. The same danger threatens the Nile
delta and other rivers in the region, ultimately forcing
millions of people below the poverty line to migrate.
I would refer also to an important site where the
ancient Sumerian civilization was born. It is a unique
and ancient water formation, at the confluence of
the great rivers in Mesopotamia at the mouth of the
Gulf, on the edge of the desert known as the Iraqi
Mesopotamian marshlands, which historically covered
an area of more than 15,000 square kilometres. There
the ancient Sumerian lifestyles have continued without
interruption to this very day, like the old civilizations
in Egypt and the Indian peninsula, where great historic
cities were founded such as Ur, Erido, Uruk and others.
This significant site was criminally and
deliberately dried up by the infamous Iraqi dictator
who was overthrown in 2003. Subsequent Governments
undertook restoration programmes and successfully
brought back to life large areas of the marshlands. The
site, which was listed as a World Heritage Site in July
2016, is now gradually drying up because of climate
change and a change in the waterways or because of
water depletion.
The descendants of the Sumerians, who live in
the marshlands and who breed cattle, have asked me
to convey to the international community their call

18-219135/29

S/PV.8307

Maintenance of international peace and security

for saving their water environment, lifestyle and
human heritage. This can be achieved only when
international conventions and parameters are respected
by neighbouring countries, and when standards are
set that are aimed at preserving biodiversity and
traditional lifestyles.
We cannot ignore the destruction caused by the
terrorist organization Da’esh in Iraq or the damage
deliberately inflicted on civil and water installations.
Terrorism is an international phenomenon, not a regional
one. Regardless of the different interpretations as to the
root causes of the phenomenon of terrorism in many
regions, the fact is that instability and economic and
social fragility contribute to the spread of extremism
and acts of revenge. This requires coordinated
interventions to address hotspots that threaten peace
and stability. We believe that measures to adapt to
climate change are part and parcel of addressing social,
economic and political challenges and that SDG 13, on
climate change, is of particular benefit to our region.
Lastly, I was asked to deliver a message from the Iraqi
Government to the Council reaffirming the country’s
commitment to peace, security and development
and to adopting a joint cooperation approach with
neighbouring countries that is based on respect, mutual
benefit, international law and the reasonable and
equitable utilization of shared water resources. Given
that climate change is a global phenomenon that knows
no political borders, comprehensive regional approaches
based on the provisions of international law as well as
initiatives based on diplomacy among riparian States,
such as water diplomacy and global security initiatives,
along with environmentally smart programmes, could
prevent tension and instability from arising and create
an environment conducive to defeating terrorism,
speeding up the rebuilding of various infrastructures,
and enhancing mechanisms for adaptation to climate
change and the sustainable use of natural resources.
Iraq commends the supporting role of the
international community in defeating terrorism on its
territory and calls for respect for its water rights and
for protecting the Tigris and Euphrates rivers. We
believe that this will help spread peace and security in
the region.
The President: I thank Minister Janabi for his
briefing. I now give the floor to Ms. Ibrahim.
Ms. Ibrahim: Anyone who believes in peace and
security and sits in this Security Council Chamber
6/29

11/07/2018

has to consider climate change as a security risk. I
know that many people here today read the reports
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change,
but it is my duty to tell the Security Council that my
community — nomadic pastoralists moving from one
place to another in search of water and pastures for
our survival — knows nothing at all about the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
My people do not know that there is such a thing
as a Security Council where a group of people sits and
thinks about peace around the world. My people are
living climate change. Climate change has an impact
on their daily lives and gives them insecurity. When
they sleep at night, they dream that they will wake up
the next day and be able to get food or water for their
children. They also dream that if someone gets to the
resources before they do they will have to fight for
them. My people do not sit in offices all day and wait
for their salaries to be paid at the end of the month so
they can feed their families.
More than 80 per cent of the communities in my
region of the Sahel depend on the environment — on
agriculture, fishing and the raising of livestock — for
their livelihoods. On a daily basis they have to go out
and fight to feed their families. Practically speaking,
because we are nomadic we have to follow the changing
patterns of water and pasture. In the past decade,
however, we have been forced to experience the impact
a changing climate has had on all our resources.
Natural resources are indeed shrinking. Council
members have of course already heard about what is
happening to Lake Chad, but there are many other
places where water is now disappearing forever. People
have to fight to gain access to these shrinking natural
resources, resulting in local conflicts that are spreading
every day. These local conflicts grow into national
conflicts and then become regional conflicts. Even
worse, these places where these people live become a
fertile place for terror. All around these places, terrorist
groups are growing. Why are they growing? Perhaps it
is because of their ideologies, but it may also be because
the opportunity to take advantage of people who are
becoming poorer and poorer every day is also growing.
In my region, men and women have different
responsibilities. Men are responsible for feeding
their families. If a man cannot do that, it is a great
humiliation. He will lose his dignity. To preserve
that dignity, he has only two choices — he can join a
18-21913

11/07/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

terrorist group because, as a human being, he needs to
feed his family, or leave the place where he is. If he
does that, he joins the internal migration that creates
conflict in his region. There is also external migration,
which also occurs because people have no other choice.
We have all heard the sad story about how migrants are
being treated in Libya in this, the twenty-first century.
But people continue to go because they have no choice.
Either they go there and jump into the sea to save their
human dignity or they stay home to fight and die.
For me, as one who comes from these communities,
I see babies and young people growing up in this area
and think about them in the next decade or the next 20
years. What will their futures be like? Are they also
going to jump in the sea? Are they also going to join
terrorist groups? Or are they just going to kill each
other because, in order to survive, they have to eat?
Council members have to go beyond the Paris
Agreement and the United Nations agency fighting
climate change. The fight has to be a global one. It has
to be a global fight because globalization can be a curse
or an opportunity. In my community, where a radio
is hard to come by, it is easy to find a bottle of Coca
Cola. This makes us wonder why we get useless things,
instead of a great solution, access to energy, help in
getting to school or to health services, or support for
finding other alternatives in life, leading to a peace and
a prosperous future for all.
Most development aid goes to cities, but because
the problems are all in the rural areas, the solution must
also come from there. My people are always fighting
for peace — to combat climate change — but we
cannot do that alone, because resources are not always
available. We need both tools and capacity. Members of
the Council need to come to our countries to see how
we are living. Our way of life needs to be observed.
Solutions need to be found. These solutions could be
very inexpensive because they could be derived from
the traditional knowledge we already have.
I would like to conclude by saying that my people do
not have a choice. We do not have a choice, but members
of the Security Council do have a choice. They choose
to sit in the Council. They choose to fight for peace
and security around the world. I therefore urge them
consider climate change to be a security risk. Council
members must give my people — men, women, young
people — hope. In fact, the Security Council should
give my people something greater than hope because

S/PV. 8307

we deserve something more than mere survival: we
deserve a life like everyone else’s.
The President: I thank Ms. Ibrahim for her briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Sweden.
I am honoured to preside over today’s debate on
climate-related security risks. I am a bit taken aback
by the previous speaker. Nevertheless, I thank all
the briefers for their statements this morning. Their
testimonies all say one thing, despite coming from
different perspectives: the security risks associated with
climate change are real. Minister Janabi spoke of how
Iraq is grappling with the harsh weather conditions and
intense droughts that will affect his country’s fragile
security. Ms. Hindou Ibrahim just vividly described the
challenges facing pastoralists in the Lake Chad Basin,
as ecosystems — and old power structures — shift.
Let me also thank the speakers representing groups
of affected countries who will share their experiences
with us. Also, I extend special thanks to His Excellency
President Baron Waqa of Nauru for being here today.
Last week, we met men and women who are dealing
at first hand with the everyday consequences that a
changing climate is having on peace and security. They
are migrants and refugees displaced as a result of drought
or floods. They are the breadwinners no longer able to
feed their families because, much like Lake Chad itself,
their traditional fishing or farming livelihoods have
evaporated, giving rise to tensions. They are women
leaders working in their communities to prevent youth
from becoming victims of radicalization by groups that
prey on the vulnerable. They do not have the choice of
ignoring those realities, and neither do we.
The link between climate and security continues
to be a priority for Sweden in the SecurityCouncil. It
is time for the Council to catch up with the changing
reality on the ground. It has been seven years since we
last debated climate and security (see S/PV.6587). It is
past time for us to deepen our understanding of how
climate change interacts with drivers of conflict.
I will be very practical, as I like to be. I believe
there are four areas that need to be addressed.
First, in order to properly address threats to
peace and security and to guarantee the Council’s
future efficiency, we need a better understanding
of climate-related security risks. We have made an
important start over the last 18 months by recognizing

18-219137/29

S/PV.8307

Maintenance of international peace and security

the adverse effects of climate change on stability in the
Lake Chad Basin, West Africa and the Sahel.
Secondly, we need improved tools, analysis and
reporting from the field to better address climate-related
security challenges. The presidential statement
on climate and security adopted seven years ago
(S/PRST/2011/15) asked for better reporting. However,
that knowledge and information gap still exists, and it
urgently needs to be filled.
To be able to make informed decisions on how best
to respond to the conflicts on our agenda, we must
have all the information on what is driving them. That
includes how a changing climate is contributing to those
conflicts. Climate-risk assessments should be part and
parcel of relevant reporting to the Security Council.
How climate risks interact with political, social and
economic factors, as well as gender dimensions, should
be taken into account. It is clear that climate risk has
the potential to play an ever-increasing role in driving
future conflicts. We need to invest in early warning
in order to better understand where those potential
vulnerabilities lie. To that end, we would welcome
regular, forward-looking regional and global reporting
from the Secretariat on climate-related security risks.

11/07/2018

Fourthly and lastly, in framing our response, we
need to look to the countries on the front line and learn
from their experiences and from good practices. For
example, Nepal and the Sudan, with United Nations
support, are taking steps to address climate-related
risks through pilot projects that map such risks, with
the aim of identifying resilience-building interventions
and programming.
The Lake Chad Basin Governors’ Forum was
established this year to enhance joint efforts towards
building peace and fostering sustainable development
across the region. It has confirmed the importance of
applying a holistic approach to complex and interlinked
security challenges, including climate change.
Led by the African Union Commission, the Great
Green Wall for the Sahara and Sahel Initiative is a truly
integrated project for climate, security and peace. It
aims to halt desertification, boost food security and
build resilience to climate change, while creating jobs.
That is conflict prevention and sustaining peace in
practice. We must capitalize on that knowledge on the
ground and integrate it into our efforts to end conflict
and sustain peace.

Thirdly, to deliver on all of that, an institutional
home for those issues within the United Nations system
is needed — we hope that Ms. Amina Mohammed
might be the mother of that home — maybe under
the leadership of a special representative, with
responsibility for bringing together information from
all relevant United Nations agencies. Reporting and
analysis should also draw on available research from
outside the United Nations system, perhaps through a
network of universities and other research institutes
that can provide us with that. I am pleased to announce
the launch of a Stockholm-based knowledge hub for
climate security later this summer. That hub will
increase the collective understanding of those issues
and will be available to the United Nations and other
actors by providing evidence-based analysis.

Regional organizations such as the African Union
and the European Union, as well as the Pacific small
island developing States, the Alliance of Small Island
States and the Caribbean Community, are already
providing momentum to the international response
to climate-related security risks. It is now imperative
that the United Nations catches up and takes the lead
in facilitating and coordinating global efforts, working
with regional partners and other stakeholders.

An enhanced understanding of climate-related
security risks and how to address them in the Security
Council should not, and will not, duplicate the
responsibilities of the General Assembly or other United
Nations bodies. Instead, it will ensure that all United
Nations bodies deliver on their respective mandates to
the best of their ability and that the system collectively
delivers more than the sum of its parts.

The threat that a changing climate presents to
our societies and to international peace and security
cannot be underestimated. It has already created a new
reality for the communities that we met in the Sahel.
To realistically and meaningfully respond to their
needs, address the conflicts of today, meet the call of
Hindou Ibrahim and others and prevent the conflicts of
tomorrow, we can no longer afford to ignore that threat.

8/29

The Secretary-General’s climate summit in
September 2019 represents a pivotal moment to make
progress on the issue. The concrete steps I have
mentioned today should work towards guaranteeing
that climate-related security risks are on the agenda at
that summit.

18-21913

11/07/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I call on the Prime Minister of Curaçao, Kingdom
of the Netherlands.
Mr. Rhuggenaath (Netherlands): I would like to
thank Minister Wallström of Sweden for organizing
today’s debate on climate-related security risks. I
also wholeheartedly thank Deputy Secretary-General
Mohammed, Minister Janabi and Ms. Ibrahim for their
excellent and valuable testimonies and briefings. In
addition, it is great to see fellow small island developing
States at this table.
I am particularly pleased to be here today, because
we are discussing a topic that directly affects my
country. As the Prime Minister of Curaçao, a small
island developing State in the Caribbean, I can attest
to the fact that the link between climate change and
security is clear and undeniable to our people and to
those of other countries of the Kingdom, particularly
Aruba and Sint Maarten. Increased climate variability
threatens social stability. It can ultimately lead to
displacement and regional tensions. Where climate
change threatens international stability and security,
the Council has a responsibility to act.
What if we had known 15 years ago that in 2018,
millions of people in the Lake Chad region would need
relief assistance to survive, with water stress as one
of the threat multipliers? What if we had known that
millions of people from Somalia would still be displaced
against the backdrop of severe droughts? What if we
had known that climate change would constitute an
existential threat to small island development States
like my own?
Those questions may seem irrelevant, since we
cannot change the course of history. But what we can
change is how we apply the lessons we have learned so
far. By responding in a timely manner to warning signs,
also when it comes to climate-related security risks, we
can adequately address root causes, prevent instability
and conflict and sustain peace in the future.
Recently, the Council has taken significant steps
towards recognizing climate-related security risks,
as you, Madam President, just mentioned. The first
was the adoption of resolution 2349 (2017), on the
Lake Chad basin, followed by presidential statement
S/PRST/2018/3 on the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel and resolution 2408 (2018) on the

S/PV. 8307

United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia. There
was also the request that the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq assist the Government of Iraq in
facilitating regional dialogue and cooperation on water
and most recently the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali. I also recall the briefing on the Lake Chad basin
under our Kingdom’s presidency (see S/PV.8212) in
which the majority of us agreed that climate change is
a threat multiplier in the region. The Council is starting
to prove that it is responsive to the security impact of
climate change where and when it matters.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands strongly believes
that the Security Council must ensure appropriate
action by the United Nations, in New York, but
especially on the ground in affected countries. That
requires the United Nations to have the capabilities that
match the extent of the challenge. By that I mean, first,
an increased analytical capability, which is needed
for joint risk assessments, conflict analysis and early
warning, and I truly hope we can agree on the need for
better analytical information. Secondly, it requires the
capability to manage risks by encouraging more and
better programming, notably prevention, stabilization
and development efforts that are conflict and climate
sensitive. Thirdly, it requires monitoring and assessing
progress and modifying our programming when
necessary. We will continue to encourage the SecretaryGeneral to include climate-related risks in his reports
to the Council when and where that applies.
To advance that agenda, we also believe that the
United Nations needs an institutional home on climate
and security. Therefore, we applaud the initiative to
launch a knowledge hub on that subject. The United
Nations needs institutionalized cooperation that
is properly coordinated and embedded across the
Organization and that will enhance and accelerate how
existing United Nations agencies tackle this challenge.
As a current member of the Council, we are ready
to shoulder our responsibility and contribute to that
end. On many occasions, the necessary actions will
need to be taken on the ground by entities other than
the Security Council. Both the Secretariat and other
United Nations bodies have a role in assessing and
managing climate-related security risks. In addition,
the international community at large should also play
its part.
Assuming our responsibility, the Kingdom of
the Netherlands continues to offer a platform for

18-219139/29

S/PV.8307

Maintenance of international peace and security

the climate and security debate through our annual
Planetary Security Conference, in which Curaçao will
also participate. We hope all interested parties make
optimal use of that platform to explore solutions to
the climate-related security risks in Mali, Iraq, Lake
Chad and, of course, the Caribbean small island
developing States.
Climate-related insecurity can affect us all. As
the Prime Minister of Fiji put it, we are all in the same
canoe. I also would like to cite Thomas Friedman, who
concluded that “the only way to steer is to paddle as
fast as or faster than the rate of change”, in this case
climate change.
In conclusion, we believe the Council has an
important role to play. It is up to the Security Council
to prevent instability, insecurity and the displacement
and suffering of people everywhere. The Council
therefore has to fulfil its responsibility to call for
appropriate action when stability is at risk and in the
case of climate-related threats to ensure peace for
future generations.
We heard that climate change changes everything
for everyone everywhere. This is our call and this is
our moment.
Mr. Ashibayev (Kazakhstan): Let me start by
congratulating you, Minister Wallström, and Sweden
on assuming the Council’s presidency for the month
of July. I would also like to thank Deputy SecretaryGeneral Ms. Amina Mohammed, Minister of Water
Resources of Iraq Mr. Hassan Janabi, and civil society
briefer Ms. Hindou Ibrahim for warning us about the
need for urgent national, regional and global action.
The problem of climate change is becoming a
central theme throughout the world community, which
has significant economic, environmental and social
consequences. Climate change is a threat multiplier
as it can result in poverty, food insecurity, illegal
migration, internal displacement, social instability
and bitter conflicts because high-risk areas are
essentially agricultural. The fight over scarce natural
resources, such as land and water, have also resulted
in long and brutal hostilities. The refugee problem
and mass movements of people across the world
due to climate-related causes are today resulting in
animosity, xenophobia and exclusion and ending in
unintended political upheavals. We have also seen
violent insurgencies and terrorist organizations gaining
a foothold when a vacuum is created.
10/29

11/07/2018

With regard to today’s topic of discussion,
I would like to make the following observations
and recommendations.
Climate-related security threats must be seen
through the need for climate diplomacy and should
be a part of overall United Nations efforts in conflict
prevention. Combating climate-related security threats
should also be an underpinning concept of sustaining
peace, which should not be an end process, but rather
incorporated and running parallel to prevention,
resolution, recovery and rehabilitation.
Better climate-related security risk assessments
and management strategies are required. Preventive
action needs to be taken, such as foreseeing and
mitigating timely action for building resilience through
early action aimed at investigating and mitigating risk
disasters. We need international cooperation and joint
projects to build the capacity of developing countries to
invest in new and diversified economies, live stock and
other forms of livelihood. We also need to support lowincome countries, adapt to new technologies and invest
in renewable sources of energy.
The issue of climate change is one of the priorities
of my country, considering the increased number of
emergency situations, their scale and the growing
number of affected people. Kazakhstan and the entire
central Asian region has had its own tragic experience
with the dying Aral Sea. That environmental disaster
has brought many challenges and problems for the
population and nature in neighbouring States, and has
affected almost 60 million people.
Timely action taken by Kazakhstan in cooperation
with the World Bank in putting a dam separating a
small part of the Aral Sea helped to almost restore the
water bed and restart the commercial fishery industry
in the Kazakh part of the Aral Sea. However, the Aral
Sea could definitely be seen as a threat multiplier in
central Asia, as it aggravates existing problems, such as
access to fresh water, desertification, food insecurity
and many more. Concerned with that situation, central
Asian nations established the International Fund for
Saving the Aral Sea, which will have its next meeting
of heads of State on 24 August under the chairmanship
of Turkmenistan.
Kazakhstan for its part has taken voluntary action to
cut the use of fossil fuels by 2030 and replace them with
renewable energy by 2050. Kazakhstan is committed
to upholding the Paris Agreement on Climate Change
18-21913

11/07/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

and will continue to fulfil its obligations. From June
to September 2017, we hosted the Astana Expo 2017
devoted to the theme of future energy to showcase and
promote best practices in the field of sustainable energy
and to provide support for developing countries in that
sphere. The Expo site has been transformed into the
International Centre for Green Technology to advance
our efforts to curb climate change.
Kazakhstan stands ready to unite with others for
global security. That is why the focus of our Security
Council election campaign has been on food, water,
energy and nuclear security. Those are enduring values
even beyond our term in the Council.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): May I once again
thank and congratulate Sweden for selecting such a
good menu of themes for us to discuss in the Security
Council. I was here in 2007 for the first Security
Council climate change debate (see S/PV.5663), and I
think that today’s discussion is already shaping up to
be a very worthy continuation in that area. It is obvious
that there is a great deal of common ground. I thank the
Ministers who have taken the time to be present here
in the Council today to share their very interesting,
compelling and sad stories.
The Earth is known as the Blue Planet but many
of today’s speakers have described the way in which
the most iconic geographic features of the planet are
being irredeemably affected by climate change, which
serves as an important warning to us all. It is hoped that
today’s meeting will provide us with a renewed sense of
commitment to taking action. I would like in particular
to welcome the remarks made earlier by the Minister of
Water Resources of Iraq about joint cooperation with
neighbouring countries in an attempt to solve some of
the resource problems that flow from climate change.
As many others here would agree, it was
Ms. Ibrahim’s briefing about her people that was the
most compelling. She painted a very graphic picture
of the link between development and security, what
it means on the ground for ordinary families and how
vulnerable they are to developments, such as terrorist
acts, because of the incredibly stark and unfair choices
they face. I thank her for bringing that to the Council’s
attention. We in the United Kingdom will work as hard
as we can with Sweden and other partners in an attempt
to assist the United Nations in finding answers to the
points raised by various Ministers today.

S/PV. 8307

This topic must be considered holistically
throughout the United Nations system. We very much
welcome some of the ideas that you, Madam President,
and the representative of Netherlands have outlined.
The interplay between climate and security is not an
abstract theoretical risk. If we do not manage climate
change, it will threaten lives, livelihoods and economies
across the globe. Along with migration, it will begin to
have an impact on all economies, including those not
directly affected by climate change. One statistic that
really struck me was one provided by the World Bank,
which estimates that 720 million people are at risk of
being pushed into poverty by climate change by 2050.
That is not only a shocking statistic in itself; it also
means that climate change would reverse much of the
progress made in the first quarter of the twenty-first
century. We are therefore working against ourselves if
we do not act to address the topic. That is in addition
to the fact that there will be other consequences of
conflict and instability that arise from climate change.
My Prime Minister, Theresa May, has gone on
record to say that there is a clear moral imperative
for developed economies to help those who stand to
lose most from the consequences of climate change.
We have pledged $7.7 billion in international climate
financing to help alleviate the problem. The actions and
solutions we agree on in the Security Council must take
into account all the risks we face today and how they
might interact, so as to address potential risks in the
future. If I may say so, I believe that the Council has
been quite good about reflecting those points in recent
resolutions, in particular those on Lake Chad, Somalia
and the Sahel. Our task is to effectively implement
those resolutions.
For our part in the United Kingdom, we have
committed to championing a sharper focus on
building resilience to climate change. Ahead of the
Secretary-General’s 2019 climate summit, we will
be collaborating with a range of actors, including
Governments, aid agencies, regional bodies and the
United Nations, to launch actions we hope will be
genuinely transformational in order to build climate
resilience. As i said, Madam President, we completely
agree with you that we need an improved understanding
of climate-related risks. We ourselves have been
working on climate-risk assessment and were among
the first countries to conduct a national climate-change
risk assessment. We will support other countries in
conducting their assessments. We have worked very

18-2191311/29

S/PV.8307

Maintenance of international peace and security

closely with experts in China, India and the United
States to look at complex systemic risks, including how
climate change interacts with security. Together with
the Chinese, we will develop a framework to monitor
climate-related risks continuously, which we hope to
launch later this year. Therefore, there is a great deal
of good work being done. We can all support each other
and ensure that we build on our progress, rather than
duplicate it.
I will conclude by saying that we have always
known, in particular in the United Nations, about
the interdependence between security, development,
stability and other issues, such as human rights. That
in itself is not a new concept; indeed, the Charter
of the United Nations alludes to it. It is true to say
that it is now all intensifying as the world become
increasingly complex. Above all, it is exemplified by
climate change, which was given a very moving voice
by Ms. Ibrahim’s testimony. I hope that we can all leave
here with renewed determination to put right some of
the problems highlighted by speakers.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
also are grateful for the convening of today’s meeting
on a very pressing and important subject. We thank
Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed and
Mr. Hassan Janabi, Minister of Water Resources of
Iraq, for their important briefings. We also thank
Ms. Hindou Ibrahim, civil society representative, for
her testimony, which I believe has inspired us all.
Peru believes it is crucial to understand that the
growing socioeconomic and environmental impacts of
climate change lead to humanitarian crises and conflicts,
which, because of their scope, could pose a threat to
international peace and security. We also believe that
the primary responsibility of the Security Council
in the maintenance of peace and security includes
resolving and preventing the emergence, recurrence or
worsening of conflicts and humanitarian crises, while
addressing their root causes, with a view to promoting
lasting peace. We therefore believe that the Council
must strengthen and systematize its coordination with
the United Nations system, in particular with those
bodies and agencies directly involved in preventing
and mitigating the negative effects of climate change,
especially with regard to the most vulnerable people.
We stress that such coordination should take into
account the competencies and mandates of the various
United Nations entities and promote synergies that
are conducive to addressing the particular needs and
12/29

11/07/2018

situations of risk, crisis or conflict that Member States
increasingly face. From the perspective of the Council,
we believe that entails having timely information on
the impact of climate change, both with regard to the
situations on its agenda and those in which preventive
action is necessary to maintain international peace
and security.
Peru is a country that is vulnerable to climate
change and natural disasters. The retreat of tropical
Andean glaciers has led to frequent droughts and
flooding, which have resulted in food insecurity and
new waves of migration, which in turn pose challenges
to lasting peace. The situation compels us to reaffirm
our commitment to multilateralism and to underscore
that growing global interdependence demands that
the Organization provide more coherent and effective
responses to common problems and challenges,
including climate change, poverty and inequality. In
that regard, we emphasize that the Security Council can
and should base its actions on a better understanding
of contemporary challenges and of the factors of crisis
and conflict, on a case by case basis, as well as of the
necessary tools to address them.
We therefore appreciate the fact that since March
2017, the Security Council has recognized the adverse
effects of climate change in areas such as the Sahel,
Somalia and Lake Chad, which affect tens of millions of
people. We especially appreciate that such recognition
confirms the need for responses from the international
community, and from the Council in particular. They
should be based on an adequate assessment of the risks
and the strategies to manage them. That accords with
the reforms advocated by the Secretary-General.
We conclude by stressing the importance of
working jointly on these issues, including with regional
and subregional organizations, financial institutions,
the private sector, academia and civil society, using
holistic strategies that are more coherent, effective
and efficient.
To summarize, let us work in a more coordinated
manner to face the great challenge that lies before us
within the scope of our respective competencies.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): We thank
you, Madam President, for convening this meeting. We
also would like to thank the Deputy Secretary-General,
Minister Janabi and Ms. Ibrahim for their important
and compelling briefings this morning.
18-21913

11/07/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

The task of addressing challenges to peace and
security is complex and is influenced by many factors.
The United States remains committed to strengthening
international security in a comprehensive manner,
and we recognize the efforts of the United Nations
in helping to advance our understanding of emerging
issues related to human security, including this one.
The Council most often is focused on armed conflict
as the most conventional threat to international peace
and security, but it is right that we also consider natural
phenomena and disasters such as droughts, monsoons,
tsunamis, earthquakes, hurricanes, desertification,
volcanic eruptions and other such events. They have
taken lives, destroyed homes, impacted resources
and caused widespread displacement both within and
beyond national borders. Unlike conflicts, where there
are sides to be taken, in response to these crises we
are all on the same side: the side of survival, recovery
and resilience.
In many parts of the world where vulnerable
populations suffer from natural disasters, displacement
and food and water scarcity, the United States
is partnering with Governments and regional
organizations to bring relief to those who need it
most. We are applying innovative solutions to help
communities better prepare for and respond to
climate-related pressures. One example of United
States assistance is in Iraq, where high temperatures
and drought conditions present a particularly daunting
challenge. We are the single largest donor to Iraqi-led
stabilization programming supported by the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP), which
includes projects to restore access to household water
and electricity in areas formerly under the control of
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham.
The United States has provided $265 million to the
UNDP Funding Facility for Immediate Stabilization
since 2014. Those stabilization activities have helped
set the conditions for more than 3 million Iraqis to
return to their homes. That funding from the United
States has enabled UNDP to fix water treatment plants
and water networks, as well as to repair bridges across
the Tigris and allow for greater freedom of movement.
At the request of the Government of Iraq, the United
States has also played an essential role in maintaining
Iraq’s critical water infrastructure, especially at the
Mosul Dam, the structural integrity of which was in
question and which is vital to water management for

S/PV. 8307

millions of Iraqis living downstream. At significant
expense, the United States deployed the United States
Army Corps of Engineers to oversee the contracts
awarded by Iraq to an Italian firm for emergency grouting
and dam maintenance. The ongoing stabilization of the
dam’s foundation will allow the Iraqi Government to
store more water to mitigate scarcity resulting from
severe drought.
More broadly, the United States is also working
closely with Sweden, Norway and the Netherlands to
address specific challenges associated with shared
waters through the Shared Waters Partnership managed
by the Stockholm International Water Institute. We
have been working together to promote the cooperative
management of shared waters around the world where
water is, or may become, a source of tension.
As the Lake Chad region grapples with its own
water management issues, the United States is listening
carefully to learn more about the challenges citizens
there face and welcomes further dialogue on efforts to
promote sustainable development there.
The United States acknowledges the special
challenges that small island developing States face in
achieving sustainable development, challenges related
to their size, geographic isolation from markets and
limited infrastructure and institutional capacity. We
have heard from our friends in the Pacific that they
consider climate change to be an existential threat to
their populations, and we understand the priority they
place on the United Nations system and the international
community supporting their unique needs.
Our support for small island developing States
takes many forms. We are taking concrete action to
address priorities identified in the Samoa Pathway,
the Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation
of the Programme of Action for the Sustainable
Development of Small Island Developing States
and other bilateral and multilateral initiatives. We
participate in the Small Island Developing States
Action Platform, and, in addition, the United States is
seeking new ways to improve cooperation and align our
programmes more closely with the priorities of small
island developing States.
Disaster risk reduction and building resilience to
cope with natural disasters are important elements of
promoting sustainable development and eradicating
extreme poverty. As appropriate, that should be

18-2191313/29

S/PV.8307

Maintenance of international peace and security

11/07/2018

integrated into policies, plans programmes and budgets
at all levels.

tomorrow, affecting the stability of our countries and
our societies in ways we could not have prevented.

As a global leader in innovation, the United
States continues to support access to cleaner and
more efficient energy sources; the promotion of
effective and sustainable land use practices and other
activities aimed at improving resilience, particularly
where such support benefits broader mutual economic
development, and foreign policy and national security
objectives. The United States wants to work with other
countries to continue advancing the development and
deployment of a broad array of technologies that will
ultimately enable us to achieve greater resilience in
the face of these daunting challenges. Once again, we
appreciate this opportunity to reflect on these issues.

In this context, I would like to share five main
messages with the Council this morning.

Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset I would like to thank you, Madam President, for
taking the initiative to convene this Council debate on
the problem of climate change and its consequences for
international peace and security. It is a critical issue to
which we must pay all the attention it deserves.
I would also like to thank the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Amina Mohammed, for her important
presentation, as well as for her commitment and her
efforts in the fight against climate change. I also
warmly thank the Minister of Water Resources of Iraq,
Mr. Hassan Janabi, and Ms. Hindou Ibrahim for their
very enlightening and inspiring statements.
Not a day goes by without an increasing number of
us falling victim to the consequences of climate change
and environmental degradation. While extreme climate
events are often the most visible, other phenomena
with less immediate effects — such as droughts, the
salinization of soils and rising water levels — contribute
to land degradation, coastal erosion and the depletion
of water resources. Those negative impacts on natural
resources, in the context of vulnerable populations and
economies, can generate or re-ignite conflicts between
communities, provoke population displacement and
jeopardize international peace and security.
The eloquent statements we have heard this morning
are a stark reminder that the impacts of climate change
are imultiplying the risks to international stability. That
is already the tough reality in many parts of the world,
from the Sahel to the Middle East. Yet it also constitutes
a threat to many other regions that are stable today
but which will suffer the impacts of climate change
14/29

My first message is a call to action. As our
speakers emphasized, the threat of climate change to
international peace and security is an objective fact that
we cannot deny. Its effects are already being painfully
felt and they will go on automatically increasing. From
now on, we cannot turn a blind eye. It is our collective
responsibility to tackle this existential challenge headon and use all the tools at our disposal to address it. It is
urgent, because every day lost makes the threat worse.
My second message has to do with the institutional
debate that often resurfaces in our statements on the
subject. Considering the urgency and importance of
these challenges, we must rise above institutional
arguments. The General Assembly and the Security
Council must speak out on this threat to international
peace and security, which concerns us all. However, I
want to reassure everyone that the fact we are discussing
the effects of climate change on international security
here in the Council in no way undermines the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC) or the Paris Climate Change Agreement,
which remain the multilateral frame of reference for the
fight against climate change. In that regard, I would like
to remind all concerned that our priority is ratifying the
Paris Agreement and that we will have to collectively
adopt rules for implementing it in December, under the
Polish presidency of the twenty-fourth Conference of the
Parties to the UNFCCC. That is an essential condition
for maintaining the positive momentum launched in
Paris in 2015 in the fight against climate change and
for ensuring that every country implements ambitious
climate policies, as many countries, including China,
for instance, have already done.
That is how we will be able to fulfil our
collective commitment to keep the rise in the average
temperature below 2 degrees Celsius and, if possible,
1.5 degrees. But the fact is that when we speak of the
effects of climate change on international peace and
security — and this is my third message — we are
engaging in the process of conflict prevention. Here
in New York, the international community must take
ownership of the matter and decide to cooperate in
dealing with the impact on international peace and
security produced by the effects of climate change and
18-21913

11/07/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

establish genuine preventive diplomacy to do that. In
that regard, I want to voice our strong support for the
Secretary-General’s vision and ambition regarding
conflict prevention and the peace continuum, which
must comprehend all destabilizing factors, including
those related to the effects of climate change and the
collapse of biodiversity.
My fourth message concerns the ways in which
we can ensure that the United Nations has a robust
analytical capacity in this area. In that regard, we
welcome the progress that the Council has made
in the past few months in recognizing the adverse
effects of climate change in various regions such as
the Lake Chad basin, Somalia and Mali, as well as
in calling for better assessment and management of
climate change and ecological risks. Those advances
should now be translated into concrete action. That
demands that the United Nations develop its capacity
to analyse risks in order to warn us about the security
risks related to climate change in every region of the
world. The Deputy Secretary-General has reminded us
of the remarkable initiatives that she has undertaken
with the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the
Sahel, and France fully supports and actively endorses
those crucial major efforts. What we want to do is to
expand that approach to other regions of the world.
It will now also be necessary to take a next step and
recommend measures and actions to be implemented
by national Governments, United Nations agencies
and regional organizations to both prevent the adverse
effects of climate change on security and protect and
restore biodiversity.
Finally, my fifth message is that the entire United
Nations system must mobilize to tackle the challenges
related to the security implications of climate change.
The Secretariat, the General Assembly and the Security
Council have a shared responsibility in that regard.
They must rely on all of the specialized agencies and
institutions dealing with the environment, together
with the United Nations Environment Programme; they
must work on climate with the UNFCCC, the World
Meteorological Organization and the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change; on agriculture with the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and
on desertification with the United Nations Convention
to Combat Desertification in order to come up with
appropriate analyses, propose courses of action and
implement them on the ground.

S/PV. 8307

In conclusion, I would like to assure you, Madam
President, of France’s resolute commitment to working
alongside you to build a multilateral, twenty-firstcentury diplomacy that fully integrates the effects of
climate change into its approach to conflict prevention.
In the face of the reality of climate change, one of the
greatest challenges of our time, we must move forward
together and with our eyes wide open.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank Deputy Secretary-General
Amina Mohammed, as well as today’s briefers,
Mr. Hassan Janabi, Minister of Water Resources of
Iraq, and Ms. Hindou Ibrahim, the representative of the
International Indigenous Peoples’ Forum on Climate
Change. We would like to welcome President Waqa
of Nauru and to acknowledge the great significance
that climate change holds for his country. Russia also
considers this issue extremely important. We are one
of the leaders of the international climate process, both
because of our contribution to reducing greenhouse-gas
emissions and our efforts to universalize the regime on
climate change under the auspices of the United Nations
Frameworks Convention on Climate Change. My
country is making active use of innovative approaches
based on introducing cutting-edge technologies.
My statement may not be in tune with those of other
Security Council members before me today. That said,
however, I have to say that we are disappointed about
today’s Council meeting, and not because we object to
collective efforts to combat climate change. Quite the
contrary. We refuse to be reconciled to the fact that in
our view today’s meeting is yet another attempt to link
the issue of preserving the environment to threats to
international peace and security. Regrettably, we are
creating the illusion among those who follow our work
that the Council is now taking on the climate issue and
that will immediately bring about a turning point. That
is a dangerous illusion and a clear deception.
In various countries and regions, attempts are
being made to ascribe a worsening socioeconomic and
political situation to the climate factor. The resulting
conclusion is that climate change is a threat to security
generally, and yet those who promulgate that idea do
not as a rule make the effort to bring scientifically
sound, specific details to bear or clear explanations
of the notions of security, conflict, threats or stability
as they relate to the climate issue. These words are
used in a very general sense while demanding that we
recognize highly abstract connections. Such actions not

18-2191315/29

S/PV.8307

Maintenance of international peace and security

only do not help anyone, they mislead everybody and
distract the Council from dealing with issues where it
can make a genuine contribution to the quest for the
right solution.
I will say it again. While we believe that climate
change is a grave threat to us all, the Council has neither
the specialized expertise nor the tools to put together
viable solutions for effectively combating climate
change. I am once again obliged to point out that climate
change is not a universal challenge in the context of
international security but should rather be addressed
with regard to the specifics of each situation. Besides
that, the role of the United Nations is to give support
to States, which have the primary responsibility for
responding to security challenges within their national
borders and for independently determining strategies
for that. Our international Organization should adhere
strictly to the principle of the division of labour in its
work and in the understanding that each of the main
United Nations organs should operate within its area
of responsibility.
The basis for introducing climate issues in the
Security Council is frequently the premise that climate
change is a so-called threat multiplier and a catalyst for
acts of violence. If we are so principled about this, why
are we always silent during the discussions initiated on
this pretext about a no less serious aspect of the issue,
the damage to the environment that results from violent
military operations and unilateral sanctions, a glaring
example of which have been the bombings of Yugoslavia,
Libya and Syria by Western coalitions? It is strange,
to say the least, that no speakers today have expressed
concern about the massive environmental damage that
such action inflicts, not to mention the colossal harm to
the health of the citizens of those countries.
It is no secret that NATO’s bombing of the territory of
the former Yugoslavia using munitions with radioactive
compounds, chiefly depleted uranium, that pollute the
environment, spawned a surge in cancers and had an
adverse impact on the general and reproductive health
of the population living in the affected areas, which to
this day still need decontamination and rehabilitation.
The situation following the Libyan venture has been
equally tragic. The NATO rocket strikes and bombings
of its oil infrastructure, as well as the operations by
armed opposition groups supported by the West in
the vicinity of oil enterprises, led to their partial or
total destruction, colossal fires and pollution of the
16/29

11/07/2018

atmosphere with the burning of oil and petroleum
by-products.
I should not omit to point out that the ongoing
illegal presence of Western coalition forces on Syrian
territory is an obstacle to the restoration of Government
control throughout the country and therefore to the
implementation of its national legislative norms on
the use of natural resources, including environmental
norms, and in general to restoring domestic activity in
those areas, including household waste management.
The situation is exacerbated by unilateral anti-Syrian
sanctions that deprive the country of the possibility
of buying the equipment and materials needed for
environmentally safe industrial production.
An alarming situation is developing with regard to
the work of the Donetsk water filtration station, which
has been subject to regular shelling by Ukrainian armed
forces. If the chlorine gas in its storage tanks leaks, it
could be an environmental and humanitarian disaster. It
is hard to believe that the initators of such actions were
unaware of the negative consequences of environmental
pollution by radioactive materials or the destruction of
oil facilities. However, they continue to choose to pay
no attention to it and are in no hurry to help to mitigate
the damage that has been done. In that connection, we
believe that issues of environmental pollution resulting
from criminal military operations and illegal unilateral
sanctions can be viewed as threats that at the very least
are no less significant to the climate problem.
With regard to climate change, I want to say once
again that the constant securitization, as it were, of
this vital issue irreparably undermines the process of
our joint quest to resolve it. This year there are plans
to adopt guidelines for the implementation of the
Paris Climate Change Agreement. At the same time,
the member States of the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change will discuss joint action
and coordination on climate-related efforts in the
Talanoa Dialogue Platform, whose founding principles
are depoliticizing climate discussions, preventing
mutual blame-laying and striving to understand what
we can get done by joining forces.
We are just as eager as Ms. Hindou Ibrahim, in
her emotional statement today, to ensure that climate
change does not interfere with the lives of indigenous
peoples. Russia is also helping small island States
through its contributions to the United Nations
Development Programme. We are ready to help and are
18-21913

11/07/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

doing all we can to ensure that the collective efforts
of the specialized entities and mechanisms can solve
these problems, but it is clear that today’s discussion
in the Council is taking the issue in the exact opposite
direction, to speculations on the climate issue and its
exploitation to solve purely political problems, impose
one-sided standards and abandon practical action for
demagoguery and public-relations posturing.
We believe it is essential to allow all the United
Nations mechanisms related to combating climate
change to do their work in peace, without creating
artificially intersecting approaches that merely obstruct
the advancement of our shared interests. Only through
joint practical action, conducted through the existing
expert formats, can we achieve our aim of preserving
the global climate in the interests of the current and
future generations of humankind.
Ms. Cordova Soría (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): I would like to welcome you,
Madam President, and to commend the work that the
Swedish delegation has been doing as President of the
Security Council. I also want to welcome the presence
of Mr. Eugene Philip Rhuggenaath, Prime Minister of
Curaçao of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, and to
thank Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed,
Mr. Hassan Janabi, Minister of Water Resources of
Iraq, and Ms. Hindou Ibrahim of the International
Indigenous Peoples’ Forum on Climate Change for
their briefings.
Climate change is one of the most important global
challenges of our time. We want to emphasize the fact
that developing countries, despite historically being
the ones that contribute the least to climate change,
continue to suffer the most from its adverse effects and
from the increasing frequency and intensity of natural
disasters. According to the Sustainable Development
Goals Report 2017, between 1990 and 2015 more than
1.6 million people died due to the effects of climate
change. Moreover, between 2000 and 2013, an average
of 211 million people were affected due to increasingly
extreme natural disasters.
Climate change threatens not only prospects for
sustainable development, but also the very existence
and survival of the countries, societies and ecosystems
of Mother Earth. We deplore the fact that some of the
most highly industrialized countries have not taken any
responsibility for the problems generated by climate
change. Climate change has become an escape valve to

S/PV. 8307

avoid discussing basic issues such as how the model
of capitalist development, excessive consumption
and wasteful production causes or exacerbates the
problems of environmental degradation and depletion
of resources, thereby impeding the sustainable
development of our peoples. In some countries, climate
change is an existential threat, while in others it means
the loss of biodiversity, an increase in endangered
species or the loss of food security. This shortage of
natural resources like water can lead to increased
social tension. Moreover, as the sea level rises, the
conditions in many coastal areas and small islands can
progressively deteriorate until they become simply
uninhabitable or even disappear.
All those factors could make the population
vulnerable to social conflicts or forced to leave their
homes; we would then be faced with the displacement
of hundreds of thousands of people as climate migrants,
possibly generating new conflicts or aggravating
existing ones. The adverse effects of climate change
have a series of consequences, both direct and indirect,
for the effective enjoyment of human rights, including
the right to life, the right to adequate food, the right
to adequate housing, the right to safe drinking water
and sanitation, the right to development and the right
to peace.
The challenges facing the Security Council in the
fulfilment of its mandate are indeed many and complex,
but we believe that those that truly jeopardize the
efforts of the Council and our Organization to prevent
the breach of international peace and security are
linked to the insufficient application of the mechanisms
provided for in the Charter of the United Nations.
We are convinced that it is essential to maintain the
focus on the powers and mandates of each organ,
carrying out the coordination tasks that allow for the
best alternatives to face the problems emerging from
conflicts, thereby avoiding the unnecessary duplication
of work and, above all, overlap and interference in the
specific mandates of the other organs.
We agree that climate change can generate possible
causes of conflict and social tension. Nevertheless, we
believe that the Security Council is not the appropriate
organ or venue to address that issue. We are convinced
that the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change and the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change are the main international and intergovernmental
platforms for confronting, mitigating and adapting to
climate change and its effects.

18-2191317/29

S/PV.8307

Maintenance of international peace and security

If we intend to address this sensitive and delicate
situation, we must essentially analyse the problem’s
underlying causes. In that regard, Bolivia regrets that
the most industrialized countries, instead of confronting
causes such as the allegedly civilizing model, which is
based on a voracious financial architecture in which the
wealth of the majority is concentrated in the hands of
a few, continue to promote policies of war with yearly
increases to its enormous budget. We are convinced
that the military machinery of the most powerful
countries on the planet has been busy destroying
entire towns and innocent civilizations with the sole
desire of appropriating oil, gas or strategic minerals.
The high humanitarian cost of these policies of war
and appropriation of natural resources goes hand in
hand with the military expenses they represent, at the
expense of the population and perpetuating the cycle of
poverty, need and confrontation.
In that sense, we echo the statement made by
President Evo Morales during his speech during the
high-level segment of the General Assembly in 2017,
when he said:
“Inequality is immoral. If 800 million people
suffer from hunger, it is not because there is a lack
of food. If millions of children die from infection,
it is not because there is a lack of medicine ... If
there are poor people in the world, it is not because
there are no resources ... Due to war, terrorism
and other conflicts, we are experiencing the worst
humanitarian crisis”. (A/72/PV.6, p. 15)
We call on these so-called developed countries to
assume their responsibilities in the framework of the
principle of common but differentiated responsibilities
through financing, technology transfer and capacitybuilding in mitigation and adaptation to climate change.
As a result of the appropriation and exploitation of the
natural resources of many of our countries, today we
cannot consider ourselves industrialized.

11/07/2018

presentation was fully aligned with the purpose of this
meeting and the heavy responsibility that briefers have
to be as objective as possible and not be partial. That is
very critical and we should learn from today’s meeting.
Frankly, what we heard today almost validates the
concerns expressed by some colleagues.
I wish to recognize the presence among us of the
President of Nauru and the Prime Ministers of Curaçao,
Kingdom of the Netherlands. I would also like to greet
the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kazakhstan.
Climate change is one of the greatest threats to
the entire global community. No country can remain
unaffected, as the Deputy Secretary-General said.
Its devastating consequences not only undermine
development gains, but they also threaten the very
existence of our communities. Although their
contribution is negligible, it is well known that it is
developing countries, particularly the most vulnerable
among them that literally know nothing about how long
they can survive, that disproportionately suffer the
impacts of climate change.
We therefore underline that climate change
requires urgent and concerted global action and
responses, anchored primarily in promoting inclusive
and sustainable development. That is also why what we
did in 2015, when we unanimously adopted the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and its 17 Goals
was so historic and the expression of multilateralism at
its best. It is with that in mind that we concur with the
assessment of the Council, as reflected in presidential
statement S/PRST/2011/15, that
“possible adverse effects of climate change may, in
the long run, aggravate certain existing threats to
international peace and security”.

Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We once again thank
Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed for her
briefing. I would like to express our appreciation to her
and to the President of the Council and the Chairperson
the African Union for the very important mission they
conducted very recently to two African countries that
are among those seriously affected by climate change.
That visit was very meaningful.

We recognize that climate change, in certain
circumstances, could create conditions for conflict or
exacerbate it. In communities where there is heavy
dependence on natural resources for livelihoods, the
likelihood of intercommunal violence or cross-border
or regional conflicts is high. The situation in the Lake
Chad basin or the Sahel region is a clear manifestation
of the link between climate change and conflicts, and
the briefing by the Deputy Secretary-General yesterday
(see S/PV.8306), following her joint high-level visit
with the African Union, highlighted that aspect.

I would also like to thank the other briefers,
particularly Ms. Hindou Ibrahim, whose passionate

On the other hand, it is also important to note
that climate change or climate-related environmental

18/29

18-21913

11/07/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8307

change does not automatically result in conflict. The
lack of durable and comprehensive solutions aimed
at addressing climate-change-induced migration,
insecurities, increased tensions and competition for
resources could lead to localized or cross-border
conflicts in various parts of the world. In this regard,
addressing the root causes of such climate-induced
conflicts remains of vital importance. We need to do
so in a comprehensive manner; this would require
taking concrete measures to reduce the vulnerabilities
of States to the impact of climate change and creating
a cooperative framework to mitigate such impacts,
including climate-induced migration and displacement.

with the Charter of the United Nations, has a role in
analysing the conflict and the security implications
and finding a path to peace and security. The Council,
in collaboration with the relevant regional and
subregional organizations, could also take concrete
measures to manage climate-change-induced security
risks and conflicts, in line with comprehensive
national and regional priorities. For instance, regional
initiatives such as the one by the Economic Community
of West African States to conduct a comprehensive
study and recommend an action plan to address
climate-change-induced conflicts in West Africa could
be cited as an example.

Redoubling our efforts to ensure sustainable
development for current and future generations
in the context of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, the Addis Ababa Action Agenda, the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, the Paris Agreement on Climate Change and
the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction
2015-2030, inter alia, is critical. A genuine commitment
to multilateralism should make this self-evident.
Furthermore, ensuring the full implementation of the
Paris Agreement and of our commitments under various
frameworks aimed at addressing the adverse impacts
of climate change is a prerequisite for addressing
climate-change-induced conflicts or security risks.

In conclusion, I would stress the need for all relevant
United Nations organs, within their own mandates, to
take concrete measures in line with their national plans
and priorities to address the root causes and negative
effects of climate change and related security threats
or conflicts.

In this regard, all countries, particularly developed
ones, should take concrete measures to honour their
commitments and pledges in line with the Paris
Agreement by providing sufficient and sustained
climate financing to developing countries, particularly
the most vulnerable. The facilitation of the transfer
of appropriate technology ought, naturally, to be part
of this obligation. Such efforts, in our view, would
complement national and regional efforts to address
the adverse impacts of climate change and prevent
climate-change-related security threats and conflicts.

Climate change affects human survival and
development. It is a daunting global challenge. In recent
years, the concerted efforts of countries to protect the
global environment and address climate change have
yielded remarkable results. However, responding to
climate change and achieving sustainable development
remains an urgent long-term task for the international
community. Given the current circumstances, we must
work together to address climate change.

To that end, the General Assembly and its relevant
subsidiary bodies and the Economic and Social Council,
as well as the relevant intergovernmental frameworks
established to address the root causes of climate change
and its adverse impacts, should continue to play the
primary role, as affirmed by the Security Council in its
presidential statement S/PRST/2011/15.
Where the impacts of climate change have become
a threat to the maintenance of international peace
and security, the Security Council, in accordance

Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
should like at the outset, Madam, to welcome your
presence here in New York to preside over this debate.
I also thank the Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Amina
Mohammed, and Mr. Hassan Janabi, Minister for Water
Resources of the Republic of Iraq, for their briefings,
and Ms. Ibrahim, representative of civil society in
Chad, for her statement.

First, it is important for the international
community to foster a communal vision of a shared
future for humankind and actively rise to global
challenges. Countries must strengthen exchanges and
cooperation to respond to climate change and provide
assistance to developing countries through technology
transfer and capacity-building. The United Nations and
the relevant international and regional organizations
should enhance their coordination and play a positive
role in addressing climate change.
Secondly, the international community must uphold
equality and justice and ensure that international rules

18-2191319/29

S/PV.8307

Maintenance of international peace and security

are effectively respected and implemented. Countries
should fully respect the international agreements
concluded in the area of climate change, reject a zerosum mentality, enhance benefit- and responsibilitysharing and endeavour to achieve mutual benefits and a
win-win outcome.
Thirdly, the international community must
implement the Paris Agreement in earnest. It is
important to take into account countries’ national
circumstances; respect their differences, in particular
those of developing countries; adhere to the principle
of common but differentiated responsibility; and help
developing countries, especially the African countries
and small island developing States, to strengthen
their capacity for adaptation, mitigation, management
and financing.
Fourthly, the international community must build a
new concept of common, comprehensive, cooperative and
sustainable security to properly tackle climate-related
security risks. At present, security threats of all kinds
continue to emerge. All countries must take integrated
measures, strengthen international cooperation and
embark on the path to sustainable development, with a
view to addressing climate-related security risks such
as land and water resource depletion, food insecurity,
humanitarian crises and mass migration flows through
the achievement of common development.
China believes that all Member States should, in
line with the Charter of the United Nations and their
obligations under the relevant documents, and based on
the functions and divisions of labour of United Nations
organs, promptly address and properly respond to
climate-change issues.
Upholding the right approach to justice and
interests, China has been participating in international
cooperation on climate change. We stand ready to
continue to implement our commitment to SouthSouth cooperation on climate change and support other
developing countries in responding to climate-change
challenges. We are committed to working with the rest
of the international community in a concerted effort
to safeguard our common homeland, on which our
survival depends.
Mr. Djédjé (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I wish to welcome the presence among
us today of Mr. Baron Divavesi Waqa, President
of Nauru; Mr. Eugene Philip Rhuggenaath, Prime
Minister of Curaçao, Kingdom of the Netherlands;
20/29

11/07/2018

and Mr. Yerzhan Ashikbayev, Deputy Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Kazakhstan. I wish also to thank
Ms. Amina Mohammed, Deputy Secretary-General;
Mr. Hassan Janabi, Minister for Water Resources
of the Republic of Iraq; and Ms. Hindou Ibrahim,
representative of the non-governmental organization
International Indigenous Peoples Forum on Climate
Change. We found their enlightening briefings and
important recommendations very instructive on the
issue of climate change and its growing linkage to the
intercommunal tensions and conflicts plaguing many
parts of the world.
In 2007, upon the initiative of the United Kingdom,
the Security Council took up issues relating to the
effects of climate change on peace and security for
the first time. Since then, the Council’s interest in
this issue has been strengthened and today reflects
a global awareness of the need to develop collective
and sustainable responses to this challenge facing our
planet. Indeed, the Council’s commitment to promoting
sustainable solutions to the impacts of climate change
on peace and security has become concrete over the
years through the adoption of numerous resolutions
and presidential statements, including resolution 2349
(2017) and presidential statements S/PRST/2011/15 and
S/PRST/2018/3. In these texts, the Council expressed its
concern about the effects of climate change, considering
them to be factors that aggravate existing situations
or situations that might trigger crises, particularly in
regions where pre-existing sociopolitical and economic
vulnerabilities constitute fertile ground for the outbreak
of armed violence.
The situation with regard to Lake Chad, on which
some 20 million people depend, is by itself emblematic
of the devastating effects of environmental shortages on
peace and stability. Having lost a large part of its water
volume, the Lake Chad basin region, like the Sahel
region, symbolizes all the environmental, security and
humanitarian challenges facing the African continent.
For the populations living on the shores of Lake
Chad, who derive most of their income and means of
subsistence from this source, the decline in water and
fishery resources can be a factor of tension and even
cause an upsurge in jihadist activity, which is the thrust
of resolution 2349 (2017), recognizing the effects of
climate change on the stability of the Lake Chad region.
For Côte d’Ivoire, this is an essential question
whose undeniable impact on peace and security
invites us to go beyond the usual divisions concerning
18-21913

11/07/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

the relevance of the bodies where these questions
should be discussed, in order to provide consensual
answers capable of reversing the climate change
curve and its harmful effects on peace and stability,
in a continent already facing too many challenges.
My country therefore takes this welcome opportunity
to stress the need to take into account the security
implications of climate change in the analysis of the
root causes of conflicts and in the formulation of
strategies for their prevention and management, in
accordance with the recommendations of presidential
statements S/PRST/2011/15 and S/PRST/2018/3. This
is particularly necessary when climate factors may
pose challenges to the implementation of the Council’s
mandates or compromise peacebuilding processes in a
post-crisis context.
Côte d’Ivoire, an essentially agricultural country,
has not been immune to the large-scale reduction in its
forest cover, largely linked both to human activity and
to a decline in rainfall, itself induced by the climate
change observed in recent decades. From 16 million
hectares of forest in the 1950s, the remaining area of
forest, according to United Nations estimates, had
fallen by 2015 to less than 3.4 million hectares. This
worrying phenomenon, also experienced by other
countries in sub-Saharan Africa, constitutes — along
with desertification, the depletion of arable land
and water shortages due to prolonged episodes of
drought — factors of instability in regions where access
to and control of resources have become sociopolitical
issues generating conflicts, which sometimes take
dramatic identity and religious turns.
Shortages of water and cultivable land as a result
of climate change have exacerbated migration and
demographic pressures on scarce existing resources,
as evidenced by the environmental, security and
humanitarian situation in the Lake Chad basin. Indeed,
according to Food and Agriculture Organization
estimates, 6.9 million people are food insecure, and
2.5 million people are internally displaced in this
area of the Lake Chad basin, where Boko Haram and
transnational criminal networks have taken root, taking
advantage of local vulnerabilities and contradictions.
The establishment of these terrorist and criminal
networks is also facilitated by the radicalization of a
fringe of young people confronted with unemployment
and poverty. Moreover, the Sahel region, which is
also still facing the effects of climate change, is
experiencing a resurgence of autonomist movements,

S/PV. 8307

driven by the desire to change political institutions and
governance mechanisms.
The Peace and Security Council of the African
Union, concerned about the security challenges related
to climate change, organized, during its 774th meeting,
held on 21 May 2018, in Addis Ababa, a public meeting
devoted to the link between climate change and conflicts
in Africa and the response to security implications. My
country endorses the relevant recommendations of this
meeting, including the need to strengthen the resilience
of African States in the face of climate change, as well
as the recommendations’ integration into national and
regional conflict-prevention strategies. The Peace and
Security Council also reiterated the importance of
multilateralism in the fight against climate change,
of which the Paris Agreement on Climate Change,
of 12 December 2015 remains a perfect illustration,
and urged the signatory States of the Agreement to
implement the relevant commitments.
The Peace and Security Council further encourages
the international community to support subregional
strategies to address the root causes of conflicts,
including those proposed by the first Summit of Heads
of State and Government of the Climate Commission
of the Congo Basin, held on 29 April, in Brazzaville,
and the International Conference on Saving Lake Chad,
held 26 to 28 February 2018, in Abuja. The Peace and
Security Council also stressed the importance of the
preventive approach by emphasizing the strengthening
of the capacities of national and community earlywarning and early-response mechanisms, such as the
early warning and response network of the Economic
Community of West African States, as well as the
integration into their indicators of the premises of
community violence, climatic factors and their effects
on peace and security.
Côte d’Ivoire would like to draw the attention of the
Security Council to the existence in Africa of numerous
initiatives based on the commitment of States to taking
ownership of their collective security within multilateral
frameworks that favour a preventive approach through
dialogue and the peaceful settlement of disputes related
to the management of natural resources and the climate.
These subregional approaches, which enable Member
States, united by the ideals of solidarity, sharing
and peace, to work together to strengthen peace and
security, a guarantee of sustainable development, are
only waiting to be supported by the Security Council.

18-2191321/29

S/PV.8307

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): Throughout this week, we have been
addressing issues of paramount importance related to
the maintenance of peace and security. The Republic of
Equatorial Guinea once again thanks and congratulates
the Swedish presidency and Foreign Minister Margot
Wallström for bringing to the table the issue we are
discussing this morning, namely, “Maintenance of
international peace and security: risks related to
climate change”.
We also thank Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed, who has been with us during these
discussions, for her briefing and reflections; Ms. Hindou
Ibrahim of the International Indigenous Peoples Forum
on Climate Change, who has presented us with a stark
vision of the reality of the effects of climate change
and the risks it poses to peace and security at the local,
national and regional levels; and the Iraqi Minister of
Water Resources, Mr. Hassan Janabi, for his illustrative
reports that make us see more clearly the complex issue
of establishing the relationship between climate change
and the maintenance of peace and security, that is, the
risks that climate change poses to the world’s peace
and security.
On behalf of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea, I
welcome the presence among us of His Excellency the
President of Narau, the Prime Minister of Curaçao,
Kingdom of the Netherlands, and the Deputy Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Kazakhstan.
During a visit that Nigerien President Mahamadou
Issoufou made to the Lake Chad region in March 2017,
he told those accompanying him that he did not believe
that Boko Haram would have taken root without the
shrinking of Lake Chad, which has lost 90 per cent of
its surface area since the 1960s, with devastating effect
on local livelihoods and existence.
Shortly after that visit, the Security Council
adopted resolution 2349 (2017), which addressed the
multifaceted dimensions of the Boko Haram conflict.
Among its many elements, the resolution recognized
the adverse effects of climate and ecological
changes, among other factors, on the stability of the
region, including through water scarcity, drought,
desertification, land degradation and food insecurity. It
emphasized the need for by Governments and the United
Nations to undertake appropriate risk assessments and
adopt risk management strategies in relation to those
climate-related factors.
22/29

11/07/2018

It should be recalled that in January, the Security
Council adopted presidential statement S/PRST/2018/3,
which addressed the activities undertaken by the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
in the areas of conflict prevention, mediation and good
offices, and welcomed the efforts of the countries of
the region to combat terrorism and transnational crime.
The statement used the language of resolution 2349
(2017), which recognized the adverse effects of climate
change and ecological changes, among other factors,
on the stability of West Africa and the Sahel, thereby
reflecting the security implications of those factors for
the region.
For Equatorial Guinea, international peace and
security are threatened by various elements, each
representing a different challenge to the international
community. In addition to the threats posed by
political, religious and terrorist agendas, the climate
change affecting the entirety of our planet undoubtedly
presents new risks, raising those already in existence
to more dangerous and violent levels. In fact, climate
change affects basic and fundamental aspects of human
life, as we have already mentioned, such as access
to drinking water, the deterioration of land quality
to produce food, resulting in food shortages, and the
reduction of land suitable for living. All those worrying
aspects intensify the struggle among different groups
for control of scarce resources, thereby increasing
the risks and dangers of conflicts in various parts of
the planet.
Coping with climate change no longer depends
solely on scientists and academics. It has also become a
high priority political issue that needs to be addressed
frequently so as to ensure progress in achieving the
related objectives. The Republic of Equatorial Guinea
believes and suggests that the climate issue should
be included in all reports submitted to the Security
Council on the maintenance of peace and security, as is
the issue of women and children in conflict, in order to
better understand and address the adverse implications
of climate change on various conflicts.
For Equatorial Guinea, a key question is how the
debate on this issue can contribute to the Council fully
assuming its commitment to climate change. Another
question is how to improve the analysis that the Security
Council receives on how and where climate-related
issues are a factor of conflict or insecurity. That is
why we strongly advocate the improvement of the
18-21913

11/07/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8307

analyses and information on the subject provided by the
Secretary-General.

challenge is to act together. Every country should share
the responsibility to act.

In conclusion, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
once again congratulates Sweden on its decision to
raise this key issue and expresses its commitment to
supporting the international community’s action to
combat the adverse effects of climate change.

The effective prevention of conflicts that have
resulted from climate change is definitely more cost
effective than addressing their consequences. That is
why the focus should be put primarily on preventing
and mitigating the root causes of conflicts and natural
disasters, as well as on enhancing countries’ adaptive
capacities, strengthening resilience and reducing their
vulnerability to climate change.

Mr. Lewicki (Poland): At the outset, let me thank
the Swedish presidency for organizing this highly
important debate. I would also like to thank Deputy
Secretary-General Amina Mohammed and Minister
Hassan Janabi for their excellent briefings. Last but
not least, I am very grateful to Ms. Hindou Ibrahim for
her very touching statement and for having reminded
us, the Security Council, of our responsibility to tackle
the security challenges resulting from climate change,
because we are talking about the effects of climate
change on the lives of ordinary people. We also welcome
the President of Nauru and look forward to hearing
his statement on how climate change is affecting his
country, as has been mentioned by several speakers.
It is a kind of existential threat to a number of small
island States.
More than 10 years ago, the Security Council
discussed the link between climate change and security
for the first time (see S/PV.5663), as mentioned by
Ambassador Karen Pierce. Since then, the situation
has not improved. Since then, the number of climate
change-related conflicts has only increased. That is
why we believe that it is more timely than ever that we
are having this debate right now. It falls fully within
the Security Council’s mandate. If the Security Council
does not address this topic on climate-related security
risks, we will fail the people on the ground and fail to
deliver on our mandate.
Having said that, I wish to stress that we simply
cannot neglect the negative impacts of climate change
on global peace and security. What we are seeing, as
Ms. Ibrahim oultined in her statement, is that those
impacts are threat multipliers that can aggravate poverty,
environmental degradation and social tensions, and can
lead to escalations of local and regional conflicts.
Poland would like to underscore the inevitable need
of acting in the spirit of multilateralism. The problem of
climate change is not a problem only of the affected or
risk-exposed countries. It is also a global challenge of
the whole international community and needs a global
response. The only effective way to respond to that

We believe that the Security Council is key to
enhancing the United Nations response to conflicts,
in particular in the context of conflict prevention
in regions affected by adverse effects of climate
change, such as the Lake Chad basin, West Africa,
the Sahel and Somalia. The Council should underline
the need for better climate-related security risk
assessment and management strategies, as has been
discussed by a number of previous speakers. In order
to fulfil such a task, the Security Council should be
equipped with accurate climate-related security risk
information, analysis and early-warning mechanisms.
We cannot overestimate the critical role of reliable
data about climate-change related risks, which is
key to avoiding conflicts, building resilience and
preventing natural disasters. Therefore, we believe that
in order to implement adequate prevention measures,
comprehensive information from the field is inevitable.
All States and organizations should use the full
potential of their field offices and diplomatic missions
in order to gather reliable and current information from
the regions affected or vulnerable to climate change
and conflicts.
Poland would like to see regular discussions
and reporting on climate change and security on the
agenda of the Security Council. That is why we are
grateful that Sweden has addressed that topic. Such
debates could complement other deliberations carried
out in United Nations forums, mainly in the General
Assembly, within their respective mandates and by
various international and regional organizations and
other stakeholders. That is the point we have been
making consistently in recent years and which we will
be raising in the future if need be.
This year, Poland will assume the presidency of
the twenty-fourth Conference of Parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(COP). This will be the fourth time we will hold the COP

18-2191323/29

S/PV.8307

Maintenance of international peace and security

presidency, and we intend to use our past experience to
deliver positive conclusions. While leading the climate
negotiations, we will bear in mind that climate security
issues constitute the core threat for countries vulnerable
to climate change, especially small island developing
States and least developed countries.
In conclusion, let me underline that effective
responses to climate change and conflict are strictly
linked to the implementation of the security and
sustainable development agendas. Only by taking
coherent and integrated actions in those areas can
tangible and durable progress be accomplished.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): We
congratulate you, Madam President, on participating
in and presiding over this important meeting. We
also welcome the participation of the President of
Nauru and the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Kazakhstan. We thank the Deputy Secretary-General,
Ms. Amina Mohamed; the civil society representative,
Ms. Ibrahim; and the Minister of Water Resources of
Iraq, Mr. Hassan Janabi, for their valuable briefings.
As a state neighbouring Iraq, we have similar
environmental concerns. We agree with Mr. Janabi
that climate change has effects on the ecological
system in many parts of his country, particularly in
the marshlands, as he outlined in his statement. This
requires closer coordination at all levels in order to
mitigate the adverse impacts on the environment and
the people, and to revitalize and develop this area again.
We agree with everybody in the Council that the
phenomenon of climate change is clearly inevitable and
that it has become a concern to all nations and peoples of
the world, given its grave consequences and challenges
in our times. It imperils the security and even the
very existence of certain States and is a harbinger of
a humanitarian disaster. Contrary to what some people
believe, human activities are the main reason for this
change, as wars and conflicts are no longer the sole
reason for instability and insecurity.
In that regard, we underscore the role of the Security
Council, the organ entrusted with the maintenance of
international peace and security by the Charter of the
United Nations, although we believe that the Council is
not the ideal organ in which to tackle the phenomenon
of climate change owing to the multidimensional
consequences that need to be addressed within the
context of sustainable development. Nonetheless, the
efforts of the Council are an integral part of the efforts
24/29

11/07/2018

undertaken by other United Nations bodies and agencies,
within their respective mandates, in order to mitigate
the impact of climate change and the potential risks it
may pose to security. Those efforts are underpinned by
the requirements and provisions of the Kyoto Protocol
to the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change and the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change, which are the legal instruments binding us to
cooperate in that area.
We cannot discuss international measures to
address the phenomenon of climate change without
reaffirming the importance of the implementation of
common but differentiated responsibilities by States,
which was enshrined in the 2015 Paris Agreement.
We welcome the Agreement’s entry into force at a
record pace.
With a view to achieving multidimensional
sustainable development, we must establish conditions
conducive to combating the serious consequences of
climate change, for example, drought, desertification,
famine, political upheavals, conflicts over resources,
mass displacement, cyclones, floods, heat waves,
rising water levels and food insecurity. Despite the
efforts undertaken to counter climate change, the path
ahead in order to mitigate its effects is still a long one.
Concerted international action is a sine qua non to
mitigating the impact of climate change and its serious
repercussions for our planet. It will take political will
and cooperation, as well as international solidarity, to
attain those objectives.
Without a doubt, developing countries are making
exceptional efforts to address climate change and
strengthen their capacities to adapt themselves to
its consequences. They are the first countries to be
affected by climate change. The same holds true for
small island developing States and numerous African
States. We hope that developed countries will deliver
on their commitments vis-à-vis the leading role that
they need to play in adopting the bold and urgent
measures needed to reduce greenhouse gas emissions,
and maintain the agreed temperature level.
The international concern about climate change is
accompanied by a similar concern on the part of the
State of Kuwait. We, like other nations, are affected
by it and has therefore joined international efforts to
combat it. We will spare no effort at the local, regional
and international levels to address it. My country sought
to promote collective action from the beginning to the
18-21913

11/07/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

conclusion of the negotiations on the Paris Agreement.
We have incorporated the commitments arising from
the Agreement into our national priorities, projects and
programmes. That is a reflection of our responsibility to
future generations, given our environment-friendly role
within the framework of mitigating the consequences
of climate change and adapting to it.
In conclusion, the State of Kuwait will continue
to support the United Nations endeavours to address
the challenges caused by the phenomenon of climate
change. We believe that addressing this phenomenon is
a joint responsibility, albeit to varying degrees, in line
with national priorities and capacities, which will lead
to realizing the aspirations of all our nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the President
of the Republic of Nauru.
President Waqa: It is my honour to deliver this
statement on behalf of the 12 Pacific small island
developing States. We align ourselves with the statement
to be delivered by the representative of Maldives on
behalf of the Alliance of Small Island States.
At the outset, I would like to extend our sincere
gratitude to the Government of Sweden for hosting
today’s important debate. For nearly a decade, our group
has been advocating at the United Nations for a robust
response to the security implications of climate change
and so we fully appreciate the courage that Sweden has
shown in taking on this sensitive issue.
Since acknowledging that the adverse effects of
climate change may aggravate certain existing threats
to international peace and security, the Security Council
has begun to consider the issue according to specific
geopolitical contexts. In our view, it is essential that we
begin examining the ways that climate change interacts
with the drivers of conflict and how the United Nations
system can respond appropriately.
The Paris Agreement notwithstanding, climate
change is not going away. There will be no return to
a normal climate in our lifetime. In fact, the situation
will continue to deteriorate for decades, even if we
achieve our global goals. Extreme events are projected
to occur at a frequency and magnitude well outside
human experience and we must take seriously the
potential for abrupt climate change to cross dangerous
tipping points. There is strong scientific evidence
that natural systems are increasingly out of balance.
However, we do not have a good understanding of

S/PV. 8307

how our human systems will be impacted by such new
and unprecedented stressors. Some of the greatest
threats posed by climate change may be not the actual
biophysical impacts, but rather the deficiencies in
our response to them. Greater competition for scarce
resources, the destruction of critical infrastructure, the
interruption of public services and human displacement
will all test the resilience of our institutions and
governance structures.
Climate change will be the defining issue of the
next century and our preparation is long overdue. That
is why the Pacific small island developing States are
calling for the appointment of a special representative
of the Secretary-General on climate and security.
The special representative would fill a critical gap
within the United Nations system, as well as provide
the Council with the information it needs to fulfil its
existing mandate. Monitoring potential tipping points at
the nexus of climate and security; facilitating regional
and cross-border cooperation on issues affected by
climate change; engaging in preventive diplomacy
and supporting post-conflict situations when climate
change is a risk factor are all critical functions that
a Special Representative could begin to address, in
coordination with other relevant United Nations bodies.
The Pacific small island developing States first
offered that proposal in 2011 and we have made every
effort to address the concerns of all countries, the
greatest of which has been the fear of encroachment by
Security Council on other mandates of other bodies. Let
me be clear: the appointment of a Special Representative
should not expand the Security Council’s mandate. The
Special Representative serves the Secretary-General,
as the title implies. That being said, the Council
needs better climate-related security risk information,
analysis and early-warning mechanisms to be able
to make informed decisions and carry out its main
functions of preventing conflict and sustaining peace.
That is consistent with the intent of the 2011 presidential
statement (S/PRST/2011/18) and fully supportive of
recent Security Council resolutions on the Lake Chad
basin, West Africa, the Sahel and Somalia.
Seven years ago, my predecessor sounded the
alarm in the Chamber (see S/PV.6587) and the Council
demurred. Since then, the security risks of climate
change — along with global emissions — have only
grown. The Security Council, along with the United
Nations system, as a whole, needs a coherent approach
to address this pressing issue. The Council has taken a

18-2191325/29

S/PV.8307

Maintenance of international peace and security

few tepid steps in the right direction, but it is not enough,
which is why the Pacific small island developing States
reiterate their call for the appointment of a special
representative of the Secretary-General on climate and
security. We strongly urge all members of the Council
to join us.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Maldives.
Mr. Mohamed (Maldives): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the Alliance of Small
Island States (AOSIS), which represents 37 States
Members of the United Nations.
I would like to thank Sweden, the President of the
Council for the month of July, for convening today’s
important debate on climate-related security risks.
AOSIS welcomes in particular the participation
in today’s debate of His Excellency Mr. Baron Waqa,
President of Nauru, and the Prime Minister of Curaçao,
Kingdom of the the Netherlands. I would also like to
thank Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed;
Mr. Hassan Janabi, Minister of Water Resources of
Iraq; and Ms. Hindou Ibrahim of the International
Indigenous People Forum on Climate Change for
their briefings.
Three previous Security Council debates have
been held on this very issue — on 30 July 2015, chaired
by New Zealand (see S/PV.7499); 22 November 2016,
chaired by Senegal (see S/PV.7818); and 20 December
2017, chaired by Japan (see S/PV.8144). In addition,
there have also been two Arria Formula meetings on
climate change and security. In 2011, the Council issued
presidential statement S/PRST/2011/15, on climate
change, calling for the inclusion in the SecretaryGeneral’s reports of conflict analysis and contextual
information on the possible security implications of
climate change.
Should the Security Council discuss climate
change? That is the wrong question to ask. A more
appropriate question is: Should the Council take
appropriate measures when man-made actions result
in the destruction of islands, cities, nations or entire
livelihoods in some countries? AOSIS therefore
welcomes today’s debate on how the Council can
perform its functions more effectively through a better
understanding of climate-related risks to international
peace and security.
26/29

11/07/2018

As we are faced with new and emerging risks,
including those arising from climate change, it
is important to understand these issues to tailor
responses accordingly. AOSIS believes that the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC) should remain the primary United Nations
agency for responding to the phenomenon of climate
change. The United Nations existing institutional
architecture on the issue of climate change — whether
concerning mitigation, adaptation, the transfer of
technology or advancing basic principles, such as
common but differentiated responsibilities related
to respective capabilities in responding to climate
change — should be promoted within the framework
set out by the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council. Yet, where there are clear threats to the
security and survival of any country — whether such
threats originate in climate risks or from conventional
military aggression — the Security Council has to take
appropriate action.
The group of countries that I represent here — the
37 small island States — are on the front line of impact
from climate change, and the very existence of some of
those countries is threatened by climate change and the
security risks arising from its impacts. As the Atlantic
hurricane season is under way, a number of small island
developing States have yet to recover fully from last
year’s hurricanes, which uprooted entire communities,
caused substantial damage to vital infrastructure and
rendered entire islands uninhabitable.
But it is not just extreme weather events with
which we must contend. Many small island States are
experiencing unpredictable rain patterns that have
resulted in prolonged droughts, as well as floods. We
are also experiencing coastal erosion and saltwater
contamination of agricultural lands and freshwater
reserves. The documentation related to this issue rightly
notes that climate change is reshaping the world’s oceans
and coastlines. As large-ocean States, our futures are
closely related to the health of oceans. From sea level
rise to ocean acidification, to ocean warming, the
impacts of climate change on our oceans is threatening
the existence of our livelihood as we know it. We are
calling on States Members of the United Nations to take
urgent action to reverse the trend.
The Paris Agreement on Climate Change was
a historic milestone in the global effort to address
climate change. However, it is well established that
we will well exceed the maximum increases of 1.5°C
18-21913

11/07/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

and 2°C for global average temperature, which we set
for ourselves, and enter into truly uncharted territory.
But climate change is no longer just about the future.
The danger is already here in the present, with the
potential to become a destabilizing force nationally and
regionally. According to the UNFCCC, our first line
of defence must be to ensure that developing countries
have the support that they need to adapt. There have
been persistent funding gaps for adaptation that trail
far behind climate financing provided for mitigation.
That must be remedied, with a larger share of public
and grant-based financial resources for adaptation.
We also require a strong international mechanism
to address loss and damage for when climate change
impacts exceed the capacity of nations to adapt. We
therefore urge all Member States, especially developed
country partners, to fully uphold their commitments
and obligations of the Paris Agreement and other
international conventions and agreements relating to
climate change. We also emphasize the critical role
that the international community plays in providing
adequate, predictable and additional financial
resources, the transfer of technology and capacitybuilding to developing countries, in particular small
island developing States.
It is important that the United Nations system
have a full understanding of how climate change
threatens international peace and security and how the
phenomenon drives conflicts. The Council has already
recognized the adverse effects of climate change in
several specific contexts — the Lake Chad basin, West
Africa, the Sahel and Somalia — and has also stressed
the need for improved climate-related security risk
assessments for more effectively predicting potential
conflicts. The Council has also commenced work on
adapting peacekeeping operations to be better informed
of the impact of climate change and how that can impact
stability in the target countries. However, capabilities,
knowledge and understanding of climate-related risks
need to improve across the United Nations system.
The inclusion of relevant analyses in the SecretaryGeneral’s regular reporting, risk assessments and early
warnings is vital.
Were the Security Council to ignore climate-induced
risks to international peace and security, that would be a
mistake of historic proportions. From fires to famine, to
flooding, every continent is feeling the fury of climate
change, and we cannot wait until we clarify which
United Nations agency is most appropriate to respond.

S/PV. 8307

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Trinidad and Tobago.
Ms. Beckles (Trinidad and Tobago): I have the
honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the 14 States
members of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM).
At the outset, I align my statement with the
statement delivered by the representative of Maldives
on behalf of the Alliance of Small Island States.
I wish to recognize the President of Nauru;
the Prime Minister of Curaçao, Kingdom of the
Netherlands; the Minister for Water Resources of Iraq;
the Deputy Foreign Minister of Kazakhstan; and the
Deputy Secretary-General. The Caribbean Community
expresses its sincere gratitude to Sweden, the President
of the Security Council for the month of July for
convening this important meeting, and CARICOM
thanks those who briefed us earlier today.
The Security Council often deals with the issues
on a case-by-case basis, and in most cases reactively
rather than pre-emptively. Conversely, there is a
threat to universal peace and security that cannot go
unanswered. That threat far outweighs the current
structure of the Council. Under the established notion
of peace and security, the current structures within it
will not prove sufficient for discussion of the threats
posed by climate change. For threats to our peace
and security demand far greater measures than
combative, military and sanctions-based ones. The
appropriateness of the discussions within the Council
should not go unanswered. However, the predominance
of climate change should remain within the framework
of the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change.
Although the threat to the peace and security of
all humankind by climate change is real, there are
some States, categorized as small island developing
States (SIDS), that face an even greater threat — one
that is imminent and requires a pre-emptive response
that includes both risk assessment, planning and
appropriate financing. Climate change and sea-level
rise are unquestionably the most urgent threats to the
environment and the sustainable development of SIDS.
Climate change, if not addressed, has the potential
to compound the peace and security risks of everyone,
but at a faster rate for SIDS. In 2017 the most devastating
manifestation of climate change rendered part of
our sister nation Antigua and Barbuda completely

18-2191327/29

S/PV.8307

Maintenance of international peace and security

uninhabitable and rolled back decades of development
in Dominica. CARICOM recognizes that climate
change poses a serious threat to human societies and
ecosystems, especially in the areas of extreme weather,
sea-level rise, flooding, mangrove degradation, coastal
agricultural soils and residential communities, and
therefore needs to be addressed with urgency.
At the recent meeting of the Heads of State and
Government of the Caribbean Community, held in
Jamaica from 6 to 8 July, our Heads of State adopted a
declaration on climate change, in which they called for
a global effort to close the mitigation ambition gap and
place the world on pathways for low emissions climate
resilient development. They also urged the international
community to continue to support the Caribbean in
its ongoing efforts to contribute to global mitigation
efforts and to adapt to the effects of climate change
and build the region’s resilience so as to mitigate and
manage the real risk of irreparable loss and damage.
It is important nonetheless not to turn a blind eye to
the reality that climate risks could exacerbate security
threats. While the Security Council itself does not
have the wherewithal to combat climate change, it is
within its purview to consider all risks that will impact
international peace and security.
In conclusion, CARICOM thanks you, Madam
President, for this important debate, which exposes a
range of views on how the Council can address climate
risk in a security context, if at all. For CARICOM, it
also importantly brings out a fundamental point — that
we all must act in earnest to combat climate change,
lest we find ourselves far beyond any international
capacity to cope.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): On behalf
of the Group of Arab States, I wish to congratulate you,
Madam President, on your country’s presidency of the
Security Council this month. I also wish to note the
initiative led by your country to deepen the concept and
meaning of pluralism and to defend peace in its various
aspects around the world. I thank today’s briefers, the
President of Nauru, the Minister of Water Resources
of Iraq, Ms. Hindou Ibrahim and the Deputy Foreign
Minister of Kazakhstan.
I have the honour to make this statement today
on behalf of the States members of the Arab Group to
clarify its position on the topic under consideration in
28/29

11/07/2018

the Security Council with regard to the maintenance
of international peace and security in connection with
the impact of climate change. While we recognize
the primary responsibility of the Council for the
maintenance of international peace and security, we
also believe that it is important to not overlook the
role of the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council in that regard so as to avoid duplication
and overlap in the roles of those organs — without
prejudice, of course, to their complementary mandates,
in accordance with the principles and purposes of the
Charter of the United Nations. At the same time, we
stress the need to address the threat of climate change
to our planet and its existence. Understanding that
threat is the first step towards reaching effective and
collective solutions.
Of course, armed conflict and international
terrorist activities are no longer the only key threats
to international peace and security in today’s
world — a world that is grappling with climate change
and environmental degradation that exacerbate the
threats to international peace and security due to their
negative impact on livelihoods, human security and
the ability of Governments to meet the basic needs of
their citizens.
Vulnerable communities and States that have
limited resources are the most susceptible to the
negative impact of climate change, which amplifies
their inability to appropriately address emergencies and
the unexpected complexities that impact security and
stability in those regions and have a direct bearing on
civilian populations. Many people have been forced to
migrate from their homes as a result of the consequences
of climate change, such as flooding, torrential rain,
desertification, drought, rising sea levels, dust storms
and famine, among other negative effects that also
cause migration and displacement.
The Arab region is rich and diverse in climate
and environment, but it is not immune to the negative
security effects of climate change, which affect all of
the countries of the Arab region alike. A number of
Arab countries are suffering significantly from the
manifestations of climate change that have exacerbated
drivers of political and armed conflicts, with obvious
effects on international and regional peace and
security. Those include heat waves, rising sea levels,
drought and desertification, which have diminished
arable and pasture lands, and have also contributed to
the disappearance of agricultural lands due to water
18-21913

11/07/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

shortages, leading to land salinity and affecting crop
productivity. Those negative developments have had
security and social consequences that have given rise to
conflicts between different populations, such as herders
and farmers, and led to strained relations between
groups and communities, and in some cases to armed
conflict resulting in displacement and migration.
We draw the attention of the Council to the
potential present and future negative consequences of
severe climate change on the Arab region, including
its socioeconomic effects. In that regard, the Arab
Group cites the success of the international community,
through complex negotiations, in defining international
frameworks that identify the responsibilities and
obligations of States, while taking into account the
historical responsibility of developed and industrial
States for the current negative impact of climate change.
A recent case in point is the fact that the international
community has concluded the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change — a road map in support of international
cooperation against climate change via the leading role
of developed countries in supporting implementation
through financing, technology transfer and building
the capacities of developing States in order to support
their national efforts and to contribute to international
efforts to address climate change, promote national
programmes and mitigate negative effects.
In that respect, it is important to point out that the
multilateral international framework has managed to
set up international mechanisms to provide funding
for developing countries, including the Global
Environment Facility and the Green Climate Fund. One

S/PV. 8307

of the most serious challenges facing the Arab region
with regard to the effects of climate change on security
and peace is the poor cooperation and coordination
at the regional and international levels in addressing
the problems of climate change and environmental
degradation, as well as their impact on Arab security
and peace. All parties must mobilize their efforts to
reach a positive outcome and to prevent conflicts. The
imbalance in the exploitation of natural resources,
combined with the inability to manage environmental
programmes is a driver of conflicts and is responsible
for the deterioration of humanitarian situations causing
migration and displacement. Of course, this calls for the
enhanced cooperation and support of developed States
for regional and national Arab efforts, in particular with
respect to technology transfer and capacity-building.
Developed States must work in parallel with many
initiatives to promote Arab synergies and coordination.
Another case in point is reaching a consensus on a
number of recommendations that were concluded at the
ninth Arab Forum for Development and Environment,
held in Beirut in 2016 under the theme “Sustainable
development in a changing Arab climate”. There,
Arab Governments agreed to shift towards a green
economy and to integrate the principles of sustainable
development into their conflict resolution and peace
initiatives, alongside plans for the reconstruction of
Arab countries emerging from conflict in a manner
that would help them to achieve the United Nations
Sustainable Development Goals by 2030.
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.

18-2191329/29
