ReeolutioDll adopted on the reports of the Third Committee
Article 6
1. The present Convention shall come into force on the
ninetieth day following the date of deposit of the eighth instru-ment of ratification or accession.
2. For each State ratifying or acceding to the Convention
after the deposit of the eighth instrument of ratification or
accession, the Convention shall enter into force on the ninetieth
day after deposit by such State of its instrument of ratification
or accession.
Article 7
1. Any Contracting State may denounce the present l 'onvention by written notification to the Secretary-General of the
United Nations. Denunciation shall take effect one year after the
date of receipt of the notification by the Secretary-General.
2. The present Convention shall cease to be in force as from
the date when the denunciation which reduces the number of
parties to less than eight becomes effective.

Article 8
Any dispute which may arise between any two or more Contracting States concerning the interpretation or application of
the present Convention which is not settled by negotiation shall,
at the request of all the parties to the dispute, be referred to
the International Court of Justice for decision, unless the parties
agree to another mode of settlement.

Article 9
The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall notify all
States Members of the United Nations and the non-member
States contemplated in article 4, paragraph 1, of the present
Convention of the following:
(a) Signatures and instruments of ratification received in accordance with article 4;
(b) Instruments of accession received in accordance with
article 5;
(c) The date upon which the Convention enters into force in
accordance with article 6;
(d) Notifications of denunciation received in accordance with
article 7, paragraph 1 ;
(e) Abrogation in accordance with article 7, paragraph 2.

Article 10
1. The present Convention, of which the Chinese, English,
French, Russian and Spanish texts shall be equally authentic,
shall be deposited in the archive; of the United >Jations.
2. The Secretary-General of the United Nations shalI transmit a certified copy of the Convention to all States Members of
the United Nations and to the non-member States contemplated
in article 4, paragraph 1.

B
DRAFT RECOMMENDATION ON CONSENT TO MARRIAGE,
MINIMUM AGE FOR MARRIAGE AND REGISTRATION
OF MARRIAGES

The General Assembly
Requests the Economic and Social Council to ask the
Commission on the Status of Women to consider the
draft Recommendation on Consent to Marriage, Minimum Age for Marriage and Registration of Marriages 2
in the light of the discussions in the General Assembly
on the draft Convention relating to the same subject,
and to report back in time for consideration of the
draft Recommendation by the Assembly at its eighteenth
session.
1167th plenary meeting,
7 November 1962
2 See Economic and Social Council resolution 821 III B
(XXXII) of 19 July 1961.

1772 (XVII).

29

Committee on Housing, Building
and Planning

The General Assembly,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution 903 C (XXXIV) of 2 August 1%2 establishing a
Committee on Housing, Building and Planning,
Noting further that many Member States have expressed interest in the new Committee,
1. Welcomes the decision of the Economic and Social
Council to establish a Committee on Housing, Building
and Planning whose terms of reference and reporting
procedure provide a new instrument for consideration
of the problems involved and appropriate integration of
housing and urban development programmes with economic, social and industrial development programmes;
2. Requests the Economic and Social Council at its
resumed thirty-fourth session to consider enlarging the
membership of the Committee from eighteen to twentyone.
1187th plenary meeting,
7 December 1962.

1773 (XVII).

United Nations Children's Fund

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration of the Rights of the Child
adopted by the General Assembly on 20 November
1959,3
Mindful of the interrelation of economic and social
progress,
Considering the interest of the United Nations Children's Fund, in collaboration with other United Nations
bodies, in all aspects of the child's physical, mental and
social development,
Considering further that the United Nations Development Decade offers an opportunity to promote the health,
education and welfare of children and youth as part of
the broader effort to accelerate economic and social progress in the developing countries,
1. Takes note with approval of the decisions of the
Executive Board of the United Nations Children's
Fund for orienting the work of the Fund towards the
economic and social development efforts of the United
Nations Development Decade;
2. Recommends that Member States, as appropriate,
should:
(a) Take account of the needs of children and youth
ih the planning and administration of public health, education, social welfare, preparation for employment, housing, industry and agriculture, bearing in mind the need
for the strengthening of family life, and make such
plans part of over-all development programmes ;
( b) Give due importance, in working towards the
objectives of the United Nations Development Decade,
to their own programmes for children and youth in
allocating their available resources, and take account,
in their international aid programmes, of the needs of
children and youth;
( c) Take full advantage of the services which the
United Nations Children's Fund can offer, especially in
planning for children and youth and in training appropriate personnel in collaboration with the Bureau of
3 Resolution 13F:6 ( \~ l V 1.
