S/2014/840

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
21 November 2014
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014) and 2165 (2014)
I. Introduction
1.
This ninth report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 17 of Security Council
resolution 2139 (2014) and paragraph 10 of Council resolution 2165 (2014), in
which the Council requested the Secretary-General to report, every 30 days, on the
implementation of the resolutions by all parties to the conflict in the Syrian Arab
Republic.
2.
The report, which covers the period from 18 October to 16 November 2014,
provides a review of events since the adoption of resolution 2165 (2014). The
information contained in the report and its annex is based on data available to
United Nations entities on the ground and on reports from open sources and sources
of the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic.

II. Major developments
A.

Political and military developments
3.
Widespread conflict and high levels of violence continued throughout the
Syrian Arab Republic during the reporting period, particularly in the governorates of
Aleppo, Hama, Homs, Deir ez-Zor, Rif Dimashq, Damascus, Hasakeh, Idlib, Dar’a,
Quneitra and Raqqa. Indiscriminate aerial bombings by government forces and
indiscriminate shelling by armed opposition, extremist and listed terrorist groups 1
continued to result in deaths, injuries and the displacement of civilians.
4.
Government and pro-government forces continued to conduct airstrikes and
shellings. According to information received by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), government forces dropped
hundreds of barrel bombs in Aleppo, Hasakeh, Rif Dimashq, Dar’a, Hama,
Damascus, Idlib and Quneitra governorates during the reporting period. Since
20 October, at least 239 civilians have reportedly been killed by government

__________________
1 On 30 May 2013, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and the Nusra Front were designated

as terrorist groups by the Security Council under resolution 1267 (1999). Both groups operate in
the Syrian Arab Republic.

14-65066 (E)

241114

*1465066*

S/2014/840

airstrikes, including barrel bomb attacks, which have also caused a large number of
injuries, internal displacement and large-scale destruction to infrastructure.
5.
In Aleppo, OHCHR estimates that approximately 42 barrel bombs were
dropped between 18 October and 6 November. According to reports received by
OHCHR, at least 25 civilians, including 11 children, were killed by barrel bombs
dropped on Sifat, Kafr Oueid and Tal Qarah in Aleppo, between 18 and 23 October.
On 23 October, in Tal Qarah, a barrel bomb was allegedly dropped on a wedding
hall used by internally displaced persons for shelter, killing 14 civilians, including
11 children. On 6 November, government helicopters dropped two barrel bombs on
Al-Shaár, a neighbourhood of opposition-controlled Aleppo, reportedly killing
14 civilians, including women and children, and injuring 23 others.
6.
In Rif Dimashq, on 21 October, the government air force allegedly bombarded
the districts of Jisreen and Arbine, killing four people, including two children, and
injuring many civilians. Attacks were also recorded in Dar’a and Hama. On
26 October, the government air force dropped barrel bombs on Busra al-Sham,
killing 15 civilians, including six children, and injuring many other civilians. On
29 October, government helicopters dropped barrel bombs on a small settlement for
internally displaced persons near Hbit in northern Hama, killing many displaced
persons. On 13 November, more than 7 children were killed, and 13 were injured, as
a result of barrel bombs dropped on Tal Laylan primary school in Ras al-Ain,
Hasakeh.
7.
In Damascus, the government air force bombed the opposition-controlled
neighbourhood of Al-Qaboun on 5 November, striking a primary school and killing
at least 17 children and injuring a dozen others. On the same day, three mortar shells
struck the Haya school in Al-Qaboun, in eastern Damascus, killing at least
11 children and injuring many others. Elsewhere, according to analysis of the
Operational Satellite Applications Programme of the United Nations Institute for
Training and Research, extensive damage, of the kind observed from airstrikes and
barrel bombs, was caused in Joubar and Yarmouk.
8.
Violence in the Al-Wa’er neighbourhood of Homs continued, with OHCHR
receiving information on intensified bombardment by government forces. Daily
shelling between 18 and 20 October resulted in some 23 people killed and 35 injured.
Further attacks on 25 October and 2 November resulted in the deaths of at least nine
civilians. In one attack, three children were killed. On 2 and 3 November, mortars and
rockets landed in and around an orphanage, causing extensive damage and forcing the
United Nations to evacuate approximately 50 children.
9.
Armed opposition and designated terrorist groups continued to shell
government-controlled areas, including in civilian-populated areas, using mortars
and small rockets, causing civilian deaths and casualties. Mortar fire on different
government-held areas continued on a large scale, including in Damascus, Homs,
Hama and Quneitra. For example, on 20 October, mortar shelling was reported on a
university in Quneitra, which resulted in many injured students. Two attacks on or
near schools in government-controlled Aleppo city on 27 October killed nine
people, including four children. In Hama, on 12 November, two mortars hit a
school, killing seven children and injuring four.
10. The use of improvised explosive devices, including vehicle-borne improvised
explosive devices, and suicide bombs, which have resulted in numerous casualties,

2/22

14-65066

S/2014/840

were also reported in Damascus, Rif Dimashq, Aleppo, Idlib, Deir ez-Zor and
Homs. For example, in Damascus, on 27 October, a vehicle-borne improvised
explosive device was detonated in Al-Bzuriya neighbourhood, killing one civilian
and injuring six others. On 2 November, the Government reported that a suicide
bomber had detonated his explosive vest in the vicinity of the College of Medicine,
in the Al-Mezza area of Damascus, killing two students and injuring five others. In
Homs, on 29 October, two vehicle-borne improvised explosive devices were
detonated in a crowded square in the Al-Zahra neighbourhood of Homs near three
schools, killing 12 civilians and either killing or injuring 40 others.
11. Civilians continued to be displaced as a result of ongoing fighting and conflict.
In the last two weeks of October, the Syrian Arab Red Crescent (SARC) registered
some 50,000 internally displaced persons who fled Inkhil in Dar’a towards
Sanameen and nearby villages. Some 5,000 others were displaced recently owing to
fighting in Sheikh Miskine, in Dar’a. Heavy fighting in north-eastern Quneitra
forced people to flee to surrounding rural areas. Violence in the northern and eastern
parts of rural Hama forced many more people to seek refuge in the cities of Hama
and Salamiyyeh. To date, over 100,000 internally displaced persons have been
registered in these two locations.
12. Parties to the conflict continued to target civilian facilities and objects,
including vital services and infrastructure. For example, at the end of October, the
water supply to Idlib city was cut for six days and the electricity supply was
disrupted for three days following a Nusra Front offensive on Idlib city and western
areas. Some 1.3 million people were affected by the cuts in supply, which was
restored after switching to an alternative pumping station.
13. Foreign fighters continued to be involved on all sides of the fighting.
According to reports that the United Nations cannot independently verify,
significant numbers of foreign, mostly Shiite, militias joined the pro-government
forces in Aleppo that were attempting an advance into the northern and eastern part
of the city in late October and early November.
14. During the reporting period, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
and the Nusra Front, both listed terrorist groups, increased efforts aimed at
recruiting domestic and foreign fighters. On 4 November, the leader of the Nusra
Front, Abu Mohammed al-Julani, stated that foreign fighters constituted “30 to
35 per cent” of his group’s total force. It was reported that a number of Syrian
fighters had defected from other groups, including the Islamist Front and groups
affiliated with the Free Syrian Army, to join the Nusra Front and ISIL.
15. The international coalition continued to carry out airstrikes against ISIL in the
Syrian Arab Republic on an almost daily basis. According to reports, some
865 people have been killed, including 50 civilians, in Aleppo, Deir ez-Zor,
Hasakeh, Idlib and Raqqa since the strikes began. In response to the attacks, ISIL
placed its fighters in populated areas, raising additional concerns for the protection
of civilians, and changed its main positions. It also continued to fight on multiple
fronts in the country. On 1 November, ISIL took control of the second Al-Sha’ar gas
field in Homs and confiscated large quantities of weapons and armed vehicles from
the area. It was reported that government forces regained control of the gas field a
few days later. ISIL also attacked pro-government checkpoints in Salamiyyeh, and
pressed for control of the military airport north-east of Homs.

14-65066

3/22

S/2014/840

16. Starting in late October, fighting in Idlib between the Nusra Front and the
Syrian Revolutionary Front, a group that is loosely defined as being part of the Free
Syrian Army, resulted in significant gains by the Nusra Front. The Nusra Front
began advancing towards the crossing point with Turkey at Bab al-Hawa, which is
used for the provision of cross-border humanitarian assistance under Security
Council resolution 2165 (2014). At the end of October, the Nusra Front and Jond
al-Aqsa launched an offensive on the government-controlled city of Idlib, shelling it
with mortar fire and grad rockets. United Nations humanitarian operations were
suspended for three days while the main supply road could be assessed for
improvised explosive devices.
17. The fight continued between ISIL and the Kurdish People’s Protection Units
for the city of Ayn al-Arab/Kobane, in northern Aleppo governorate. Turkey has
recently allowed Iraqi Peshmerga forces to enter the town through its borders.
Militants of other nationalities have allegedly joined the Units in their fight against
ISIL.
18. While government forces were reported to have retaken territory inside Deir
ez-Zor city, ISIL was said to have maintained positions around the city, increasing
concerns about the possibility of blocking access to government-controlled
neighbourhoods, where almost 150,000 people remain.
19. A number of setbacks were reported in areas of Damascus and Rif Dimashq
where local agreements had been reached. Negotiations came to a stop in Al-Wa’er
(Homs), Yarmouk (Damascus) and Zabadani (Rif Dimashq).
20. During his briefing to the Security Council on 30 October, the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Syria, Staffan de Mistura, laid out an action plan that
included opportunities for an incremental, strategic de-escalation of violence in
locations that could have an impact at the national level. In contrast to previous
ceasefire agreements, the action plan focuses on select pockets or zones of stability
that would be anchored on a “freezing of the fronts” between government and
opposition forces, starting with Aleppo. These would not be a substitute for a
national political process but could constitute building blocks towards one.
Expressing concern that Aleppo could be the next theatre of operations for ISIL, the
Special Envoy stressed the importance of averting a major humanitarian disaster and
of building a credible alternative to conflict with demonstrable benefits for the
average Syrian.
21. As part of ongoing diplomatic efforts, the Special Envoy engaged in regional
consultations and concluded his second visit to Damascus on 11 November.
Following a meeting with the President of the Syrian Arab Republic and other
Syrian authorities on 10 November, the Special Envoy took note of the authorities’
expressed intent to work with the United Nations on identifying concrete ways to
implement a freeze in the city of Aleppo on the basis of the concept presented by the
Special Envoy to the Security Council.

B.

Human rights
22. On 14 November, the independent international commission of inquiry on the
Syrian Arab Republic released a paper entitled “Rule of terror: living under ISIL in
Syria”. The paper, based on the first-hand accounts of 300 victims and witnesses,

4/22

14-65066

S/2014/840

detailed the use by ISIL of terror and brutality to subjugate Syrians living in areas
under the group’s control. The commission concluded that the abuses, violations and
crimes committed by ISIL against Syrians were deliberate and calculated. The terror
was inflicted through the systematic imposition of restrictions on basic rights and
freedoms and through the widespread commission of international humanitarian law
violations and war crimes.
23. During the reporting period, OHCHR continued to receive reports of ISIL
attacks on civilians. It was reported that, on 2 November ISIL publicly executed
three men in Deir ez-Zor on the grounds that they had collaborated with the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic. It was also reported that ISIL had
executed eight men in Al-Bokmal for unknown reasons. There are unconfirmed
allegations that ISIL continues to commit abuses against members of the Al-Shaitat
tribe for refusing to recognize ISIL jurisdiction over their villages. Information
received indicates that hundreds of civilian members of the tribe were abducted by
ISIL and kept in detention in Deir ez-Zor.
24. OHCHR continued to receive reports of the arbitrary arrest of civilians,
including peaceful activists. For example, on 18 October, information received by
OHCHR indicates that civilians, including women and children, were detained en
masse in the town of Sifat in northern Aleppo. The detainees, including entire
families, are reportedly being held in makeshift facilities run by government
security forces in Aleppo. On 20 October, a young man was arrested by the Military
Intelligence Directorate (branch 215) at a checkpoint outside Madamiyet in Rif
Dimashq. His fate remains unknown. Local sources informed OHCHR that many
more civilians are being arbitrarily detained at that particular checkpoint on a daily
basis. On 31 October, three human rights defenders were detained by a branch of the
Political Security Directorate as they attempted to return from Lebanon to the
Syrian Arab Republic. At the time of writing, the three activists had no access to a
lawyer and at least one of them required urgent medical attention owing to
pre-existing medical conditions.
25. OHCHR continued to receive reports of the use of torture and other forms of
ill-treatment in government detention facilities. For example, in Homs governorate,
information received indicates that individuals continue to die as a result of torture
and other forms of ill-treatment in detention centres run by branches of the
Government’s security forces. On 30 October, the Government reportedly informed
the families of more than 40 detainees from the town of Al-Gariatain in rural Homs
that a relative had died in detention. According to information received by OHCHR,
the authorities did not provide the families with any documentation as to the cause
of death.
26. The Government reported that, between 23 October and 3 November,
1,175 individuals were pardoned after they had surrendered themselves and their
weapons and had pledged not to participate in hostilities. The Government did not
provide any further details regarding the pardons.
27. The remaining 153 Kurdish students from Ayn al-Arab/Kobane who had been
abducted by ISIL were released. Human Rights Watch reported that the students
were tortured and abused while detained by ISIL, including through beatings and by
being forced to watch videos of ISIL beheadings and attacks.

14-65066

5/22

S/2014/840

28. Members of the international commission of inquiry, OHCHR and United
Nations human rights monitors continue to be denied access to the country.

C.

Humanitarian access
29. Since the adoption of Security Council resolution 2165 (2014), the situation in
the Syrian Arab Republic has continued to deteriorate. The number of people
requiring humanitarian assistance now stands at 12.2 million. Almost half of all
Syrians have been displaced: 7.6 million Syrians are internally displaced and over
3.2 million Syrians are refugees.
30. United Nations agencies and partners continued to make some gains during the
reporting period in terms of making deliveries both across borders and within the
Syrian Arab Republic. The ability to cross borders resulted in greater access to
Aleppo, Idlib, Dar’a and Quneitra, as well as to hard-to-reach areas in Idlib, Homs,
Dar’a and Aleppo from within the Syrian Arab Republic. Overall, however, it
remains extremely challenging to provide assistance in the country owing to
violence and insecurity, shifting conflict lines, obstructive administrative procedures
and continued underfunding at a time when needs continue to grow.
31. During the reporting period, assistance reached 65 (22.6 per cent) of the
287 locations identified as hard to reach. Food assistance by the World Food
Programme (WFP) and the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) reached 332,150 people in 24 hard-to-reach
locations, compared to 390,050 people in 23 hard-to-reach locations during the
previous reporting period. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR), UNRWA, UNICEF and the United Nations Population Fund
(UNFPA) delivered non-food items to 127,195 people in 38 hard-to-reach areas
compared to 148,614 people in 47 hard-to-reach locations during the previous
reporting period. The World Health Organization (WHO) and UNICEF delivered
health supplies and assistance to enable 231,474 treatments in hard-to-reach areas.
UNICEF provided nearly 207,000 people in hard-to-reach areas with access to safe
water and improved sanitation.
32. The United Nations and its partners have sent 30 shipments — 23 from Turkey
and 7 from Jordan — to the Syrian Arab Republic under the terms of resolution
2165 (2014). The shipments included food assistance for over 208,000 people,
non-food items for almost 237,900 people, water and sanitation supplies for nearly
86,000 people and medical supplies for over 250,000 people, including reusable
medical equipment and supplies that will benefit many more patients in the coming
months. Other assistance has also been delivered, to almost 48,000 people. In line
with resolution 2165 (2014), the United Nations notified the Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic in advance of each shipment, including of the details of the
content, the district of destination and the number of beneficiaries.
33. The United Nations monitoring mechanism continued its activities in Jordan
and Turkey. Efforts to deploy a team in Iraq continued. Operations remain pending,
however, owing to continued insecurity. Monitoring mechanism teams monitored
the loading of the shipments and accompanied the loaded vehicles to the respective
border crossings. In addition, for each shipment, the monitoring mechanism sent a
notification to the Government confirming the humanitarian nature of the shipment,
in accordance with resolution 2165 (2014). The monitoring mechanism continued to

6/22

14-65066

S/2014/840

benefit from excellent cooperation and support from the Governments of Jordan and
Turkey.
34. Owing to the deteriorating humanitarian situation in Hasakeh governorate,
relief items continue to be urgently needed. Following the consent of the respective
Governments, the Nusaybin/Qamishli border crossing between Turkey and the
Syrian Arab Republic remains open to United Nations agencies for the dispatch of
supplies to Hasakeh governorate. WFP dispatched goods for 227,000 people and
UNICEF for another 114,255 people, and UNHCR began transporting urgently
needed non-food items for 75,000 people during the reporting period.
35. Ongoing fighting and the presence of armed groups along the main access
routes again prevented WFP from delivering food as planned to 600,000 people in
Deir ez-Zor and Raqqa governorates. Widespread fighting across the country and
delays in granting approvals continued to constrain humanitarian access and affect
the capacity of WFP to deliver as planned, including in Hama, Rif Dimashq, rural
areas in Dar’a and Quneitra governorates. Heightened insecurity since the start of
international coalition airstrikes caused a slowdown of deliveries to oppositioncontrolled rural areas in Idlib and Aleppo. Heavy fighting in Idlib forced a
suspension of operations and insecurity in Hasakeh prevented UNHCR from
reaching some 4,400 internally displaced persons directly, although it was able to
provide assistance through volunteers.
36. Despite the extremely difficult operating environment, United Nations
agencies and partners continued to deliver assistance to people in need. In October,
WFP dispatched food for some 3.9 million people across 12 governorates. WHO
distributed medicines and supplies for nearly 2.9 million medical treatments in
11 governorates. An estimated 16.55 million people continued to have access to safe
water thanks to the provision of chlorine by UNICEF. UNHCR reached 264,884
people with core relief items. Nearly 30,000 people received agricultural support
from the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. UNFPA
supported tens of thousands with reproductive health care.
37. Non-governmental organizations (NGOs) have delivered considerable
assistance in the Syrian Arab Republic. Through NGOs, about 1.37 million people
received food assistance and over 655,000 people received health assistance in
September, among many other interventions. Over the course of the year, more than
2.5 million people received water, sanitation and hygiene support.
Besieged areas
38. Changes to conflict lines, forced displacement and new information available
to humanitarian actors as a result of the needs assessments that have been conducted
since the adoption of resolution 2165 (2014) have led to a revision of the areas and
the number of people besieged by either government or opposition forces in the
Syrian Arab Republic. Revised estimates at the end of the reporting period show
that 212,000 people are besieged, a decrease from the estimate of 241,000 people at
the beginning of the reporting period. After a local agreement was reached allowing
some civilians to gain access to people and supplies, the town of Madamiyet Elsham
is no longer besieged, but remains hard to reach. Some 163,500 people are besieged
by government forces in eastern Ghouta (an increase from 150,000), 4,000 remain
besieged in Darayya and 18,000 remain besieged in Yarmouk. Some 26,500 people
are besieged by opposition forces in Nabul and Zahraa (a decrease from 45,000).

14-65066

7/22

S/2014/840

39. During the reporting period, food was distributed to 8,800 (3.7 per cent) of the
241,000 people in besieged areas at the beginning of the reporting period, non-food
items were distributed to 8,800 people (3.7 per cent) and medical assistance was
provided to 1,657 people (0.7 per cent).
40. In eastern Ghouta, some 150,000 people were besieged at the beginning of the
reporting period. Duma, the only location to which it has been possible to provide
humanitarian assistance so far, last received assistance in the form of medicines and
water and sanitation supplies on 9 September 2014, while food and other supplies
were last provided on 28 May 2014.
41. In Madamiyet Elsham, about 24,000 people were besieged at the beginning of
the reporting period.
42. In Darayya (Rif Dimashq), about 4,000 people remain besieged. No assistance
reached Darayya during the reporting period. The area last received assistance in
October 2012.
43. In Yarmouk, about 18,000 people remain besieged. UNRWA is permitted to
distribute humanitarian assistance three days a week; distribution is regularly
interrupted or cancelled by clashes. During the reporting period, UNRWA was able
to distribute food on 12 occasions to around 8,800 people, hygiene kits on
9 occasions to approximately 5,600 people, and additional non-food items and water
on four occasions to around 3,200 people. Syrian authorities have authorized the
distribution of medical supplies for a fourth consecutive month; those supplies
include antibiotics and a range of medicines for chronic and non-communicable
diseases, as well as standard infant and early childhood vaccines. People could
access medicines at the temporary health centre, which operated nine times,
allowing for 1,657 consultations. After a break of 11 days, UNRWA was permitted
to reopen its temporary health centre in Yarmouk on 13 November.
44. In Nabul and Zahraa, about 45,000 people were besieged by opposition forces
at the beginning of the reporting period. No humanitarian assistance has reached the
two villages since 8 May.
Free passage of medical supplies, personnel and equipment
45. During the reporting period, WHO distributed medicines and supplies for
nearly 2.9 million medical treatments throughout the country, of which 171,474
were in hard-to-reach areas in Aleppo, Hasakeh, Raqqa and Deir ez-Zor
governorates. UNICEF reached 77,263 people with health support, including 60,000
people in hard-to-reach areas from within the country.
46. WHO and partners continue to press for people in need to have comprehensive
access to medicines and medical supplies. Access, however, continues to be
hampered by the deteriorating security environment, recurring displacement and
constraints imposed on humanitarian operations by parties to the conflict.
47. Since the beginning of October, 10 WHO requests to deliver medical
assistance have been rejected or gone unanswered by the Government. The
Government rejected four WHO requests to provide support to hard-to-reach areas
in Raqqa, Deir ez-Zor and Rif Dimashq and to the besieged area of Duma, thereby
preventing the distribution of medical assistance, including surgical supplies and
medicines for chronic diseases, for 479,000 treatments. Six other requests submitted

8/22

14-65066

S/2014/840

to the Ministry of Health since the beginning of October to gain access to
17 opposition-controlled areas in Aleppo, Hasakeh, Raqqa, Dar’a, Deir ez-Zor and
Idlib governorates in order to distribute drugs and medical supplies have gone
unanswered. In addition, the Government did not authorize the provision of surgical
supplies and equipment for 1,100 treatments being delivered by an inter-agency
convoy to a village in opposition-controlled Rif Dimashq.
48. Despite having given approval previously, on 12 November security forces
removed all medical assistance, including surgical supplies, from an inter-agency
convoy on its way to Al-Wa’er in Homs, preventing supplies for 47,701 medical
treatments from reaching the area.
49. Attacks on medical facilities and personnel continued during the reporting
period. In October, Physicians for Human Rights documented five attacks on
medical facilities. Of the attacks, four were carried out by government forces and
one by unidentified forces. Two attacks occurred in Rif Dimashq, one in Dar’a, one
in Deir ez-Zor and one in Idlib. One attack was carried out with a car bomb, two
with barrel bombs, one with barrel bombs and rockets, and one with rockets. In
October, Physicians for Human Rights documented the deaths of 19 medical
personnel, of whom nine were targeted or killed in the line of duty. All 19 of them
were killed by government forces. Of the total, 16 were killed by shellings and
bombings, one by torture, one by execution and one was shot.
50. The ninth polio immunization campaign took place between 19 and 23 October.
Of the 2.9 million children under 5 years of age who were targeted, 2.7 million were
vaccinated.
Administrative procedures
51. No changes in administrative procedures were made during the reporting
period. On 26 August, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs informed the United Nations
that agencies could send biweekly or monthly loading plans, as weekly notification
was causing constraints. The movement of supplies to hard-to-reach areas continued
to be negotiated on a case-by-case basis centrally through meetings of the joint
committee established following the adoption of resolution 2139 (2014). The
committee includes representatives of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Ministry
of Social Affairs, security personnel, SARC and the United Nations. Despite a
verbal communication from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs on 7 September that
governors in Aleppo, Hama, Homs and Idlib could authorize inter-agency cross-line
convoys, central approval continued to be sought. This led to significant delays in
the approval of some convoys.
52. UNHCR reports that negotiations with the Syrian authorities for the
facilitation of deliveries of core relief items led to 48 requests for facilitation being
approved during the reporting period, 34 of which were for delivered to hard-toreach areas.
53. As at 16 November, 19 United Nations visas or visa renewal requests remained
pending, of which six were within the 15-working-day limit and 13 exceeded the
15-working-day limit. As at the same date, eight visas for international NGOs were
pending.
54. Nine national NGOs were authorized to partner with agencies of the United
Nations system in Aleppo, Deir ez-Zor, Hama, Lattakia and Sweida during the

14-65066

9/22

S/2014/840

reporting period. One national NGO based in Damascus was removed from the list
of authorized NGOs. There are 107 national NGOs operating through 165 branches
throughout the Syrian Arab Republic.
55. International NGOs continue to be unable to conduct independent (or joint)
needs assessments, nor are they are authorized to partner with national NGOs or
participate in inter-agency cross-line convoys or United Nations field missions.
Moreover, most international NGOs cannot open sub-offices.
Safety and security of staff and premises
56. On 7 November, two SARC volunteers were killed when a mortar shell hit a
civilian area of Homs. The two volunteers were transporting supplies for a joint
SARC-UNICEF project that provides children traumatized by the conflict with
psychosocial support.
57. On 13 November, a truck hired by the United Nations and SARC to deliver
humanitarian assistance to the Al-Wa’er neighbourhood of Homs city was fired
upon; the driver suffered minor injuries.
58. On 16 November, ISIL released a video of the execution of an American aid
worker.
59. Twenty-seven United Nations staff members, 24 of whom are UNRWA staff,
continue to be detained or missing. The total number of humanitarian workers killed
in the conflict since March 2011 is 69. This includes 17 United Nations staff
members, 40 SARC staff members and volunteers, 7 Palestinian Red Crescent
Society volunteers and staff members and 5 international NGO staff members.
Trends since the adoption of resolution 2165 (2014)
60. More hard-to-reach locations have been reached by United Nations agencies
and partners since the adoption of resolution 2165 (2014). United Nations
organizations and partners reached an average of 38 hard-to-reach areas per month
in the four months leading to the adoption of that resolution compared with a
monthly average of 66 since adoption. In addition, NGO partners have reached 144
hard-to-reach locations through their cross-border operations since adoption.
61. In the four governorates most often reached by cross-border operations
(Aleppo, Idlib, Quneitra and Dar’a), a majority of locations classified as hard-toreach have been accessed. Since the adoption of resolution 2165 (2014), the United
Nations and NGO partners have collectively reached 15 of the 15 hard-to-reach
locations in Idlib, 21 of the 24 hard-to-reach locations in Aleppo, 69 of the 70 hardto-reach locations in Dar’a and 13 of the 13 hard-to-reach locations in Quneitra.
Some 80 per cent of this assistance has been delivered — mostly by NGOs — by
crossing borders; the remaining 20 per cent has been delivered from within the
Syrian Arab Republic. Needs continue to outpace the response, however. For
example, of the approximately 2 million people in need in the four governorates, on
average 38 per cent are receiving food support each month and 16 per cent are
receiving health support.
62. While the United Nations and partners have been able to reach the locations in
these governorates, access to hard-to-reach locations in other parts of the country
remains extremely challenging and needs far exceed the response. For example, on

10/22

14-65066

S/2014/840

average, 20 percent of people in hard-to-reach areas throughout the country have
received food assistance from the United Nations and NGOs each month since the
adoption of resolution 2165 (2014) and 11 per cent have received health supplies.
63. Parties to the conflict continue to restrict access to besieged areas. No more
than two besieged locations have been reached in any month since the adoption of
resolution 2165 (2014) and only one location has been reached in each of the past
two months. In the four months preceding the adoption of the resolution, on average
8 per cent of people besieged received food each month, 6.1 per cent received
non-food items and 1.6 per cent received medical support. In the four months since
the adoption of the resolution on average 4.3 per cent of people besieged have
received food each month, 2.2 per cent have received non-food items and 10.9 per
cent have received medical support, although medical assistance has been provided
to only 1,115 people and 1,657 people over the past two months.
64. Since the adoption of resolution 2165 (2014), the ability of agencies to deliver
medical assistance to people in hard-to-reach locations continues to be hindered by
the lack of approvals from the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic. During the
reporting period, WHO continued to negotiate with the Government, including the
Office of the President, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Health,
and advocated for an equitable distribution of health interventions, including
vaccines, medicines and medical supplies and equipment. While deliveries have
been made to hard-to-reach areas from both within the Syrian Arab Republic and
across borders since the adoption of the resolution, concerns remain as the
Government continues to withdraw medicines, medical equipment and supplies such
as antibiotics and injectable medicines, including for surgical interventions, from
WHO deliveries and United Nations inter-agency convoys.
65. Humanitarian staff continue to face grave risks in carrying out their duties.
Since the end of July, eight humanitarians have been killed, as have 49 health
workers. Premises, including schools, hospitals, offices and residences, have also
been attacked. Some 21 medical facilities were attacked between August and
October, compared with 27 during the period from May to July.

III. Observations
66. The situation in the Syrian Arab Republic continues to deteriorate. Attacks
with barrel bomb attacks and explosive weapons continue to be carried out in
civilian areas. Schools, hospitals, basic services and humanitarian deliveries have
not been spared from attack. The number of people killed, injured, displaced and in
need of assistance continues to increase.
67. In its report on ISIL, the international commission of inquiry details harrowing
examples of the punishment inflicted upon those not confirming to ISIL mores. The
testimonies of those who are victims of the violence are a constant reminder of the
urgent need to protect people, particularly minorities, from ISIL brutality. I
appreciate that the international community is acting to address the grave threat to
international peace and security posed by ISIL and other Al-Qaeda-affiliated groups.
ISIL must be defeated. I remain concerned, however, that a military campaign alone
could lead to further radicalization and spark a cycle of renewed violence. The
violence in the Syrian Arab Republic is escalating, more people are suffering every

14-65066

11/22

S/2014/840

day and groups on all sides are profiting from the deteriorating security and
governance environment.
68. Government forces, armed opposition groups and designated terrorists
continue to attack, kill and injure civilians with impunity. Other actions, such as
locating military positions in populated areas or placing populations under siege as
a tactic of war, are unacceptable and should be condemned. Those responsible must
be held accountable.
69. There are now 12.2 million people in need of assistance and 7.6 million people
who have been internally displaced. Another 3.2 million people have fled to
neighbouring countries. Humanitarian workers aiming to save lives must be given
every opportunity to reach people who are desperate for assistance.
70. The adoption by the Security Council of resolution 2165 (2014) has enabled
United Nations agencies and partners to reach more locations where assistance is
urgently needed and to complement the cross-border assistance that NGOs have
been delivering for years. But needs continue to rise and the situation on the ground
continues to deteriorate.
71. United Nations humanitarian agencies and partners plan to continue to scale
up aid deliveries in the weeks and months ahead, both from within the country and
across borders. The new routes that opened up following the adoption of resolution
2165 (2014) have allowed improved assessments and coordination of the response
in key governorates where significant needs remain. The use of additional bordercrossing points means that agencies can increase the humanitarian assistance they
provide in opposition-controlled areas.
72. The monitoring mechanism has fulfilled the mandate it was given by the
Security Council, ensuring the strictly humanitarian nature of United Nations
operations. The scale of the mechanism will continue to be adapted to ensure that it
has the capacity to do the job required while remaining light and flexible.
73. While some progress has been made, over 12 million people still urgently need
help. Nearly 5 million of them live in areas that remain hard to reach despite the
additional access granted through resolution 2165 (2014) and only a portion are
receiving humanitarian assistance. Some 212,000 people remain besieged and in
desperate conditions. They all must be protected, have their rights respected, be
allowed access to aid and be allowed to live in dignity.
74. While the international community must do whatever it can to make sure that
the rights of people in the Syrian Arab Republic are respected and that their needs
are met, ultimate responsibility lies with the parties to the conflict. They must
immediately reduce the violence and end the conflict. The proposal made by my
Special Envoy to establish incremental freezes, beginning with the city of Aleppo, is
first and foremost intended to lead to a strategic de-escalation of violence, starting
from specific areas with a national impact. They could also serve as building blocks
to arrive at a national, all-inclusive political process. I count on the continued
support of the Security Council for my Special Envoy’s efforts.

12/22

14-65066

S/2014/840

Annex
Implementation of Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014)
and 2165 (2014) a
1.

Protection of civilians b
Examples of attacks on civilian facilities (schools, hospitals, camps, places of worship)
• On 13 November, more than 7 children were killed and 13 injured as a result
of barrel bombs on Tal Laylan primary school in Ras al-Ain, Hasakeh.
• On 12 November, two mortars landed on the Karnaz primary school, northwest of Hama city, which resulted in 7 children killed and 4 injured.
• On 5 November, Al-Hayat school in the Al-Qaboun neighbourhood of
Damascus was hit by a mortar, which resulted in 11 children killed and many
others injured.
• On 29 October, a vehicle-borne improvised explosive device detonated near
Sanaa Muhaydaly school in the Al-Zahra neighbourhood of Homs city;
according to reports 1 child was killed and some 40 people were injured.
• On 29 October, barrel bombs were dropped on a small settlement for internally
displaced persons near Hbit in northern Hama, which reportedly resulted in the
deaths of 13 people, including children.
• On 28 October, an explosion detonated in Yarmouk camp, Damascus,
reportedly killing 4 people.
• On 28 October, two barrel bombs were reportedly dropped on a house and on a
school in the village of Sheikh Miskine, Dar’a, killing 5 civilians, including
3 children, and critically injuring 11 others.
• On 27 October, a mortar landed near Al-Kamal private school and Ebla
University in the government-controlled area of Hamiduniyeh in Aleppo city,
which resulted in 6 people killed, including 4 children, and around 30 injured.
• On 23 October, in Tal Qarah, Rif Dimashq, a barrel bomb was allegedly
dropped on a wedding hall used by internally displaced persons as a shelter. As
a result, 14 civilians, including 11 children, were reportedly killed.
• On 20 October, reported shelling (with mortars) on Quneitra University in
Baath city during class hours resulted in 17 people injured, 1 of whom
critically.
• The United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) reported that, in the first nine
months of 2014, the United Nations in Syria had verified at least 35 attacks on
or near schools that killed 105 children and injured 293. The actual numbers

__________________
a The data contained in the present annex are based on contributions received from United

Nations agencies and other partners during the reporting period. The data may be revised and
updated as more information becomes available.
b The United Nations has a distinct and regular mechanism of reporting on the six grave
violations against children in armed conflict that has set verification standards and periodicity of
reporting to identify trends.

14-65066

13/22

S/2014/840

are likely to be higher and there are indications that attacks in some areas may
have been deliberate.
Large-scale impact of conflict on public services
• The conflict continued to disrupt health-care services throughout the country:
o Hospitals have been damaged in 12 of the country’s 14 governorates. By the
end of September 2014, of the 109 assessed public hospitals 43 per cent
were reported to be fully functioning, 35 per cent were reported to be
partially functioning (i.e. there was a shortage of staff, equipment and
medicines and some buildings were damaged) and 22 per cent were reported
to be non-functioning (completely out of service).
o Public health clinics have been damaged in every governorate. By the end of
June 2014, of the 1,514 public health clinics 51 per cent were reported to be
fully functioning, 21 per cent were reported to be partially functioning
(i.e. there was a shortage of staff, equipment and medicines and some
buildings were damaged) and 18 per cent were reported to be non-functioning
(completely out of service), while the functionality status of 10 per cent of the
health centres was undetermined.
• The electricity supply continued to be unstable in Aleppo city, with up to
36 hours of total blackout reported from 18 October caused by damage to
Zeyzoun station, affecting 1.5 million people. The electricity supply has since
been restored, albeit on a rationing schedule, including in western Aleppo,
where the supply was reportedly of only six hours per day.
• From 27 October, the water supply to Idlib city was cut for six days and the
electricity supply for three days, affecting some 1.3 million people, after an
electricity cable was broken as a result of fighting. The Syrian Arab Red
Crescent (SARC) and local authorities continue to be prevented from
accessing the area for repairs. Electricity and water supply were restored
through an alternative source from Zeyzoun station.
2.

Safe and unhindered humanitarian access to people in need
Hard-to-reach areas:
• Food assistance was provided to 332,150 people during the reporting period in
hard-to-reach areas, 323,350 by the World Food Programme (WFP) and 8,800
by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA).
• Non-food items were provided to 127,195 people in hard-to-reach areas by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR),
UNICEF and the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA).
• Water and sanitation assistance was provided to 226,416 people by UNICEF.
• Medical assistance was provided to 231,474 people (171,474 by the World
Health Organization (WHO), 60,000 by UNICEF and 1,657 by UNRWA).
• Nutrition supplies were provided to 18,547 children.
• Education support was provided to 41,145 children by UNICEF.

14/22

14-65066

S/2014/840

• Agriculture assistance was provided to 26,369 beneficiaries by the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO).
Inter-agency cross-line convoys
• Three inter-agency convoys took place during the reporting period:
o On 26 October, a 22-truck inter-agency convoy was dispatched to western
Aleppo (Big Orem, Afrin, Nubul and Zahra) to deliver food and non-food
items for 47,500 people, education supplies for 2,570 children and medicines
for 230,000 patients, including six inter-agency health kits. The assistance
delivered also targeted families displaced from Ayn al-Arab/Kobane to Afrin.
Deliveries to Nubul and Zahra have not taken place, as armed opposition
groups in control of the area have yet to allow access.
o Two inter-agency convoys were dispatched to Homs:
▪

From 11 to 13 November, a United Nations-SARC inter-agency convoy
reached the Al-Wa’er neighbourhood of Homs city with food and
non-food items for 60,000 people, including hygiene supplies, nutrition
assistance and winter clothing. Although a letter to facilitate operations
had been received, Syrian security forces removed all medical assistance,
including surgical supplies, on 13 November, thereby preventing supplies
for 47,701 medical treatments from reaching the area. Also on
13 November, one SARC truck was shelled; no injuries were reported.

▪

On 21 October, an inter-agency convoy reached Krad Dasnieh and Tir
Maallah, northern rural Homs. Food, non-food items and water,
sanitation and hygiene assistance for 10,000 people were delivered in Tir
Maallah, while food, non-food items and water, sanitation and hygiene
assistance for 4,500 people was delivered in Krad Dasnieh. Midwifery
kits were removed from the convoy by the Syrian authorities. On
22 October, the Governor of Homs requested the United Nations hub to
send a new request so that midwifery kits could be delivered to SARC.

• Four inter-agency convoys could not be dispatched during the reporting
period:
o A convoy to eastern Ghouta, Rif Dimashq, targeting 5,000 people on
19 October was not dispatched because no feedback was received from the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
o A convoy to As-Zabadani, Rif Dimashq, targeting 5,000 people on 20 and
21 October was not dispatched because of a lack of response from the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
o A convoy to Madaya, Rif Dimashq, targeting 5,000 people on 22 and
23 October was not dispatched because of a lack of response from the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
• An inter-agency convoy to Khan Shaykun, Idlib governorate, for the provision
of multisectoral assistance for 15,000 people from 1 to 5 November could not
be dispatched. Although the Governor of Idlib had approved the convoy and
submitted a request to the Ministry of Social Affairs, no formal approval was
received. On 30 October, the relief committee of Idlib reviewed and endorsed

14-65066

15/22

S/2014/840

the revised plan for inter-agency convoys in Idlib. The revised plan has been
approved by the newly appointed Governor and is awaiting approval by the
Ministry of Social Affairs.
• On 2 November, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs communicated that the
Government would permit medical supplies to reach Duma, Erbin, Zamalka,
Zabadani and Madayya in Rif Dimashq, provided that delivery of those
supplies was coordinated with the Ministry of Health and SARC. WHO is
coordinating with the Ministry of Health and SARC and the United Nations
has reiterated its request to deliver food, non-food, and water and sanitation
supplies.
Besieged areas
• A total of 241,000 people remained besieged at the beginning of the reporting
period.
• During the reporting period, Yarmouk was the only besieged location reached.
Food assistance was distributed to 8,800 people (3.7 per cent of those
besieged), non-food items and water were distributed to 8,800 people (3.7 per
cent) and medical assistance was distributed to 1,657 people (0.7 per cent of
people in besieged areas).
Cross-border assistance
• According to the Turkish Red Crescent Society, humanitarian actors have
channelled about $9 million into humanitarian assistance in October from
Turkey into the Syrian Arab Republic through the zero-point delivery system
administered by the Society. The monthly average does not include assistance
delivered by commercial or other channels.
Pursuant to resolution 2165 (2014)
• The United Nations and its partners have sent 30 shipments — 23 from Turkey
and 7 from Jordan — to the Syrian Arab Republic under the terms of Security
Council resolution 2165 (2014) to locations in Aleppo, Idlib, Lattakia, Hama,
Quneitra and Dar’a governorates. The shipments contained food assistance for
over 208,000 people, non-food items for around 237,900 people, water and
sanitation supplies for nearly 86,000 people and medical supplies for over
250,000 people. Many of the medical supplies that were shipped are reusable
and will benefit many more patients in the coming months. Other assistance
for almost 48,000 people has also been delivered.
Safety of humanitarian workers
• On 16 November, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) released a
video in which it executed an American aid worker.
• On 13 November, a truck hired by the United Nations and SARC to transport
relief supplies as part of an inter-agency convoy to the Al-Wa’er
neighbourhood of Homs city was hit by gunfire, causing a minor injury to the
driver.

16/22

14-65066

S/2014/840

• On 7 November, two SARC volunteers were killed when a mortar shell hit a
civilian area of Homs. The two were transporting supplies to be used as part of
a joint SARC-UNICEF project that provides children traumatized by the
conflict with psychosocial assistance.
• The number of humanitarian workers killed since March 2011 stands at 69. Of
that total, 17 were United Nations staff, 40 were SARC staff and volunteers,
7 were Palestine Red Crescent Society volunteers and staff, and 5 were
international non-governmental organization (NGO) staff.
• A total of 27 United Nations national staff members continue to be detained or
missing, of whom 24 are UNRWA staff.
Declaration of commitment
• A total of 24 armed opposition groups have signed a declaration of
commitment affirming their core responsibilities under international
humanitarian law and their commitment to facilitate action to meet the needs
of civilians on the basis of need alone. There were no new signatories during
the reporting period.
3.

Safe passage of medical personnel and supplies
Attacks on medical facilities during the reporting period
• Physicians for Human Rights documented five attacks on medical facilities in
October. Four were by government forces and one by unidentified forces. Two
attacks were in Rif Dimashq, one in Dar’a, one in Deir ez-Zor and one in Idlib
governorates. One attack was carried out with a car bomb, two with barrel
bombs, one with barrel bombs and rockets, and one with rockets.
• In total, Physicians for Human Rights has documented 207 attacks on 166
separate medical facilities throughout the Syrian Arab Republic since the start
of the conflict. Of the total, 186 (89.9 per cent) were by government forces,
14 (6.8 per cent) by non-State armed groups (the Free Syrian Army, ISIL, the
Nusra Front and the Islamic Liberation Front), and 7 (3.4 per cent) by
unknown forces.
• In October, Physicians for Human Rights documented the deaths of 19 medical
personnel, of whom 9 were targeted or killed in the line of duty. All of them
were killed by government forces. Of the total, 16 were killed by shellings and
bombings, one by torture, one by execution and one was shot.
• In total, Physicians for Human Rights has documented the deaths of
578 c medical personnel as at 31 October 2014. Of the total, 569 deaths were
by government forces, 7 by forces of non-State armed groups and 2 by
unknown forces. The most common cause of death continues to be shelling
and bombing (272 deaths, or 47.1 per cent), followed by shooting (156 deaths,
or 27.0 per cent), torture (82 deaths, or 14.2 per cent) and execution (53
deaths, or 9.2 per cent).

__________________
c While conducting regular data cleaning, Physicians for Human Rights identified and corrected a

total of 12 duplicate or non-civilian entries.

14-65066

17/22

S/2014/840

Removal of medicines and medical supplies from convoys
• Although a letter to facilitate operations had been received, on 12 November
security forces removed all medical assistance, including surgical supplies,
from an inter-agency convoy to Al-Wa’er in Homs, preventing supplies for
47,701 medical treatments from reaching the area.
• Since the beginning of October, 10 requests made by WHO have been rejected
or gone unanswered by the Government:
o Four of the requests, for the provision of support to hard-to-reach areas in
Raqqa, Deir ez-Zor, Rif Dimashq and the besieged area of Duma, were not
approved by the Government, preventing the distribution of 479,000 medical
treatments, d including surgical supplies and chronic disease medicines.
o Six requests to the Ministry of Health submitted since the beginning of
October to access 17 opposition-controlled areas in Aleppo, Hasakeh, Raqqa,
Dar’a, Deir ez-Zor and Idlib governorates with drugs and medical supplies
have gone unanswered.
• One inter-agency request to deliver surgical supplies and equipment for 1,100
treatments in a village in opposition-controlled Rif Dimashq was not approved
by the Government.
Polio vaccination campaign
• There have been no new confirmed cases of polio during the reporting period.
There are still 36 confirmed polio cases (35 cases in 2013 and 1 case in 2014).
• The ninth polio immunization campaign occurred between 19 and 23 October
2014. Of the 2.9 million children under 5 years of age who were targeted,
approximately 2.7 million were vaccinated, including in hard-to-reach and
opposition-controlled areas. Coverage rates exceeded 90 per cent in most
governorates, except Deir ez-Zor (69 per cent), Idlib (84 per cent), Rif
Dimashq (84 per cent) and Aleppo (89 per cent). Since the campaign began in
late 2013, UNICEF has provided 34 million doses of oral polio vaccine to
contain the outbreak in the Syrian Arab Republic.
• An additional campaign is planned for the last week of November in high-risk
districts throughout the country.
4.

Administrative hurdles
• On 9 June, the Ministry of Social Affairs communicated to governors that all
convoys or missions required the approval of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
the High Relief Committee and the National Security Office to travel to “hotspot areas”. e Previously, the governors would coordinate and authorize

__________________
d One standard treatment course (for example, a course of antibiotics for eight days) is considered

as treatment for one person. Treatment courses are determined for each medicine distribution on
the basis of international WHO standards.
e The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic refers to “hot spots”. Clarification was requested
by the United Nations on 16 July for the definition and criteria of “hot spots” but such
clarification has not been received. For the purpose of the present report, and until clarification
has been received, they are understood to be hard-to-reach because of the difficulty of reaching
these locations.

18/22

14-65066

S/2014/840

delivery of assistance within their respective governorates, including across
lines of conflict. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs communicated verbally to the
United Nations on 7 September that this requirement had been removed and
that governors had been empowered to authorize inter-agency cross-line
convoys. Delivery of assistance to hard-to-reach locations, however, continues
to be hampered as a result of the directive.
• On 7 July, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs communicated a time frame for
submitting the weekly loading plans in accordance with the truck-sealing
procedures rolled out for the movement of trucks for regular programmes:
loading plans are to be submitted by United Nations agencies each Monday
during working hours. The Government has committed to clear the weekly
loading plans on Thursday for distribution to start on Saturdays. On 26 August,
the Ministry stated that agencies could send the loading plans on a biweekly or
monthly basis to simplify procedures, as weekly loading plans were creating
constraints.
• An exemption was obtained with respect to the distribution of medicines and
medical equipment and water, sanitation and hygiene items for regular
programmes. The distribution of such items will be exempted from some of
the new procedures rolled out by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in April and
May.
• On 11 September, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs notified the United Nations
that the regular importation of goods through the official border crossings,
namely Jdaidet Yabous, Tartus port, Ladhiqiyah port, Naseeb and Nusaybin,
could proceed to United Nations or international NGO warehouses directly
from the crossing upon authorization by the official in charge of the crossing
rather than requiring an additional facilitation letter from the Governor. Other
administrative procedures continue to apply.
Empowered interlocutors
• Government of the Syrian Arab Republic. The joint United NationsGovernment of the Syrian Arab Republic committee established following the
adoption of Security Council resolution 2139 (2014) includes a security focal
point. Regular meetings take place between the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
and the United Nations Humanitarian Coordinator on an almost daily basis.
• The opposition is still unable to designate empowered interlocutors. The
fragmented nature of the opposition makes it difficult to clearly identify an
interlocutor for armed opposition groups. Ad hoc local engagement is ongoing
to negotiate access. Interlocutors vary depending on the localities where
access is being negotiated.
Visas
• The revised visa policy established by the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic on 4 March continued to be implemented. As at 16 November, a total
of 19 United Nations visas or renewal requests remained pending, of which 6
were within the 15-working-day limit and 13 exceeded the 15-working-day
limit.

14-65066

19/22

S/2014/840

• As at 16 November, the number of pending visas for international NGOs
dropped from 17 to 8.
International non-governmental organization partners
• The number of international NGOs approved to work in the Syrian Arab
Republic stands at 16.
• International NGOs are still not authorized to work directly with national
NGOs and are not allowed to accompany United Nations convoys.
• There was no progress in the revision of the standard memorandum of
understanding for international NGOs with SARC and line ministries.
National non-governmental organization partners
• Nine national NGOs were authorized to partner with agencies of the United
Nations system in Aleppo, Deir ez-Zor, Hama, Lattakia and Sweida during the
reporting period. One national NGO based in Damascus, but not working with
United Nations organizations, was removed from the list of authorized NGOs.
• The number of national NGOs authorized to partner with the United Nations
stands at 107; they are operating through 165 branches.
5.

Funding
• A total of $35.5 million in funding for the Syrian crisis was registered during
the reporting period. Of that amount, $12.6 million was for activities inside the
Syrian Arab Republic and $22.8 million was for support to Syrian refugees in
neighbouring countries.
• Of the total amount reported for the Syrian Arab Republic during the reporting
period, 30.2 per cent ($3.8 million) was for activities included in the Syrian
Arab Republic Humanitarian Assistance Response Plan. For neighbouring
countries, 69.8 per cent ($8.8 million) of the amount reported was for
activities included in the Syrian Arab Republic Regional Refugee Response
Plan.
• As at 16 November, the total funding for the Syrian Arab Republic
Humanitarian Assistance Response Plan and the Syrian Arab Republic
Regional Refugee Response Plan stood at 48 per cent ($6.02 billion requested,
$2.87 billion received). The Syrian Arab Republic Humanitarian Assistance
Response Plan is 39 per cent funded and the Syrian Arab Republic Regional
Refugee Response Plan is 53 per cent funded.

6.

Overview of United Nations humanitarian response
Food assistance
• In October, WFP dispatched food for over 3.9 million people in 12 of
14 governorates, reaching 92 per cent of the overall monthly target.
• As at 12 November, WFP had reached close to 1.8 million beneficiaries in
11 governorates as part of the November dispatch cycle.

20/22

14-65066

S/2014/840

• Widespread fighting across the country and subsequent delays in approval
continued to constrain humanitarian access and affect WFP capacity to deliver
at planned scale to Deir ez-Zor and Raqqa, Rif Dimashq, rural areas in Dar’a
and Quneitra governorates, while heightened insecurity caused a slowdown of
deliveries to opposition-controlled rural areas in Idlib and Aleppo.
• On 11 November, WFP initiated a planned shipment of 46,000 family food
rations to Quamishli through Nusaybin, marking the second consecutive month
in which WFP has been able to deliver sufficient supplies to Hasakeh to meet
the monthly target of 227,000 beneficiaries.
Core relief items and shelter
• UNHCR dispatched core relief items for 264,884 people overall during the
reporting period. As at 12 November 2014, UNHCR had delivered 14.08 million
core relief items to 3.97 million beneficiaries in 13 out of 14 governorates.
• So far in 2014, UNHCR has completed the planned rehabilitation of collective
shelters in 9 of 11 governorates, benefitting 19,266 people. Furthermore,
private shelters were upgraded for 36,023 beneficiaries in Homs, Rif Dimashq,
Dar’a and Aleppo.
Health
• Through its regular programme, WHO distributed medicines and supplies for
nearly 2.9 million medical treatments in 11 governorates.
• UNICEF reached 77,263 people with health support, including 60,000 people
with access to primary health-care services in rural Aleppo, including with
inter-agency emergency health kits, as part of the inter-agency convoy of
23 October.
• UNFPA continued to support its implementing partners in the delivery of
lifesaving reproductive health services through 28 mobile clinics, 27 static
clinics and 13 medical points in 10 governorates. During the reporting period,
39,810 women received reproductive health services; of that total, 6,125
benefited from family planning services. Furthermore, 4,709 pregnant women
received antenatal care and 553 women were referred for emergency obstetric
care services through reproductive health vouchers.
• As at 4 November 2014, the 13 primary health-care clinics of UNHCR in
Damascus, Rif Dimashq, Homs, Tartous, Aleppo and Hasakeh have provided
433,919 beneficiaries with access to primary health care.
Nutrition
• UNICEF and partners provided nutrition supplies for 18,547 children in rural
and eastern Aleppo and in Homs.
Water, sanitation and hygiene
• UNICEF continued to support water treatment nationwide through the
provision of chlorine to 16.55 million people, 42 per cent of whom were in
hard-to-reach areas. During the reporting period, UNICEF improved access to
water and sanitation for 226,416 people through regular programming.

14-65066

21/22

S/2014/840

• UNICEF has also airlifted a total of 120 metric tons of chlorine for water
treatment to Hasakeh, as well as 30 metric tons of sodium hypochlorite and
10 metric tons of water purification tabs, covering needs for five months for
800,000 people.
Education
• UNICEF continued to implement its 2014/15 “Back to learning campaign”,
which aims to provide 1 million children with school bags and essential
stationery, such as pens and notebooks, in nearly 300 sub-districts in all
14 governorates. During the reporting period, UNICEF, through its partners,
distributed a total of 81,872 school-bag kits and supplies overall. This
included 37,506 school-bag kits and supplies in hard-to-reach locations in
Aleppo and Dar’a and Idlib governorates. Since the start of the campaign in
September, UNICEF and partners have reached 180,000 of the 395,000
children in hard-to-reach locations targeted. UNICEF airlifted text books for
49,360 school children in Hasakeh governorate.
Palestine refugees
• Through emergency programming, UNRWA provided food assistance to
308,080 people, cash assistance to 44,686 people, hygiene kits to
approximately 10,064 people and additional non-food items to around 16,620
people. Through its regular programming, the Agency delivered health
consultations to 77,357 people, education to 39,975 students, 598 new
microfinance loans and water and sanitation assistance to 8,405 people.
Agriculture
• FAO, with support from partners, provided agricultural support (wheat, barley
seeds and animal feed) to almost 30,000 people in Raqqa, Homs and Hama
governorates.
Protection and community services
• UNHCR continued to extend protection support through seven offices,
17 community centres, partner organizations and outreach volunteers. Since
the beginning of 2014, UNHCR has provided 312,881 vulnerable persons with
protection and community services support activities.
• UNFPA supported partners to provide medical examinations and psychosocial
support for approximately 13,740 women in five governorates. In addition,
3,035 women and girls were screened for gender-based violence; the 802 who
were found to be survivors of such violence received specialized services,
including medical counselling and legal advice.
• UNICEF provided psychosocial support to 9,420 children in Damascus and
Homs governorates, including 1,080 Iraqi refugee children in Nerwoz camp.

22/22

14-65066
