XIII. BESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE SIXTH COMMI1TEJ:.
Allowance of 100 florins for
every day on which he acts
as President, up to a maxi10,000
murn of ..... .
Members:
Annual salary
54,000
Judges referred to in article 31 of the Statute:
Allowance of 120 florins for
each <lay on which they exercise their functions, plus
a daily subsistence allowance nf 60 florins.
Twn1tv-third plenar'y meeting, 6 February 1946.

17(1). AMENDMENTS TO THE PROVISIONAL
RULES OF PROCEDURE

Rule 33
T he General Assembly resolves that:
(a) the following sentencP shall bP added at
the end of rule 33:
"lt shall not, however, decide any political
question."
( b) a new rule 33A shall be included after
this rul,· ·" follows:
"A Member of the General Assembly which
has no representative on the General Committee, and which has requested the inclusion of
an additional .ítem in the agenda, shall be entitled to attend any meeting of the General
Committee at which its rcquest is discussed,
and may participate, without vote, in the discussion of that item."

20 (1) • PENSIONS UF THE JUDGES AND STAFF OF
THE INTERNATIONAL CoURT OF JusTICE

The General Assembly is desirous of assuring
that adequate and reasonable pensions be assurcd
to the judges and the registrar and the staff of the
lnternatio11al Court of Justice and therefore directs
the Secretary-General, in consultation with the
registrar nf the Court, to develop a pension plan
for judgcs and registrar and staff for submission to
the second part of the first session of the General
Assemhlv.
Tu·cnty-third plenary 1111·ctirzg, 6 February 1946.

Rule 73
The General Assembly resolves that:
Rule 73 shall be amended by the addition, at the
end, of the following sen tcnce:
"There shall be no nominations."

Sufiplemenlary Rule T
The General Assembly resol ves that:
Supplementary rule T shall be amended to read
as follows:
"Pending thP adoption, under paragraph 4 of
Articlc 62 of the Charter, of definitive rules for
( ) ~
the calling of internationaJ conforences, tht> Eco- 21 1 • i:>TEPS NECESSARY FOR CONVENING THE
nomic and Social Council may, after due consulJNTERN"ATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE
tation with l\frmbers of the Umted Nations, cal!
I t is desirablc tha t the In ternationaJ Court of
international conferences in conformity with thc
Justict' should mct't as soon as possible after the
spirit of Article 62 on any mattr·r within the comelection of its mnnbcrs bv tht• General Asscmbly
petence of the Council, including the following
,uHl the Sccurity Council. '
matters: international trade and employment;
In corrc.spondcnce with thc Socrctary of the
the equitable adjustment of prict>s on the interBoard of Director, ní thc CarncgiC' Foundation,
national market, and health."
thc Executive Secrctarv has ascertained that the
Rlghteenth plenar1; meeting, 26 January, and
Board is willing to n{eet representativcs of thP
nineteenth ml'Pting, 29 January 1946.
Unitcd Nations at Thc Bague to begin preliminarv
ncgotiations in order to fix the conditions on which
the premises in the Peacc Palace at The Hague,
18(1).CoMMITTEE STRUCTURE OF THE
which are requircd by thP International Court of
J estice, can be placed at thp disposal of the Court.
GENERAL AssEMBL Y
Therefor,· the Genaa! Assembly instructs thr
The General Assembly noted the report of the
Srcretary-General:
Sixth Committee ( docurnf'nt A/36) and adopted
its conclusions.
1. To take the neccssary steps to summon a first
meeting of thc Court at The Bague as soon as can
Thirty-first pfrnary rnuting, 13 February 1946.
be conveniently arrangTd after the election of tht>
mt>mbers:

19(1) º EMOLUMENTS OF JUDGES OF THE INTER-

2. To appoint a Secrctary and such other temporary officers as may be required to assist the
Court and to act for so long as the Court desires
during tht> pcriod preceding the appointment of its
registrar and its officers:

NATIONAL CouRT OF JusTICE 1

The General Assembly resol ves that:
the emoluments of the judgcs of the International Court of Justice shall be tíxed according to
the following scale.
.Vetherland fiorins
Presiden!:
Annual saJary
54,000
Special allowance
15,000
Vice-President:
Annual salary
54,000

T To conduct preliminary negotiations with the
Board of Directors of the Carnegie Foundation, at
The Bague or other convenient place, in order to
fix the conditions on which the premisrs in the
Peace Palace at The Bague, which are required by
the. lnte_rnational Court of Justice, can be placed
at 1ts disposaJ, the conditions being embodied in
an agreement subject to the approval of the General Assembly.
Ta nzty-righth plenary mat,ng, 10 February 1946.

' Thia re!Olution was biued on a joint recommendation
from the Fifth and Sixth Committee,

24
