S/PV.8262

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8262nd meeting

Thursday, 17 May 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

President Duda/Ms. Wronecka/Mr. Radomski. . . . . . . . . . .

(Poland)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Djédjé
Mr. Nguema Obiang Mangue
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Beketayev
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Blok
Mr. Ruda Santolaria
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Skoog
Ms. Baldwin
Mrs. Haley

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Upholding international law within the context of the maintenance of
international peace and security
Letter dated 3 May 2018 from the Permanent Representative of Poland to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2018/417/Rev.1)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-15180 (E)
*1815180*

S/PV.8262

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Upholding international law within the context
of the maintenance of international peace
and security
Letter dated 3 May 2018 from the
Permanent Representative of Poland
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2018/417/Rev.1)
The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
Ministers and other distinguished representatives
here in the Security Council Chamber. Their presence
today underscores the importance of the subject matter
under discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representatives
of Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bangladesh, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Djibouti, Egypt, Estonia, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Haiti, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic
of Iran, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Latvia,
Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Maldives, Mexico,
Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Norway, Pakistan,
Portugal, Qatar, Rwanda, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine, the United
Arab Emirates, Uruguay, the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela, Viet Nam and Yemen to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Maria Luiza
Ribeiro Viotti, Chef de Cabinet of the SecretaryGeneral; Judge Hisashi Owada, Senior Judge on,
and President Emeritus of, the International Court
of Justice; and Judge Theodor Meron, President of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the
following to participate in this meeting: Her Excellency
Ms. Joanne Adamson, Chargé d’Affaires ad interim of
the Delegation of the European Union to the United
2/97

17/05/2018

Nations, and Her Excellency Ms. Fatima Kyari
Mohammed, Permanent Observer of the African Union
to the United Nations.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to also draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2018/417/Rev.1, which contains the
text of a letter dated 3 May 2018 from the Permanent
Representative of Poland to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept note on the item under consideration.
I now give the floor to Ms. Viotti.
Ms. Viotti: I am honoured to read out this statement
on behalf of the Secretary-General.
“I thank the Government of Poland for
organizing this important debate on the role of the
Security Council in upholding international law.
International law is foundational to the Organization,
and the Security Council has a special role to play
in ensuring that it is respected. I welcome Poland’s
suggestion that today’s debate pay special attention
to promoting the peaceful settlement of disputes
and the Council’s involvement in that process.
“The Charter of the United Nations does
not prescribe the use of any particular means of
settlement for disputes between Member States,
nor does it establish any particular hierarchy among
them. Member States are free to choose between
negotiation, inquiry, mediation, conciliation,
arbitration, judicial settlement, resort to regional
agencies or arrangements or other peaceful means
of their choice. The Security Council, for its part,
has many options. It can call on States to settle their
disputes and draw their attention to the means that
are available to them. It can recommend to States
that they use a particular means of settlement, a
power the Council has rarely employed.
“The Council can support States in using the
means they have chosen. It can support the initiatives
of States and other international organizations,
18-15180

17/05/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

institutions or people that try to assist States in
resolving their differences. The Council can also
task the Secretary-General with trying to assist
States to reach a settlement, or even establish
a subsidiary organ for that purpose — again, a
power that, since its early years, it has not often
employed. And where States have agreed to use
the International Court of Justice, there is a role
the Council may play in ensuring that the Court’s
judgment is properly observed. Allow me to take this
opportunity to call on Member States to consider
accepting the Court’s compulsory jurisdiction.
“Let me turn now to another issue of relevance
to today’s discussion, namely, accountability
for international crimes. Through its resolutions
establishing the International Tribunals for the
former Yugoslavia, in 1993, and for Rwanda, in
1994, the Security Council has had an undeniable
impact on international law. The two Tribunals
have laid the groundwork for the development
of international criminal law, a field that barely
existed before. At the same time, the Council has
advanced the interpretation of the Charter and of
its own functions, acknowledging the close link
between international criminal justice and the
purposes of the United Nations. The advancement of
international criminal justice therefore falls within
the scope of the Security Council’s responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and
security. The Security Council was also involved
in the establishment of the Special Court for Sierra
Leone and the Special Tribunal for Lebanon.
“But the Security Council’s role in the fight
against impunity has gone beyond creating
tribunals. In the Central African Republic, it
mandated the United Nations peacekeeping
operation, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic, to support the Special Criminal
Court, a national court established by national law.
The Council has also requested the Secretariat to
work closely with the African Union Commission
in support of efforts to establish the hybrid court
for South Sudan. Moreover, in cases where it is
difficult to foresee the establishment of effective
accountability mechanisms in the immediate
future, there is increasing momentum for gathering
and securing evidence for use in national, regional
or international courts that might in future have

S/PV. 8262

jurisdiction over relevant crimes. In the case of
Iraq, the Council unanimously adopted resolution
2379 (2017), which established an independent
investigative team to support domestic efforts to
hold Da’esh accountable for its actions in Iraq.
The Secretariat has been working closely with the
Government of Iraq and other key stakeholders to
operationalize that important mechanism.
“International criminal accountability is
still a relatively new area of work for the United
Nations, but it is already clear that there is room
for improvement in three specific areas. First, the
Security Council needs to be the driving force
to ensure that international humanitarian law,
international human rights law and other relevant
rules, norms and standards are fully included
in any accountability process. Secondly, those
institutions require sustainable funding. Yet, even
as the international community considers creating
new institutions, funding for some of the existing
hybrid institutions has largely dried up, thereby
putting at risk the gains of judicial efforts. Thirdly,
effective accountability requires the constructive
engagement of the international community. I
encourage Member States to engage with the
Secretariat during the process of establishing and
supporting accountability mechanisms to help
ensure that the framework for the establishment
of any mechanism conform with applicable United
Nations standards and policies.
“The Security Council has played a critical
role in upholding international law, supporting the
peaceful settlement of disputes and advancing the
fight against impunity. Against a backdrop of grave
threats and growing turmoil in many regions, the
unity of this organ and the serious commitment of
the entire international community will be crucial
to preventing human suffering and defending our
common humanity. The Secretariat stands ready to
support such efforts.”
The President: I thank Ms. Viotti for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Judge Owada.
Judge Owada: It is a great privilege for me once
again address the Security Council on matters pertaining
to our shared endeavour to achieve international
peace and security. As former President and a senior
member of the International Court of Justice, I make
my statement today on behalf of my esteemed colleague

18-151803/97

S/PV.8262

Maintenance of international peace and security

His Excellency Judge Abdulqawi Ahmed Yusuf, who
is now the President of the Court and, regrettably, is
unable attend this Security Council meeting. I recall
that during my own mandate as President of the Court,
from 2009 to 2012, I had opportunities on several
occasions to emphasize the constructive dialogue
that these annual meetings foster between the Court
and the Security Council. I therefore wholeheartedly
welcome and embrace the present initiative of the
Polish presidency to hold an open debate on upholding
international law within the context of the maintenance
of international peace and security. In my view, this
is a most opportune moment to provide a platform for
wider discussion, especially within the context of a
number of volatile situations that, sadly, we face in the
world today.
Let me begin by bringing to the Council’s attention
the common roots of our two institutions and their
complementary roles. Both the International Court
of Justice and the Security Council were established
in 1945 by the Charter of the United Nations as
principal organs of the United Nations. During the
crucial post-war period, in fact, it was paramount to
build a robust structure that could ensure international
peace and security through the creation of a truly
effective international organization in this area. That
is highlighted by the fact that Article 1, paragraph 1, of
the Charter refers to the maintenance of international
peace and security as one of the primary purposes of the
United Nations. Of utmost importance, it is to be noted
that such a purpose is to be achieved, “in conformity
with the principles of justice and international law”.
In particular, Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Charter
specifically provides that all Members of the United
Nations shall settle their disputes “by peaceful means
in such a manner that international peace and security,
and justice, are not endangered.”
I underscored the insertion of the words “and
justice” because the inclusion of the element of justice
in that context clearly signifies that international peace
and security are to be maintained in parallel with the
realization of justice. For that reason, the International
Court of Justice can play a role in actively contributing
to the maintenance of peace and security in parallel
with the Security Council, which bears the primary
responsibility for that purpose.
That point is fundamental to today’s discussion
in the sense that the constitutional framework of the
United Nations envisages an organic and synergetic
4/97

17/05/2018

relationship between the Security Council and the
Court, with the potential of peace being reinforced
by combining political and judicial approaches to
finding solutions. Beyond the division of power or
competence of the two United Nations organs, the
question to be discussed in this context, to my mind,
is the following: In order to realize the ultimate goal
of the United Nations to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war, which dominated the world
before 1945, how can and should the Security Council
and the Court interrelate with one another in concretely
resolving disputes and situations?
In my statement today, I will begin by saying a
few words about the international mechanism of links
between the Council and the Court provided for in the
Charter. I will then refer to several specific instances
whereby the involvement of the Court as the adjudicative
body working together with the Council might be called
on to deal with a situation in a synergetic manner, with
each organ approaching the given situation from its
respective perspective. I will therefore begin with the
institutional link between the Court and the Security
Council as provided for by the Charter.
Under the Charter, the Security Council is assigned
functions of an executive nature, whereas the Court
exercises purely judicial functions; that is the difference.
Nevertheless, there is a correlation between those two
roles. That is why the institutional underpinning of
our activities deserves some crucial attention. There
are a number of important provisions that are meant to
strengthen the coordination and cooperation between
the Court and the Council as we strive to discharge our
respective roles in maintaining international peace and
security. In that regard, I would like to highlight the
following three provisions.
First, in relation to its function in dispute
settlement between Member States, the Security
Council is empowered, at any stage of a dispute, to
make recommendations as part of its duty. The Security
Council should take into consideration the fact that,
as stated in Article 36 of the Charter, “legal disputes
should as a general rule be referred by the parties to the
International Court of Justice.”
It was pursuant to that Charter provision that
the Security Council recommended that the United
Kingdom and Albania defer their dispute with regard to
the Corfu Channel to the newly established Court at that
time. That historically notable example of institutional
18-15180

17/05/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

complementarity was all the more significant as it
resulted in the very first contentious case brought
before the Court. That case clarified the legal aspects
of the dispute, thereby leading to its resolution.
The second aspect to that institutional interaction
is provided for in Article 94, paragraph 1, which
states that
“Each Member of the United Nations undertakes
to comply with the decision of the International Court
of Justice in any case to which it is a party.”
I am happy to say that there are very few cases where
there has been non-compliance with a judgment
of the Court. However, in the event of a case of
non-compliance, Article 94, paragraph 2, can be put in
motion. According to that provision,
“If any party to a case fails to perform the
obligations incumbent upon it under a judgment
rendered by the Court, the other party may have
recourse to the Security Council, which may, if
it deems necessary, make recommendations or
decide upon measures to be taken to give effect to
the judgment”.
Admittedly, that is not a provision for the direct
enforcement of the Court’s judgment by the Security
Council. It nevertheless provides a useful and precise
framework within which the Council can ensure that the
decisions of the Court be given effect. Moreover, that
provision accords to the parties that bring cases to the
Court a broader sense of institutional reassurance that
complying with the Court’s decision is of paramount
importance to the international community.
The third provision I wish to mention is Article
96 of the Charter, under which the Security Council
may request the International Court of Justice to give
an advisory opinion on any legal question. Unlike the
Court’s contentious procedure, its advisory function
is not aimed at a resolution, per se, of the conflict in
question. Rather, the purpose is to give an authentic
opinion on that matter to other United Nations organs,
including the Security Council, with a view to clarifying
the issues involved in a given situation. With reference
to situations before the Security Council relating to the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
advisory function of the Court could be a very useful
tool by elucidating the relevant and legal questions
involved in a situation, which may assist the Council

S/PV. 8262

in its consideration of a complex state of affairs of the
situation at hand, and could be very helpful.
An apposite precedent in which the Security
Council requested an advisory opinion of that nature
on an issue that was directly raised before the Security
Council regarding the activities of the Council was a
case brought in July 1970 on the legal consequences
for States of the continued presence of South Africa
in Namibia. It is recalled that the discussion on the
issue within the Council continued in tandem with the
Court’s consideration of the legal questions involved.
Ultimately, the Court’s opinion helped to strengthen
the Security Council’s position regarding the line of
conduct expected of States in order to resolve that
political impasse.
In concluding my brief remarks on that aspect
of such interrelations, namely, the institutional link
between the Court and the Security Council, I find it
interesting to note that the Charter’s provisions on this
point, although succinct, manage to be quite flexible
and comprehensive, allowing the possibility of the
Council encouraging States to bring their disputes to
the Court, support States in the event that they have
issues regarding the compliance of an International
Court judgement and give them time to request that
legal questions of significance in relation to the work
of the Council be considered by the Court. In that way,
an effective institutional structure could indeed be in
place, and the United Nations, and by extension the
international community, could benefit from its greater
use of those three relevant provisions that are provided
for in the Charter.
I will now turn to the second part of my statement,
on the interaction between the substantive work of the
Court and the activities of the Security Council, which
are not necessarily provided for in the Charter in its
express terms. Let me address some areas of substantive
interaction between the Court and the Security Council
that go beyond the linked institutional framework that
I have mentioned.
In that connection, in addition to dealing with
specific bilateral disputes between States, the
International Court of Justice has also been called upon
to deal with cases, both contentious and advisory, that
relate to the same set of events that form an integral
part of the situations that come before the Security
Council. It can safely be said that there is no exclusive
authority pertaining to either of the two organs over

18-151805/97

S/PV.8262

Maintenance of international peace and security

a situation, which in most cases include overlapping
aspects of law and politics. Indeed, as I already
mentioned, the clarification of certain legal aspects
of a case by the Court can benefit the Council in
arriving at a comprehensive solution to the situation in
question, bearing in mind the legal implications of the
issues involved.
For the sake of the discussion today, I shall refer
to three examples that illustrate how the Court and
the Security Council can interact with each other to
contribute to the maintenance of international peace
and security. All three cases relate to situations arising
from armed conflicts or clashes in border areas that
would require a response from the Security Council.
For example, the Security Council would act to
conduct peacekeeping initiatives. At the same time, a
legal clarification of the situation by the Court would
be extremely important in the same context because
of the very nature and gravity of conflict situations
between States, which constantly require the Council’s
attention. At the same time, because of complex and
more important issues they raise, they are also at the
core of disputes that can be brought before the Court as
legal matters.
One tragic example is the bloody conflict in the
Balkans following the collapse of Yugoslavia in the
early 1990s. In tandem with the many initiatives by the
Security Council to deal with the conflict, including
the deployment of a large-scale peacekeeping force,
the creation of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia with a mandate to prosecute the
culprits as individuals for their heinous criminal acts was
an important part of efforts by the Security Council to
maintain international peace and security. In parallel to
those activities by the Council, the International Court
of Justice was also involved in playing an important
role in determining the international responsibility of
a State given its alleged commission of internationally
wrongful acts in relation to the conflict. I refer here
to the two cases that came before the Court, namely,
the application of the Convention on the Prevention
and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide — the first
brought by Bosnia and Herzegovina against Serbia and
Montenegro and the second by Croatia against Serbia.
To bring about lasting peace in the region, it was
essential that the international community could rely not
only on the Security Council to take measures to make
it possible to determine the criminal responsibility of
individuals for their acts, but also on the other principal
6/97

17/05/2018

judicial organ of the United Nations — the International
Court of Justice — to place on record the degree of
accountability of the respondent State for not having
taken the necessary measures to prevent genocide.
A second illustrative example is the situation
that arose in 2008 in the area of the Temple of Preah
Vihear, situated on the boundary between Cambodia
and Thailand, as a result of competing claims of
territorial sovereignty between the two States. Despite
the Court’s judgment in 1962 in the case Temple of
Preah Vihear (Cambodia v. Thailand), in which the
Court found that the temple was situated on territory
under the sovereignty of Cambodia, disagreement
persisted between the two neighbouring States as to the
extent of the geographical scope of the sovereignty. As
a result of the ongoing armed conflict over the issue,
the matter was brought to the Security Council, which
issued a press statement in February 2011 (SC/10174)
entitled “Cambodia-Thailand Border Situation”, which
exhorted both sides to show restraint, establish a
ceasefire and engage in dialogue. The Security Council
also expressed its support for the active efforts of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) to
find a peaceful resolution of the matter. However, the
armed clashes did not subside and one of the parties
to the conflict, Cambodia, brought the dispute before
the Court in April 2011 in the form of a request for an
interpretation of the judgement in the 1962 case.
Simultaneously, the applicant requested that the
Court also indicate provisional measures of protection
because of the urgency of the matter. In granting the
request for the indication of provisional measures, for
the first time in its history, the Court set up a provisional
demilitarized zone to be kept provisionally free of all
military personnel. Although the Court’s immediate
objective and purpose is a strictly judicial one, namely,
to prevent irreparable damage from occurring until
the delivery of the final judgment, nevertheless the
measure also contributed in a practical way to the
efforts of the Security Council to maintain peace and
security in the region. In addition, the Court joined the
Council in drawing the parties’ particular attention to
the important role of ASEAN in establishing a dialogue
between them.
The third and final example I wish to give today
is the conflict situation in the Great Lakes region that
erupted in the 1990s. In that situation, the Court was
seized of the case Armed Activities on the Territory
of the Congo (Democratic Republic of the Congo v.
18-15180

17/05/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

Uganda). The Security Council was closely monitoring
the situation concerning the Democratic Republic of
the Congo at the same time. In June 2000, the Council
adopted resolution 1304 (2000), which demanded that
all parties refrain from any offensive action, and that
same month the Court indicated provisional measures
whereby both parties were ordered to take all measures
necessary to comply with all of their obligations
under international law, explicitly including those
under resolution 1304 (2000). While the eventual
non-compliance of the provisional measures of the
Court under a resolution is regrettable, the case
illustrates that the Court can complement the activities
of the Security Council by legally scrutinizing and
analysing the issue of compliance with regard to the
relevant Security Council resolutions.
I hope that those examples show that the Court
can make an active contribution to reducing tensions
in conflict situations and preventing the aggravation
of a dispute, while working in parallel with the
Security Council.
Let me address my final point, which includes some
suggestions for the Security Council and the Court on
strengthening the role of maintaining international
peace and security. Before concluding my statement,
let me draw the Council’s attention to the question I
posed at the beginning of my presentation, namely,
how the Security Council and the Court can, or should,
relate to each other with regard to concrete cases or
situations. For the sake of discussion, I would like to
add three observations.
First, it is hoped — at least on the part of the
Court — that the Security Council could pay more
attention to its discretionary power under Article 36,
paragraph 3, of the Charter, by which it can make
recommendations to refer a legal dispute to Court. The
significance of the precedent of the Corfu Channel case,
to which I referred, would demonstrate how the basis of
that argument could still be valid. Regrettably, however,
it has become an isolated precedent. I would therefore
invite the Security Council to take inspiration from that
early instance of constructive cooperation between our
institutions and consider additional possibilities under
Article 36 of the Charter.
Secondly, with regard to the other example I provided
at the beginning of my statement, the Security Council
can have a greater active role in the post-adjudication
phase of a dispute that has been judicially settled by the

S/PV. 8262

Court. Although the number of reported non-compliant
judgements is not very large, any disregard or negligence
on the part of the parties relating to the implementation
of a decision of the Court is regrettable and not to
be welcomed. Non-compliance by one of the parties
with a judgment of the Court can easily complicate the
situation subsequent to the delivery of the judgment,
as exemplified by the case concerning Avena and
Other Mexican Nationals (Mexico v. United States
of America). Here the Security Council could have a
meaningful role to play in monitoring compliance with
the Court’s decisions, even when the recommendation
is not formally adopted under Article 94, paragraph
2, of the Charter. At least we could consider how the
institutional link between the Court and the Council, as
provided for in Article 94 of the Charter, particularly the
potential involvement of the Council, could enhance,
formally or informally, the institutional reassurance
for the parties to the dispute about compliance with the
Court’s decision and, through that, enhance the rule of
law in the international community. Such involvement
of the Security Council in the post-adjudication phase
of a dispute would, in my view, strengthen the rule of
law through the interaction between the two United
Nations organs.
Thirdly, and lastly, it is hoped that the Security
Council could consider the possibility of making use
of the advisory opinions of the Court in relation to
the activities of which the Security Council is seized
under Article 96 of the Charter. In terms of statistics,
26 requests for advisory opinions have been made so
far, giving the Court the opportunity to offer its own
advisory opinions. However, there have been very
few requests from the Security Council, except for the
Namibia case to which I referred earlier. By way of
comparison, the General Assembly has so far made 15
requests. In replying to those requests, the Court has
contributed, we believe, to the work of the respective
organs by clarifying the bigger issues involved in a
given question. Recent notable examples include the
opinions on the Legal consequences of the construction
of a wall in the occupied Palestinian territory (see
A/ES-10/273) and on the Accordance with international
law of the unilateral declaration of independence in
respect of Kosovo (see A/64/881), on which the Court
gave its opinion in, respectively, 2004 and 2010. These
examples demonstrate that the advisory proceedings
of the Court should be used also for promoting the
activities of the Security Council.

18-151807/97

S/PV.8262

Maintenance of international peace and security

I wish to conclude my brief statement by commending
the foresight of the drafters of the Charter, who created
a flexible and interconnected organizational structure
to ensure proper institutional support for the lofty
aims of the United Nations, namely, the promotion and
maintenance of international peace and security. The
Security Council, which has the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security,
has a wide spectrum of options on how to perform its
functions effectively in achieving its goal. I hope that
my statement today can make a modest contribution
to a reflection on the possibility of the role that the
International Court of Justice, as the principal judicial
organ of the United Nations, could play in this regard.
The authority, judicial expertise and commitment of
the Court to the promotion of the rule of law in today’s
world will, we hope, make a significant contribution to
the work and the activities of the Security Council in
dealing with this issue and burning issues in the context
of the current situation relating to how to effectively
maintain international peace and security, as this is the
Council’s primary responsibility under the mandate
given it by the Charter.
The President: I thank Judge Owada for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Judge Meron.
Judge Meron: It is a distinct privilege to address
the Council in the context of this open debate and a
particular honour for me to do so during the presidency
of Poland and under the chairmanship of His Excellency
Mr. Andrzej Duda, President of the Republic of Poland.
This is not simply a professional matter. I was
9 years old when Nazi Germany invaded Poland, the
country of my birth. Overnight, we became refugees,
and most of my family were killed by the Nazis because
we were Jews. When the war ended, I emerged lucky
to be alive but profoundly affected by my experiences.
Although my career has since followed a circuitous
path, the abiding focus has been an attempt to grapple
with the violence, chaos and brutality of war and to
strive to find ways to bring an end to the suffering and
horrific atrocities committed all too often during armed
conflicts. Central to any such effort is the fundamental
need to ensure respect for and adherence to international
law and to the humanitarian principles and values of
human rights and dignity reflected therein.
It is in this context that I wish to express my deep
gratitude to Poland for having provided all of us here
8/97

17/05/2018

today with this important opportunity to address the
state of respect for international law in the context of
the maintenance of international peace and security,
how it can be strengthened, and the role to be played by
the Security Council in that regard.
I shall focus in my remarks on the third theme
identified in the concept note for today’s debate
(S/2018/417/Rev.1, annex): upholding accountability, in
particular for the most serious violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law.
It is thanks in many respects to the groundbreaking work of the Council nearly 25 years ago that
we are even considering the issue of accountability
for violations of international law today. On 25 May
1993, the Security Council acted under Chapter VII
of the Charter of the United Nations to establish the
first international criminal court of the modern era,
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), a court mandated to try individuals
for serious violations of international law committed
during the conflicts in the Balkans. The following
year, the Council established a second tribunal, the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), in
the wake of the devastating 1994 genocide against the
Tutsi in Rwanda, during which Hutu and others who
opposed the genocide were also killed. These courts,
in turn, paved the way for the establishment of other
international courts and specialized chambers focused
on ensuring individual accountability for violations of
international law, including the world’s first permanent
international criminal court, and clarified and
reinforced understandings of international customary
and conventional law through their jurisprudence. Over
the same period, after a half-century of virtual inaction
following the Second World War, an increasing number
of national authorities have undertaken domestic
criminal trials of individuals alleged to have committed
war crimes and other violations of international law.
As a result of all that, there is an ever-increasing
expectation among communities around the world
that, where atrocities are committed in violation of
international law, accountability will follow. That is a
profound change from only a quarter of a century ago.
However, for all that has been achieved in the past
25 years, there is still a long way to go. International
criminal justice — by which I mean efforts to ensure
principled accountability for violations of international
law whether such efforts take place in international,
regional or national courts — is still very much in its
18-15180

17/05/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

infancy. At present, it is in a highly vulnerable stage of
development. With pioneering courts such as the ICTY,
the ICTR and the Special Court for Sierra Leone having
closed, the International Criminal Court (ICC) faces a
variety of investigative and institutional challenges.
With the recent increase in the scrutiny of and distrust
for international organizations and global endeavours
more generally, we face somewhat of a period of
contraction in efforts to advance accountability at
the international level after a remarkable period of
expansion. Let me be quite clear about the fact that
inaction and outright intransigence risk undermining
accountability gains in quite a variety of forums.
If efforts to ensure accountability for violations
of international law are to succeed in the long run,
the Security Council and its members, as well as the
international community more generally, must continue
to actively engage in and sustain such efforts — and now
more than ever for the reasons that I have just given.
At the international level that means not simply
expressing support in rhetorical terms but taking
concrete steps to affirmatively contribute to the
work of existing courts such as the International
Criminal Court. Such steps include complying with
judicial orders, arrest warrants and requests for
investigative cooperation and using soft and hard
forms of leverage to convince others to do likewise,
supporting fugitive-related investigations, enforcing
sentences against convicted persons and assisting
with the relocation and protection of vulnerable
witnesses. Such steps also include ensuring that
existing mechanisms are adequately resourced and that
political considerations are not allowed to undermine
the independence and impartiality of the courts in the
conduct of their proceedings.
However, upholding accountability for international
crimes means doing far more than cooperating with
international courts and internationalized special
chambers. International courts were not designed to try
more than a small number of alleged perpetrators, and
they do not offer the immeasurable benefits accorded
by judicial proceedings conducted closer to the
communities most affected by international crimes. For
accountability and an international order based on the
rule of law to truly take hold, it will fall to officials in
national jurisdictions to take on the greater part of that
work. Indeed, it is only through national engagement
on a broad scale and by using every tool at our disposal,

S/PV. 8262

including universal jurisdiction, that we can ever hope
to close the accountability gap.
As the examples that I have just given might suggest,
upholding accountability is not a narrow or a limited
endeavour. To the contrary, it demands creativity,
innovation and an understanding of its interdependence
with other initiatives if it is to succeed. We have
seen that in recent years at the international level,
where a wide variety of institutional and efficiencyminded reforms have come to the fore in courts such
as the ICC and the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals and where the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism for Syria and
the Investigative Team requested by resolution 2379
(2017) in relation to Iraq reflect new models for the
promotion and facilitation of accountability efforts. We
also see that in the exploration of yet more means to
ensure accountability, such as the proposed granting
of jurisdiction over international crimes to a regional
court in Africa.
Yet the aim of upholding accountability is not
satisfied simply by ensuring that those accused of
violating international law are brought before a court
and tried. Without judges who act independently
and impartially and without judicial systems that are
free of political influence and pressure, principled
accountability is not possible. Without robust judicial
systems providing for a vigorous prosecution and
defence, the protection of vulnerable witnesses, fair
procedures, transparent processes and sufficient
resources and capacity for law enforcement and judicial
proceedings, accountability for international crimes
cannot be secured. The goal of upholding accountability
is therefore closely linked to other core aims shared by
the international community with regard to sustainable
development and the promotion of respect for the rule
of law more generally.
I have so far addressed the state of accountability
efforts and the steps that can be taken by many different
actors to close the accountability gap and to strengthen
the rule of law and international criminal justice. Before
concluding, I would like to briefly touch upon the role
of the Security Council in that regard and to offer a
few reflections on steps that the Council may wish to
consider going forward.
First, the Security Council has played a high-profile
role in strengthening the rule of law by advancing the
cause of accountability over the course of the past

18-151809/97

S/PV.8262

Maintenance of international peace and security

quarter of a century, urging and calling on States
time and again to play their part. The Council’s vocal
leadership in that regard and its consideration of and
dedication to such issues, as demonstrated by today’s
debate, must continue.
At the same time, the Security Council is not
only a leading voice in upholding accountability and
the rule of law. It must also serve as a model itself. In
some respects that is a challenging task. Given that the
Council is an inherently political body, it is perhaps to
be expected that the different situations coming before
the Council may receive differing degrees of attention,
be resolved in different ways or be made subject
to varying priorities. Yet the rule of law depends on
consistency and equality of enforcement, and abhors
selectivity. If one situation involving alleged atrocity
crimes is treated with all due attention and another is
disregarded or left to linger in a decision-making limbo,
does that not fundamentally undermine the values at
the core of the principle of the rule of law? How can the
Council’s identity as a political body and its role as a
champion of the rule of law be reconciled?
One possibility would be for the Council to develop
and publicly adopt objective criteria to assess and, where
appropriate, steps to be deployed with respect to, all
credible allegations of international crimes that come
before it passing a certain threshold. Agreement in the
abstract on such an approach would not only enhance
equality of enforcement and reduce perceptions as to the
ad hoc and arguably inconsistent nature of the Council’s
actions when confronted with reported atrocity crimes.
It would also reduce the degree to which subjective or
political considerations weigh on, and potentially delay
or divert, the ultimate decision-making process.
Another possibility would be for the Council to
reflect on its role not simply as a political body but as a
representative political body. In accordance with Article
24 of the Charter, the Members of the United Nations
have conferred on the Council primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security
and have agreed that, in carrying out its duties in that
regard, the Council acts on their behalf. Given that, is it
too idealistic to suggest that members of the Council are
duty-bound to act on behalf of the broader international
community — that they must, when reaching decisions
on issues of accountability in the context of peace
and security, serve the interests of the United Nations
membership as a whole rather than prioritizing their
own interests or those of strategic allies?
10/97

17/05/2018

We may also do well to consider — or, perhaps,
reconsider — the appropriate role for political
decision-making more generally when it comes to the
treatment of specific cases or situations. The Security
Council has, in many respects, served as something of
a gatekeeper over the past quarter-century, deciding,
at times after considerable examination, whether a
particular situation or conflict should be made subject
to accountability measures. That role on the part of
the Council was perhaps necessary 25 years ago.
But now that the permanent International Criminal
Court is fully embedded within the international legal
framework, a system for the referral of situations to that
Court by the Council is well established and national
jurisdictions are increasingly demonstrating adherence
to accountability goals, is it not time for something of a
paradigm shift whereby the Council would simply refer
possible violations of international law to appropriate
judicial actors for further action rather than risking
stalemate in debate about whether or not egregious
atrocities occurred in any particular situation or who
might be responsible?
Such a paradigm shift would not only enhance
accountability but would also reflect and increase
confidence in the ability of courts to assess evidence
fairly and independently in determining whether a case
should be tried, and enhance the Council’s efficiency
and credibility through demonstrating consistency in
its approach to accountability.
As those examples suggest, the means and processes
by which the Council reaches decisions concerning
accountability are perhaps just as important as the
subject matter of those decisions when it comes to their
potential to strengthen respect for the rule of law and
for an international order founded thereupon. As we
approach the twenty-fifth anniversary of the founding
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia in just a few days, I commend the Security
Council, its President and members for their openness
to considering these and other ideas advanced during
today’s debate, and for their continued leadership when
it comes to ensuring accountability and upholding the
rule of law.
The President: I thank Judge Meron for his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
President of Poland.
Let me express my gratitude for the valuable,
substantive and insightful briefings by Ms. Maria
18-15180

17/05/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, Judge Hisashi Owada and Judge
Theodor Meron.
Allow me to begin my statement with a quotation
by Paweł Włodkowic, Rector of Jagiellonian University
in Kraków, who as long ago as the fifteenth century
proclaimed that there were certain rights of nations
that must be secured, namely, their existence, freedom,
independence, peculiar culture and decent and
unhampered development.
“Where force is stronger than friendship, one is
guided by his own self-interest. The law, including
natural law, condemns actions of people who attack
those wishing to live in peace, according to the
rule ‘do unto others as you would have them do
unto you’”.
Włodkowic’s arguments were further developed
in the seventeenth century by Hugo Grotius in what
are regarded as fundamental works of international
law, namely, On the Law of War and Peace and The
Freedom of the Seas. The conceptual work initiated
by Włodkowic and reinforced by Grotius gave rise
to the concept of the rights of nations, the basis of
international law.
Today, 600 years later, Poland wishes to return
to those roots. We want to highlight that there can be
no peace without law. International law remains the
strongest tool for civilized nations to ensure long-term
peace — peace based on trust and mutually respected
norms and values.
The need to recover the lost meaning of the works
of Włodkowic and Grotius is particularly visible today,
as a paradox of the modern world becomes clear. On the
one hand, there is an extensive system of international
law and institutional architecture to stand guard over it.
This is the United Nations system, with its international
courts and tribunals. On the other hand, the temptation
to place force above law and fear above trust remains
present around the world. That is why I invite all
countries and institutions sitting at this table today
to a discussion on the significance of international
law. As States, we cannot deal with those challenges
unless we invest in the very foundation of the global
order — respect for international law.
I believe that is impossible without first providing
coherent definitions of the basic categories of
international law in the context of contemporary
challenges to peace. Such definitions are also relevant

S/PV. 8262

in broader political debates, for if we call an act of
aggression a conflict without properly defining the
victim and the aggressor, if we call a threat a challenge
without defining the source of that threat, and if we call
building aggressive military capabilities a disturbance
of balance without determining who it is that is
advancing the offensive military capabilities, we are
helpless in terms of selecting the legal steps to react.
In international law unnamed phenomena do not exist,
and ill-defined concepts build ill-shaped realities.
Following those general remarks, which I would
like us all to take to heart, I wish to concentrate on the
problems with regard to the functioning of three aspects
of international law: means for the peaceful settlement
of disputes, actions against violations of international
law and ways of bringing the perpetrators of crimes
under international law to justice.
First, I would like to refer directly to Chapter VI
of the Charter of the United Nations, on the pacific
settlement of disputes. Poland considers it the most
useful tool at the international community’s disposal
in the case of disagreements and imminent conflicts.
The United Nations has a rich history of envoys and
mediators. For decades, they have been sent to hotspots
all over the world in order to assist both sides with
their expertise and experience. Their aim has been to
prevent or to stop violations of international law. In
that regard, we remember the late Secretary-General
Dag Hammarskjöld, who gave his life to safeguard the
international order.
It is worth underlining some recent mediation
success stories, in particular in West African States. One
example is the Gambia, where the Economic Community
of West African States intervened effectively during a
political crisis in 2017. Furthermore, we cannot forget
that the peaceful settlements of disputes also occur
outside the scope of the United Nations and of regional
organizations. They take place with the involvement
of recognized moral authorities. At this point, I would
like to mention the special role of the Pope and Vatican
diplomacy in the process of the normalization of
international relations and the peaceful settlement of
many world crises.
Currently, the importance of resolving conflicts by
diplomatic means is visible in the ongoing efforts to
reduce tensions on the Korean peninsula. Poland has
been involved in the region for more than 60 years,
including through participation in the work of the

18-1518011/97

S/PV.8262

Maintenance of international peace and security

17/05/2018

Neutral Nations Supervisory Commission in Korea. We
have always stressed that the channels of communication
should be kept open. That is something that I personally
repeated during my visit to Panmunjom earlier this
year. We are fully supportive of the new high-level
diplomatic initiatives aimed at re-establishing peace on
the peninsula.

daily reality for Syrians. The situation in Syria demands
that the United Nations and each Member State stand in
defence of humanitarian principles. The international
community, in particular the Security Council, needs to
emphasize the importance of providing uninterrupted
access for all humanitarian actors to the whole territory
of Syria.

We also cannot forget the longest conflict in
the world — that between Israel and Palestine. As a
country with close and good relations with both the
Israeli and the Palestinian peoples. Poland has always
strongly supported all initiatives aimed at stabilization
and at strengthening peace and security in the Middle
East. Only a return to meaningful bilateral negotiations
based on the relevant United Nations resolutions
and international law might bring about a peaceful
settlement of that dispute. That is the only path towards
a two-State solution and resolving all final-status
issues. Today more than ever, we need peace in the
Holy Land, which is sacred to all major monotheistic
religions. If we want to achieve peace, terrorism and
violence are never the answer.

All actors engaged in Syria must be called on
to take action to prevent the use of weapons of mass
destruction, including chemical weapons. The belief in
the importance of terminating that shameful practice
should be shared by all members of the Security Council.

The second issue that I would like to highlight
concerns situations in which the peaceful settlement
of disputes is not applied or does not bring about a
satisfactory effect. That results in situations of conflict,
wars, death, suffering and a lack of hope for millions of
human beings. At this point, we need to ask ourselves
a question: How can we protect international law,
in particular international humanitarian law, in the
darkest hour?
The Security Council can introduce targeted
sanctions regimes. We welcome international solidarity
in implementing sanctions and exerting maximum
pressure on States that disregard the international
legal order. Even though they are divisive at times
and not perfect, coercive measures are often crucial
to defending the principles of international law.
Nevertheless, persistent international pressure needs
to be combined with dialogue, as sanctions should
never be an end in themselves. Imposing United
Nations sanctions requires the Council’s decision.
Unfortunately, there are situations where a lack of
consensus prevents the effective countering of obvious
violations of international law.
The Syrian conflict has entered its eighth year. The
continued and widespread violence and violations of
international law, including those of human rights, are a
12/97

As President of the Republic of Poland, I cannot
help but turn to my region, Central and Eastern
Europe. The violation of territorial integrity through
the illegal annexation and occupation of Crimea and
by the separatists in Donbas, who benefit from strong
third-country support, are major challenges not only to
Ukraine but also to the stability of the whole European
continent. Poland supports the idea of deploying a
United Nations peacekeeping operation in eastern
Ukraine. The mandate of such an operation should not
be limited to the protection of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe Special Monitoring
Mission to Ukraine but should cover the whole area of
the conflict, including the entire Ukrainian-Russian
internationally recognized border. The international
community should not lose its focus on the ongoing
desperate plight of the Crimean Tatars and the human
rights activists in the occupied Crimea, who are subject
to constant intimidation.
In speaking about Central and Eastern Europe
in this forum, I must also mention common concerns
related to the so-called frozen conflicts in Georgia,
Moldova and Nagorno Karabakh. We have to strive to
foster an open, constructive and respectful dialogue so
as to contribute to the successful settlement of those
conflicts. Those conflicts entail clear violations of
international law that can, and should, be addressed by
the Security Council.
Thirdly, and finally, I would like to discuss the
issue of accountability. The international community,
and the Security Council in particular, are morally
responsible for guaranteeing individual criminal
accountability for international crimes. In that context,
I would like to stress Poland’s support for international
legal mechanisms aimed at bringing those responsible
for violating international law to justice. We remember
18-15180

17/05/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

the work done by the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda and the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia. We have also noted the referral of
the cases of the Sudan and Libya to the International
Criminal Court.
In 2016, Poland welcomed the establishment of the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
for the Syrian Arab Republic, which recently published
its first report. The Mechanism remains a unique
initiative that contributes to the prevention and
prosecution of the immense atrocities and human rights
violations committed in Syria. At the same time, as we
have stated on many occasions, the impunity of those
responsible for chemical attacks in Syria is not only
contrary to international law, it also undermines the
peace process and our common security. We therefore
fully support the establishment of an independent,
impartial and professional mechanism to attribute
responsibility for the use of chemical weapons. Any
such crime must be properly investigated, and those
responsible must be held accountable. Such crimes
should never happen again.
Let me underline that the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction has always been an
important element of Poland’s security policy. In our
work in the non-proliferation regimes, including as
the Chair of the second session of the Preparatory
Committee for the 2020 Review Conference of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
and Chair of The Hague Code of Conduct against
Ballistic Missile Proliferation, we have constantly
advocated for the primacy of international law, strong
international institutions, binding non-proliferation
norms, widespread and credible verification
mechanisms, the implementation of good practices and
closer international cooperation.
In conclusion, let me refer to the principle of
good faith. Acting in line with that principle is an
inherent element of respect for international law.
If we notice some States’ actions against the spirit
of international law, we cannot pretend that they
are legitimate and tolerate them. We cannot accept
dubious legal justifications for actions taken in bad
faith, in fraudem legis. Law cannot be a tool against
justice. It must serve justice and justice only. For those
who seek justice, law has to be a supportive force. It
applies specifically to such issues as compensation
for historical losses or modern investigations. The
latter includes the investigation of flight disasters,

S/PV. 8262

such as the full clarification of the causes of the crash
of the Polish airplane in Smolensk, in which the late
President of Poland, Mr. Lech Kaczyński, his wife and
all members of the Polish delegation perished. We are
morally and legally responsible to react and restore
trust in international law.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I call on the Vice-President of the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea.
Mr. Nguema Obiang Mangue (Equatorial Guinea)
(spoke in Spanish): First of all, I would like to present
to the Security Council the apologies of His Excellency,
Mr. Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, President of the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea, who was not able to
participate in this important meeting due to previous
State obligations. It is therefore my responsibility to
convey his greetings of peace, as well as his wishes for
the success of this meeting.
I would also like to express our congratulations
to His Excellency Mr. Andrzej Duda, President of
the Republic of Poland, for the magnificent work his
country is carrying out during its presidency of the
Security Council for the month of May, and for having
convened this meeting to discuss an issue of such
importance to peace and security in the world.
We also congratulate the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. António Guterres, and his entire team
for the excellent and exhaustive briefing, which reveals
once again the commitment and efforts of the United
Nations in favour of peace, security and stability
throughout the world.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea is firmly
committed to an international order based on the
rule of law with the United Nations at its centre and
in which the Security Council assumes the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. The strengthening of the rule of
law must lead to the consolidation of sustainable peace
and development and to the defence of human rights.
Peace, security and stability are essential elements for
the economic and social development of countries and
are intrinsically linked to the tranquillity and harmony
that must prevail among the peoples of the world.
Long-term conflicts such as those in Central
Africa, Syria, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
South Sudan, Yemen, Libya, Somalia and other

18-1518013/97

S/PV.8262

Maintenance of international peace and security

countries, where the use of sophisticated weapons
causes the extermination of human lives, also cause
great collateral damage. Refugees, famine and forced
displacements must be treated in accordance with
international law to ensure the protection of human
rights. To achieve a just and safe world, therefore, it is
important to promote the resolution of disputes through
peaceful means as an essential part and basic principle
of international law enshrined in Chapter VI of the
Charter of the United Nations.
Given the complexity of current conflicts, and
the sophisticated techniques of weapons that produce
disastrous effects, the international community
should also adapt to the new reality and its principles.
Apart from armed confrontations, the effects of
climate change, famine, pandemics and other natural
phenomena constitute a threat to the peace and security
of nations because they can aggravate the consequences
of wars and conflicts. In order to enforce international
law in conflicts, it is essential to ensure compliance
with the principles for peacekeeping operations of
the United Nations and regional organizations. In that
regard, we welcome the Secretary-General’s efforts to
reform peacekeeping operations in order to gain the
confidence of the host countries, and the commitment
that the Council has shown in incorporating defence of
the rule of law.
Any resolution of conflicts must include the
promotion of inclusive development that benefits the
parties so that the development can continue to expand
through the United Nations system and thereby promote
the effective implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. As the world’s main victim
of major conflicts and the problems arising from them,
Africa has a huge interest in ensuring that just and
lasting solutions can be found for them, and the United
Nations should support the African Union in its efforts
to maintain peace and security in Africa, with the aim
of optimizing and promoting joint action to achieve
synergy in the international community.
There can be no peace without justice, and in
order to build peace processes and resolve conflicts
it is important to ensure that victims have the feeling
that justice has been done, because policies that permit
impunity can foster revenge and hatred. Humankind has
always longed for peace and justice, two concepts that
complement and reinforce each other. The achievement
of justice is not merely a legal problem but is intimately
linked to other political, economic and cultural factors.
14/97

17/05/2018

Justice’s ultimate goal is stability and reconciliation,
essential concepts for peace, especially in post-conflict
environments. Beyond that, the Council has experience
in the establishment of international tribunals to
judge crimes against humanity such as genocide, war
crimes and so forth. It is important to encourage the
continuation of such mechanisms in order to combat
appearances of impunity in post-conflict situations.
Equatorial Guinea reaffirms the importance of the
concept of the peaceful settlement of conflicts through
frank, direct and inclusive dialogue, and the United
Nations has a primary role to play in encouraging
countries to resolve their differences based on those
principles. In that regard, with the support of the United
Nations, Equatorial Guinea has agreed to settle its
border dispute with its sister republic of Gabon before
the International Court of Justice.
Equatorial Guinea wishes to see its policies,
its principle of national sovereignty and its judicial
freedom respected, and it brooks no foreign
interference in its internal affairs. In that regard, before
this important body, I want to denounce a ferocious
international media campaign that is currently being
waged against my country through the dissemination
of fake news and montages of images, with the aim
of distorting and denigrating the image, honour and
reputation of my country and Government and the
ultimate goal of discrediting them with the help of socalled non-governmental organizations, all of it having
a negative effect on Equatorial Guinea’s performance
as a non-permanent member of the Security Council.
When we were elected to the Security Council,
we took on the responsibility that it entailed in full
awareness, and we are faithful to the purposes and
principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations, the Constitutive Act of the African Union and
our internal legal order. This is the foundation guiding
my Government’s statements, opinions and decisions
during our membership of the Security Council. We
aware of the historic importance of this situation
and firmly reject these attempts at manipulation and
blackmail that damage our good image and distract the
international community.
In December, as the Council knows, my country
was threatened by mercenaries who wanted to violate
and harm our independence, sovereignty and stability
in an attack that was quickly neutralized by our national
security forces, thanks to the cooperation and support
18-15180

17/05/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8262

of our sister republic of Cameroon. We would like to
recall that Equatorial Guinea has been the victim of
similar attempts in the past, specifically in March
2004, and I want to take this opportunity to denounce
such attempts, which are a direct assault on the norms
of coexistence between States.

a deep crisis, a protection crisis and a crisis of respect
for the hard-won gains in international law that we have
fought for since the end of the First World War. The
Geneva Conventions, the Charter and the Chemical
Weapons Convention — in Syria, all of those norms
were trampled.

In conclusion, I would like to say that while
today all the States Members of the United Nations
are looking to achieve the same goal, that of ensuring
peace and security in the world, we do not believe
that the leadership of one State or group of States can
dictate the implementation of international law and
morality. That constitutes a usurpation of the authority
of the United Nations and undermines the effectiveness
of our global Organization, which must impose its
own authority in the international arena, avoiding
any possibility of being manipulated through external
pressure from States or groups of States that violate
those laws. My country reaffirms its principles and its
absolute belief in the rules of international law, while
we extend our hand to all friendly countries in order
to cooperate in addressing every issue that affects our
peoples’ peaceful coexistence.

Of course, the primary responsibility for the
protection of its citizens lies with a country itself. But
when it is not able or willing to do so, collective action
should be taken. In that case, says our Charter, the
primary responsibility rests with the Security Council,
especially with those five permanent members to
whom the Charter has granted a special privilege. I am
referring to the veto and to the need to use that special
privilege with the highest degree of responsibility, That
means with maximum restraint.

The President: I now call on the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands.
Mr. Blok (Netherlands): I would first like to thank
President Duda of Poland for devoting today’s open
debate to a theme so close to our Kingdom’s heart.
As the host country of The Hague Peace Conferences,
the International Court of Justice, the International
Criminal Court and other important international legal
institutions, the Netherlands has a proud tradition of
championing international law. Today’s subject is
embedded in our DNA. In fact, it is enshrined in our
Constitution, and there are good reasons for that. A
dependable, rules-based legal order is a prerequisite for
security, stability and economic growth. When adhered
to, it is our best guarantee of prosperity and the best
conflict-prevention tool available.
Today, and in spite of the vast progress that has
been made, our international rulebook is under serious
pressure. From the annexation of Crimea to the slave
markets in Libya and the suffering of the people in
Myanmar, a quick glance at the Security Council’s
agenda makes one thing clear — that the world we
committed ourselves to building when we all signed
the Charter of the United Nations is still a long way
off. The situation in Syria has been a stark reminder of

That has certainly not been the case with regard to
Syria. In the past seven years, the veto has been used 12
times. Twelve times impunity was allowed to become
the new normal. Twelve times innocent Syrian citizens
paid the price.
What would happen if we allowed this privilege
to be used as a licence to kill, as a means to obstruct
justice, as a way to prevent the truth from being told,
as a means to hold hostage those who want to uphold
the principles of the Charter? The Council would force
itself into irrelevance. The rules-based international
order would break down. Laws would again cede to
arms, and we would all lose.
We cannot allow that to happen. In the event of
mass atrocities, a paralysed Security Council cannot
simply be the end of the road. That conviction is widely
shared. It forms the basis of initiatives such as the
French-Mexican initiative and the code of conduct of
the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group,
which are initiatives supported by a large majority of the
United Nations membership. Today I want to echo and
amplify their message: if and when the Council makes
itself irrelevant by inaction, other avenues will have to
be explored to make sure fundamental international
norms are upheld. In the run-up to the next session of
the General Assembly, we will consult with the group
to explore options to make this principle more concrete.
That brings me to my final point, that is, the
importance of accountability. There can be no lasting
peace without it. Whether in Syria, Libya, Yemen or
elsewhere, fact-finding, investigation and attribution
are essential elements in the accountability chain. They

18-1518015/97

S/PV.8262

Maintenance of international peace and security

send a clear message to the victims that justice may not
be swift, but it will, in the end, be done. I will therefore
not stop calling on the Security Council to refer the
situation in Syria to the International Criminal Court.
When the Council does become paralysed, we have
to search for alternatives, such as the International
Impartial and Independent Mechanism for Syria.
Today I am proud to announce that we will support the
Mechanism with another €2.5 million, in addition to
the €2.5 million that we contributed earlier. We hope
others will follow our lead.
The development of international law is a job that
is never finished. We must not only work to ensure
respect for existing norms, but also to strengthen
them by writing the next and very necessary chapters.
Standing on the shoulders of great men and women like
Hugo Grotius, Fyodor Fyodorovich Martens, Eleanor
Roosevelt and others, we must put protection up front.
Only in that way will arms be allowed to cede to the
law. Only in that way will peoples’ expectations for
justice and humanity finally be met. The Netherlands
stands ready to contribute to attaining that goal, during
and after our Security Council membership.
The President: I now call on the Minister of Justice
of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Beketayev (Kazakhstan): On behalf of the
Republic of Kazakhstan, I thank His Excellency
President Duda for his opening remarks.
Kazakhstan considers today’s debate to be very
timely and valuable. It provides an opportunity for the
Security Council to step back from its daily work and
reflect more broadly on how it may most effectively
carry out its mission in the complex circumstances that
the world faces today. Engaging in such reflection is the
sign of a healthy institution with strong and far-sighted
leadership. In that context, it is my honour to present
some reflections on behalf of Kazakhstan.
My country’s commitment to the United Nations,
as is well known, began as soon as it became an
independent State, in 1992. Twenty-five years later,
Kazakhstan was deeply honoured to be the first
Central Asian State to serve on the Security Council.
As President Nursultan Nazarbayev made clear in his
policy address following Kazakhstan’s election to
the Council, our country stands ready to assist in the
maintenance of regional and international peace and
16/97

17/05/2018

security. Today we are reflecting on how best that can
be achieved.
I would first like to turn to what Kazakhstan
considers a central policy objective for the Security
Council. Members will recall that, 25 years ago,
Kazakhstan was the first country to give up its nuclear
arsenal. In our view, there is no greater threat to
international peace and security than the continued
existence of nuclear weapons, and there could be no
greater achievement than ridding the world of that
threat to humankind.
President Nazarbayev, in his manifesto “The
World. The Twenty-first Century”, presented the idea
of a comprehensive programme for humankind in order
to achieve a world without conflicts by the centenary of
the founding of the United Nations in 2045. To achieve
such a world and to save subsequent generations from
the scourge of war, the manifesto sets out the collective
measures that should be taken to prevent and eliminate
threats to peace, and the responsibility each State bears
in striving to reach that end. This is an area in which the
Security Council can and must lead the way. It will be
a test of whether new processes and ways of working,
which the Security Council develops as a result of
discussions such as the one we are having today, can
bring about real change in the world.
Secondly, Article 33 of the Charter of the United
Nations provides the Security Council with a variety of
tools for the peaceful settlement of disputes that threaten
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Those mechanisms include recourse to regional bodies,
whose role is critical for early conflict prevention. The
engagement of regional and subregional organizations
is an essential tool in the maintenance of international
peace and security. When considering this topic, we
may wish to reflect on whether the Security Council
could enhance its legitimacy and awareness of its work
if from time to time it held its meetings in other regional
centres. In that regard, I would like to highlight President
Nazarbayev’s initiative in convening the Conference
on Interaction and Confidence-building Measures
in Asia, which has been successfully functioning for
more than a quarter of a century, and in the context
of which 26 countries, from Egypt to the Republic of
Korea, are conducting significant work in the field of
preventive diplomacy.
Finally, we support the efforts of the United
Nations as a whole, including the Security Council,
18-15180

17/05/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

to update and adapt its procedures to serve the world
well in these challenging times. Today’s very valuable
debate should be the start of an ongoing dialogue, and
Kazakhstan stands ready to provide its own proposals
in a constructive spirit.
As history shows, States and institutions can
thrive when they maintain clear, just objectives and
an open mind about the best means to achieve them,
which include robust mechanisms for enforcement and
accountability to bridge the gap between international
law and the reality on the ground.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I thank
you, President Duda, for organizing today’s important
debate. It is not often that we take time to think deeply
about why we are here and what we want to accomplish,
and I therefore appreciate this opportunity. I would like
to welcome Judge Owada, thank him for his briefing
and express my deep appreciation for his many years
of distinguished service. I thank President Meron for
his statement and particularly for his important work
on international criminal law. I am also grateful to
Ms. Viotti for her remarks.
Although this is a debate about international law, it
is worth stepping back to think about what the people
who wrote the Charter of the United Nations set out
to create. The Preamble to the Charter begins, “We
the peoples of the United Nations”, echoing the United
States Constitution, which begins with “We the people
of the United States”. Joining the United Nations is an
act of sovereign peoples who, as the Preamble says,
came together
“to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in
the dignity and worth of the human person, in the
equal rights of men and women and of nations large
and small”.
In that way, the Charter makes a clear connection
between respecting human rights and upholding and
promoting peace. Respect for the freedom and dignity
of the individual is fundamental to international law.
It is also fundamental to the founding values of the
United States. Our long-standing national commitment
to human rights is why the United States made human
rights a key theme of its most recent presidency of the
Security Council. Durable peace cannot be separated
from respect for human rights. In the past year, the
United States has championed a number of efforts to
highlight that connection. We have emphasized the
connection between the way in which the Iranian,

S/PV. 8262

Syrian, Venezuelan and North Korean regimes treat
their citizens and the threat to peace and security
that those Governments pose internationally. The
Security Council has also recognized the connection
between human rights and peace. We mandate many
of the Council’s peacekeeping and political missions
to promote human rights and report on human rights
violations and abuses. In many places, those missions
are the first to know about human rights violations and
abuses. We need to support them and ensure that they
fulfil their role in protecting human dignity.
A related issue is the obligations of Member States
under international humanitarian law. Here, too, the
Security Council has never been clearer about what
it expects of parties to conflicts. The Council has
adopted resolutions and statements on the protection of
civilians, children in armed conflict, medical neutrality
and famine in armed conflict. Many of our resolutions
addressing conflicts include a demand for unfettered
humanitarian access. Many of our sanctions regimes
allow for the listing of individuals and groups that
obstruct such humanitarian aid. The Security Council
has been increasingly outspoken and demanding where
respect for human rights and international humanitarian
law is concerned. That is important, but the challenge
that remains is a familiar one — it is follow-through.
Human rights violations and abuses, and humanitarian
needs, have only increased on our watch, and our
response has been completely inadequate.
Some argue that the Security Council has no
business in a nation’s domestic disputes. A nation’s
sovereignty, they argue, precludes any outside action,
even when people are suffering and abused and that
nation’s neighbours feel the consequences. We too
recognize and cherish our sovereignty and that of other
nations. But here is the thing: joining the United Nations
and pledging to abide by the words of the Charter
represent an act of sovereign peoples and sovereign
nations, an act that is freely chosen. Governments
cannot use sovereignty as a shield when they commit
mass atrocities, spread weapons of mass destruction
or perpetrate acts of terrorism. In such instances the
Security Council must be prepared to act. That is
why we are here. That is why the Council has such
wide-ranging authority to impose sanctions, establish
tribunals and authorize the use of force. We have those
tools because the people who drafted the Charter
realized that there might be times when the Council
needs to resort to its broad authority under Chapter VII.

18-1518017/97

S/PV.8262

Maintenance of international peace and security

It is the inability of the Council to follow up, especially
when it comes to human rights and humanitarian issues,
that allows suffering to continue. It is that inability to
act that erodes our credibility and makes it more likely
that more people will suffer in the future.
I once again thank the President of Poland for
calling for this critical debate. There are so many places
in the world where human dignity and well-being are
under assault today. There is much more good work that
we could be doing. As I mentioned earlier, the reasons
for our failures are often obvious, but the Security
Council’s continued paralysis in the face of so much
suffering is unacceptable. It should be unacceptable to
all of us. We have accepted this mandate. We have the
tools necessary to follow through. The time has come to
recall the fundamental purpose of the United Nations,
and for the sovereign peoples who make up the United
Nations to come together to take meaningful action to
fulfil it.
Ms. Baldwin (United Kingdom): On behalf of
the United Kingdom, I too would like to express our
gratitude to the Polish presidency for organizing today’s
important discussion, and to thank our briefers for their
statements this morning.
There are few values more important to the United
Kingdom than upholding international law. It is the
very foundation of peace and security. Today, conflicts
and tragedies in Syria, Burma, Ukraine and elsewhere
have shown us the importance of that commitment and
the consequences of the failure to uphold international
law. In Syria, appalling violations of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law
by the regime and its backers continue. Russia’s use
of the veto in the Security Council, which stopped
the work of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism, means that there is currently no means
available to properly investigate the use of chemical
weapons against Syrian civilians. In Burma, the
authorities have yet to begin a credible domestic
investigation into the clear violations of human rights
law in Rakhine state. Yet it is imperative to ensure
that there is a route to hold the perpetrators of those
crimes to account. In Ukraine, the illegal annexation
of Crimea four years ago represents a egregious assault
on international law. The enduring conflict in eastern
Ukraine continues to destroy lives.
18/97

17/05/2018

When armed conflicts break out, it is vital that
all parties respect international humanitarian law
and act in accordance with their obligations under it.
As members of the international community and the
Security Council, we are all responsible for upholding
international rules and norms. Today we must ask
ourselves how we discharge that responsibility.
The initiative on strengthening compliance with
international humanitarian law facilitated by the
International Committee of the Red Cross and the
Swiss Government has significant potential to aid that
effort. It is a valuable first step, and I encourage all
States to engage with that process, but that alone will
not be sufficient.
Enabling the meaningful participation of women in
decision-making is also key to upholding the rule of
law. We know that inclusive decision-making processes
are critical to preventing the escalation of conflict and
maintaining and supporting peace in post-conflict
societies. I call on States to act on the commitments
agreed to in the Council’s resolutions on women and
peace and security, and to recognize that they are an
integral part of our effort to maintain peace and security.
Sadly, there will be times when violations of
international humanitarian law or international human
rights law do occur. There must be no impunity in such
instances. It is, of course, States themselves that have
the primary responsibility to ensure that perpetrators
are brought to justice, but we, as the international
community, also have a role in helping States meet
their responsibilities. A year ago, the Council voted
unanimously to adopt resolution 2379 (2017), which
set up an investigative team to assist efforts to hold
Da’esh accountable for crimes committed in Iraq.
That team will collect, preserve and analyse evidence
of Da’esh’s heinous crimes and will work closely with
the Government of Iraq and organizations already
collecting such evidence. We hope that all States will
support that important mechanism by contributing to
the United Nations Trust Fund.
The United Kingdom has strongly supported
Human Rights Council resolutions aimed at increasing
accountability. We welcome the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral and the Secretariat to mainstream the promotion
and protection of human rights in all United Nations
activities. Such United Nations human rights tools as
monitoring, reporting and analysis can provide key
early-warning systems and help to identify and address
18-15180

17/05/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

the root causes of conflict as a means of prompting an
effective and early United Nations response.
The International Criminal Court also has a key
role to play in restoring peace and security. It ensures
accountability, acts as a deterrent, supports victims and
helps to establish a historical narrative of accountability.
However, for it to succeed, the Court requires the full
cooperation of States. Its inability to act directly against
those whom it seeks to arrest makes it entirely reliant
on States to execute the arrest warrants it issues. But for
too long and too frequently those indicted by the Court
have been able to travel freely without fear of arrest
and prosecution. We therefore urge all States to honour
resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1593 (2005) by cooperating
fully with the Court and its Prosecutor.
The ad hoc International Tribunals set up by the
Security Council have been crucial in bringing to
justice those most responsible for the terrible crimes
committed in Rwanda and the Balkans during the 1990s.
We are so grateful to Judge Meron and his colleagues for
taking forward the important work of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. We hope
that States will continue to ensure that the Mechanism
has sufficient resources to fulfil its mandate. We also
note the important role that the International Court
of Justice has played for many years in ensuring the
maintenance of international peace and security.
In summary, the United Kingdom believes that we
must continue to work together to deliver accountability
and justice, and to reaffirm our commitment to the core
tenets of international law.
Mr. Ruda Santolaria (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
Peru, as a country committed to multilateralism,
international law and the principle of the peaceful
settlement of disputes, welcomes Poland’s initiative
in convening today’s important open debate. We
want to highlight the presence of the President of
Poland, Mr. Andrzej Duda, as well as other high-level
participants. We would like to thank Ms. Maria Luiza
Ribeiro Viotti, Chef de Cabinet of the SecretaryGeneral; Judge Hisashi Owada, President Emeritus of
the International Court of Justice; and Judge Theodor
Meron, President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, for their briefings.
Peru would like to stress that in a world of increasing
interdependence, the validity, development and defence
of a rules-based international order are essential if
the international community is to effectively address

S/PV. 8262

serious global challenges and threats to international
peace and security. In that regard, we believe that
the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations, and a consistent approach to
sustainable peace, should continue to guide our efforts
to address contemporary conflicts. In particular, Peru
believes it is essential to ensure that the United Nations,
especially the Security Council, promotes the peaceful
settlement of disputes in accordance with the provisions
of Chapter VI of the Charter. We stress the importance
of strengthening the Organization’s capacities in
preventive diplomacy and the early warnings required
for that purpose, in compliance with Articles 1, 34 and
99 of the Charter.
In that regard, Peru supports the reforms proposed
by Secretary-General António Guterres and his efforts,
including those of his Special Envoys, to promote more
coherent, efficient and effective action by the United
Nations system to prevent conflicts and humanitarian
crises. To that end, we welcome the establishment
of strategic alliances with regional and subregional
organizations, especially the African Union, and have
great expectations for the recently established Highlevel Advisory Board on Mediation.
In the past few years, Peru has used various means
to peacefully settle disputes, including submitting a
dispute to the jurisdiction of the International Court
of Justice and engaging in negotiations supported by
friendly guarantor countries to resolve sensitive and
complex border issues with its neighbours. On a basis
of international law, we have excellent relations with
them today that are undoubtedly in the interests of
our people and theirs. In that context, we support the
provision in Article 36 of the Charter for the Council to
recommend that parties to a legal dispute should, as a
general rule, resort to the Court. We also believe that it
would be appropriate to request more frequent advisory
opinions of the Court, in accordance with Article 96 of
the Charter.
We want to take this opportunity to express our
deep concern about the current frequent instances of
violations of international law, including Security
Council resolutions, and especially of international
humanitarian law. We cannot maintain international
peace and security without respect for the rule of law.
For example, one of the cornerstones of the international
order is the prohibition of the use of force in any way that
is incompatible with the Charter of the United Nations.
We are concerned about the possibility that some

18-1518019/97

S/PV.8262

Maintenance of international peace and security

countries are testing arguments and interpretations
that are ultimately alien to international law and that
undermine the system of collective security.
The Security Council is, in essence, a political
body, with the primary responsibility to maintain
international peace and security. That means defending
and promoting a rules-based international order,
which is evident, for example, with regard to its role
in maintaining regimes for the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. The Council is also
a source of law, insofar as it adopts resolutions and
presidential statements that may be binding. That
implies an additional responsibility, since its decisions,
or the lack of them, have a decisive impact on an
effective, legitimate and predictable system of collective
security. In that regard, there is much to be done. The
Council also has a responsibility to promote access to
justice by creating ad hoc tribunals, referring situations
to the International Criminal Court and ensuring the
implementation of its decisions through the cooperation
of States. Accountability is vital in order to prevent the
commission of atrocity crimes, which should not, under
any circumstances, remain unpunished. The Security
Council establishes various kinds of sanctions that
create legal obligations for all States, which should
always respect the guarantees of due process.
In conclusion, we would like to underscore the
urgent need to respect the Charter of the United Nations
and in particular the importance of the Council’s
remaining united in carrying out the imperative
task of upholding and promoting international law
and shouldering its primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates the initiative of the Polish presidency of
the Security Council to hold today’s high-level public
meeting on upholding international law and welcomes
His Excellency President Duda to New York to preside
over it.
I would like to thank Ms. Viotti, Chef de Cabinet of
the Secretary-General; Judge Owada, Senior Judge on,
and President Emeritus of, the International Court of
Justice; and Judge Meron, President of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, for
their briefings.
The current global landscape is undergoing
profound and complex changes. Local conflicts and
turbulence keep popping up, terrorism is rife and
20/97

17/05/2018

regional security threats are on the rise. The authority
and effectiveness of the system of international law,
based on the Charter of the United Nations, face severe
challenges. How to strengthen the status and role of the
Charter and the principles of international law, which
are based on the purposes and principles of the Charter,
and thereby enhance international peace and security is
a question that warrants in-depth reflection on the part
of all States Members of the United Nations. I would
like to address the following points.
First, all countries should stand by the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter and reinforce
the cornerstone of the principles of international law.
The principles set out in the Charter, such as sovereign
equality, non-interference in a State’s internal affairs,
the pacific settlement of disputes, the non-use or threat
of use of force and the fulfilment of international
obligations in good faith underpin contemporary
international law and remain a yardstick by which to
judge whether or not a given State act is legal or just and
if it should be universally upheld by all Member States.
Secondly, all countries must effectively safeguard
the mission and authority of the Security Council. The
collective security mechanism of which the Council
is the centre is a solid guarantee of the maintenance
of international peace and security. In fulfilling its
responsibilities for international peace and security, the
Council represents the will of all Member States. The
international community must support the Council in
its efforts to resolve differences by political means and
through constructive dialogue and consultation, in line
with the purposes and principles of the Charter.
Thirdly, all countries must adhere to the
principle of the peaceful resolution of international
disputes. The sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of all countries must be respected.
Unilateral military operations that are not authorized
by the Security Council or that are not carried out in
exercise of the right of self-defence run counter to
the purposes and principles of the Charter and violate
international law and the basic norms of international
relations. The international community must adhere to
multilateralism, renounce the Cold War mindset and
zero-sum thinking, promote democracy and the rule
of law in international relations and facilitate global
governance through consultations.
Fourthly, all countries must implement and
harmonize applicable international law in good faith.
18-15180

17/05/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

The lifeblood of the law is its implementation. All
countries must commit to upholding the authority of
international justice, exercise their rights under the
law and fulfil their obligations in good faith. National
and international judicial bodies should ensure that
international law is applied in an equal and uniform
manner, with no double standards or imposition of
one country’s will on another. The implementation of
unilateral sanctions hinders and weakens the integrity
and effectiveness of measures taken by the Council and
should therefore be abandoned.
Peace and development are the current leitmotiv.
Win-win cooperation is a general trend, and advancing
the international rule of law is a common aspiration.
Looking forward, we must adhere to the five principles
of peaceful coexistence. We must respect the sovereign
rights of States to choose their own social systems
and paths to development and respect one another’s
core interests and concerns. No country is entitled
to wilful breaches of international law. All countries
should follow a new approach to inter-State relations
that features dialogue rather than confrontation, and
partnerships rather than the forming of alliances, in
order to properly manage contradictions and differences
and achieve lasting peace.
Looking forward, we must foster a new philosophy
of common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable
security. All countries should strengthen cooperation
efforts so as to coordinate responses to traditional and
non-traditional security threats and prevent the scourge
of war in the first place. We must deepen bilateral
and multilateral cooperation, promote coordination,
tolerance, complementarity and cooperation among the
various security mechanisms and implement common
and shared security.
As a founding Member of the United Nations and
a permanent member of the Security Council, China
will continue to contribute to world peace and global
development and to uphold the international order.
China stands ready to work with all countries to promote
the establishment of a global governance concept of
cooperation, joint development and sharing; maintain
and strengthen an international order and system
based on the purposes and principles of the United
Nations Charter; and actively promote a new model
of international relations of mutual respect, fairness,
justice and win-win cooperation, in a joint effort to
build a community for a shared future for humankind.

S/PV. 8262

Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to thank Judge
Owada, Judge Meron and Chef de Cabinet Viotti for
their briefings.
The Charter of the United Nations sets out the
ambition to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war, which twice in our lifetime has brought
untold sorrow to mankind. Sadly, seven decades after
the Charter was signed, the scourge of war continues
to bring untold sorrow. Yet, the vision set out in the
Charter in 1945 was not naïve. It embodies a clear view
of how to ensure a better path for the world. As stated
in its Preamble, it seeks
“to ensure, by the acceptance of principles and the
institution of methods, that armed force shall not be
used, save in the common interest”.
That is, that international law and international
institutions should harness war. That vision holds
true today.
Sweden warmly welcomes Poland’s initiative to
convene today’s meeting. We believe that it is a timely
discussion, taking place at a moment when severe
strains are being placed on international law.
International law is an essential part of modern
international relations and, although invisible to most,
is an essential part of modern life. Almost everything
we do is dependent on international agreements and
international cooperation — the ability to talk to
friends and family overseas by mail, phone and email;
to travel and discover one another’s cultures; to engage
in international trade; and to protect our societies from
global health risks or through criminal law cooperation.
The list is a very long one. This tapestry of international
rules and institutions enables international cooperation
and in many cases prevents and manages conflicts. It
creates stability, predictability and regularity while
allowing for peaceful change. Most rules are followed
by most actors most of the time. Such is the moral
expectation; violations are the exception to the rule.
Compliance is also our only enlightened and civilized
option, the alternative being indiscriminate chaos, with
the most powerful intervening at their whim.
We have created these mechanisms to protect the
rights and interests of States, peoples and individuals.
They are not only essential for the maintenance of
international peace and security but also confirm the
duty of all States to settle disputes by peaceful means.

18-1518021/97

S/PV.8262

Maintenance of international peace and security

In today’s debate, many will reaffirm, and
have reaffirmed, their commitment to respect for
international law. Yet we need to be clear-sighted. The
implementation of international law is being challenged
in many quarters, and efforts to undermine the legal
fabric built to protect us are threatening international
peace and security.
No State can be above the law. Yet all too often
the Council deals with situations in which international
law has been violated. Such breaches aim to undermine
a system that, ultimately, is there to protect us all.
In Syria, seven years of war have borne witness to
some of the most egregious and sustained violations
of international humanitarian law in modern times.
Civilians are consistently targeted, and humanitarian
agencies are regularly denied access to those in need
of assistance. When such conditions prevail, it is our
duty to act. It was for this reason that, with Kuwait, we
submitted resolution 2401 (2018), adopted unanimously
by the Council in February (see S/PV.8188). In
Backåkra, Sweden, the summer residence of former
Secretary-General Dag Hammarskjöld, the Council
confirmed that the use of chemical weapons is a
violation of resolution 2118 (2013) and is unacceptable.
We also reaffirmed our commitment to establishing an
independent and impartial attribution mechanism.
In Ukraine, Russia’s continuous aggression and
illegal annexation of Crimea is an ongoing breach of
international law. The redrawing of borders backed by
military power represents a threat that goes beyond
Ukraine; it is a challenge to the international legal
order and the United Nations Charter as such, and thus
a threat to all States.
The Israeli-Palestinian conflict has lasted for
more than half a century, and flagrant violations of
international law, such as illegal settlements, continue.
The prolonged occupation of Palestine has an extended
negative impact on the daily lives of the Palestinian
people and undermines respect for international law.
As repeatedly stated by the Secretary-General, the only
sustainable way forward is a two-State solution based
on international law.
Finally, in Myanmar, just weeks ago, Security
Council members witnessed the appalling situation
of the Rohingya minority. Systematic, widespread
and coordinated acts of violence strongly indicate
that crimes against humanity have been committed.
Impunity for such crimes cannot be tolerated, and the
22/97

17/05/2018

Council cannot abdicate its role in ensuring that those
responsible are held to account.
These are examples of situations where conflicts
and suffering could have been prevented or mitigated if
international law had been respected.
We must ask ourselves how it can be that we
succeed in using the tools of international law in most
areas yet fail in this most critical one, protecting the life
and dignity of our fellow human beings. The Council,
which the Charter entrusts with the ultimate power,
has a duty to meet its responsibility to hold those who
violate international law to account and to bring justice
to the peoples whom the Charter was promulgated to
protect. Our credibility depends on it.
The Security Council essentially has all the
tools necessary to respond and to maintain peace in
accordance with the Charter. We, its members, acting
on behalf of all members of the United Nations, have
an obligation to shoulder this responsibility, and the
permanent members have a particular responsibility.
That is why the use of the veto to protect narrow
national interests in situations of serious violations of
international law is totally unacceptable. I call on all
members to adhere to the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group code of conduct and the
Franco-Mexican initiative on restraint in the use of
the veto. Three points are particularly important.
First, on early warning and the peaceful settlement
of disputes, the Council needs to do more than react to
violence. It must use the early-warning tools available
to it to the fullest extent possible. Early-warning
mechanisms and relevant and independent information
from the ground play a crucial role in enabling the
Council to effectively assess, address, prevent and
respond to conflicts and threats to international peace
and security. The Council must make better use of the
tools at its disposal to advance the peaceful settlement
of disputes provided for in the Charter, including the
legal mechanisms available.
We have a Secretary-General who is very committed
to conflict prevention and peaceful settlements. We
encourage him to integrate the relevant international
law perspectives and tools more clearly in reporting to
the Council.
Secondly, the role of international law in sustaining
peace must be further developed. International
law and the institutions that uphold it provide a
18-15180

17/05/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

common basis for addressing the root causes of
conflict, including violations of human rights and of
international humanitarian law; environmental and
climate change; justice-related issues and inequality.
It provides frameworks for inclusive development and
the empowerment and full and effective participation
of women, as well as other prerequisites for peaceful
societies. As such, international law is not only
fundamental to bringing an end to conflicts but also
imperative in order to prevent them in the first place
and to build sustained peace.
Finally, the Council needs to come back to
addressing the entire spectrum of the peace and justice
agenda. Accountability is not only justice done and
reparations, it also deters and prevents crime and abuse.
The national responsibility for addressing violations
must be emphasized. But where that is lacking, the
international community, including the Council, must
use the means available under international law to act.
The universal jurisdiction of States and the
complementary mandate of the International Criminal
Court should be used when national authorities are
unable or unwilling to prosecute those responsible for
mass atrocities.
In this regard, we are pleased that the crime of
aggression in the Rome Statute will soon be activated.
It is a historic event when not only States but also
individuals can be responsible for this crime.
We need to effectively achieve the purposes and
principles of the Organization by faithfully adhering
to international law as set out in the Charter. This is
not just a legal and political imperative; it is a question
of common interest. Those who seek to undermine our
common legal protection should be wary of doing so;
the longer-term and wider consequences of weakening
any single instrument can be hard to predict.
Mr. Llorenty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): My delegation would like to welcome
the presence here of the President of the Republic of
Poland, His Excellency Mr. Andrzej Duda, and his
delegation, and to thank him for having convened this
important meeting. We also express our appreciation
for the important participation of the President
Emeritus of the International Court of Justice, Judge
Hisashi Owada, and the President of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, Judge
Theodor Meron. We also thank the Chef de Cabinet of
the Secretary-General for her briefing.

S/PV. 8262

We would like to take this opportunity to extend
warm and fraternal greetings to all our Muslim brothers
and sisters and wish them a blessed Ramadan.
International law is built on the rights and duties
of States and on the limits that these mutually agree to
observe in the exercise of their sovereignty. With this
in mind, the assigning of prerogatives to various organs
and systems establishes an international order regulated
by international agreements and treaties, which form
the backbone of international relations and establish
a binding framework providing certainty, equality
and security. The acceptance of these international
norms by all States is what guarantees the existence
of an international order that involves all States and
makes the maintenance of international peace and
security possible.
The twentieth century was characterized by the
strengthening of multilateralism as a basic element of
relations among States and respect for the fundamental
norms of international law. Thus, in a multipolar world,
equality among States prevails, and the Charter of the
United Nations is the cornerstone that makes possible
this interaction and coordination. However, along with
the emergence of this community of relations and
interaction, we are also seeing breaches of international
law, which are posing a major threat to the maintenance
of international peace and security.
During the twentieth century and at the beginning
of the twenty-first century, we have witnessed such
violations, which have involved a reinterpretation,
redefining or selective application of the provisions of
these various instruments by some so as to adapt them to
their points of view and agendas. They have even gone
so far as to extend their internal security policies to
the sphere of international relations, applying a kind of
exceptionalism in complying with their obligations and
United Nations resolutions. Such a breach of the rule of
law and the sovereign equality of States is reflected in
interventions, occupations, regime-change policies and
the application of unilateral coercive measures, which, in
flagrant violation of the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of States, have led to humanitarian
disasters and have destroyed entire nations under
the rationale of enforcing international law. In that
regard, the Charter of the United Nations is very clear,
through the provision in Article 2, paragraph 4, that
Members shall refrain in their international relations
from the threat or use of force against the territorial
integrity or political independence of any State, or in

18-1518023/97

S/PV.8262

Maintenance of international peace and security

any other manner inconsistent with the purposes of the
United Nations. One can clearly not claim to defend
international law by violating international law.
The effectiveness of the efforts of our Organization
in preserving and maintaining international peace and
security lies precisely in the degree of its Members’
adherence to, respect for and compliance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, as well as actions that are implemented by the
Security Council, which must at all times prioritize
dialogue and the peaceful settlement of disputes as
opposed to the use or threat of force, intimidation
or interventionism.
The effective application of negotiation, mediation,
reconciliation, prevention and the legal arrangements
for the peaceful settlement of disputes, as well as the
primary use of the provisions of Chapters VI and VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations, are indispensable
to the analysis and comprehensive consideration of
conflicts and their particularities. To that end, it is
essential to recall and to bear in mind the provisions of
Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Charter, which establishes
the obligation of States to settle their international
disputes by peaceful means in such a manner that
international peace and security, and justice, are
not endangered.
It is important to emphasize that the Charter could
have stipulated the obligation to settle disputes in
accordance with international law. However, instead
it emphasized that the obligation is to settle them in
such a manner that international peace and security,
and — I underscore — justice, are not endangered.
In that context, justice is a value that all Members of
the Organization are obliged to respect and promote.
It is a positive duty, which requires more than only
refraining from acting unlawfully. It requires effective
efforts to establish a fair outcome in situations where
international relations are distorted by injustice.
In that context, as the principal judicial organ of the
United Nations, the International Court of Justice plays
a key role in the peaceful settlement of disputes and
reinforces the provisions of Chapter VI of the Charter.
The universal jurisdiction for which the Court was
established and the work that has developed over the 71
years since its establishment demonstrate the ongoing
call for dialogue, at all times prioritizing negotiation
and peace over the use of force and aggression. As a
highly peaceful State, Bolivia reaffirms its commitment
24/97

17/05/2018

and support to the work undertaken by the International
Court of Justice.
It is also important that, in the context of the
responsibilities set out in Article 36, paragraph 3, of
the Charter, the Security Council make use of all the
tools and mechanisms provided by the Court, including
the delivery of advisory opinions, which represents
a preventive way to settle disputes and contributes
significantly to the fulfilment of the obligation of
States to settle their international disputes through
peaceful means.
Furthermore, the Rome Statute, which provided for
the establishment of the International Criminal Court,
made it possible to create a universal criminal justice
system in order to investigate and prosecute crimes
against humanity and war crimes and to fight impunity.
Unfortunately, the effort to achieve true universality in
criminal jurisdiction did not receive the support of all
Member States, since several members of the Security
Council, including permanent members, are not States
parties to the Rome Statute despite the fact that it is
precisely the Council that has the powers to refer cases
to its jurisdiction. In that regard, universality is still
a clear challenge and requires the commitment of all
States to fighting impunity.
In that regard, a successful example in the pursuit
of justice and accountability was the establishment of
the International Criminal Tribunals for the Former
Yugoslavia and for Rwanda through resolutions 827
(1993) and 955 (1994), respectively, which, in addition
to contributing significantly to justice by fighting
impunity, played an important role in restoring the rule
of law in the countries of the former Yugoslavia and
in Rwanda.
In conclusion, we reiterate that full compliance
with the commitments assumed under international law
is indispensable for the maintenance of international
peace and security. There can and should be no area
where double standards are used in the application of
those norms, since such acts are contrary to international
law and undermine the work of our Organization and
the efforts of the international community.
Mr. Djédjé (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): I
thank the Polish presidency of the Security Council for
organizing this open debate on upholding international
law within the context of the maintenance of
international peace and security. The presence of the
President of Poland among us, as well as his outstanding
18-15180

17/05/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

conduct of our work, illustrates the special interest that
Poland attaches to respect for international law, which
is an essential condition for strengthening international
peace and security.
My delegation also thanks Ms. Maria Luiza Ribeiro
Viotti, Chef de Cabinet of the Secretary-General, Judge
Hisashi Owada, former President of the International
Court of Justice, and Judge Theodor Meron, President
of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, for the quality of their briefings.
On 23 September 2017, the Special Chamber
of the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea
ruled in favour of Ghana, a neighbouring country of
Côte d’Ivoire, in a dispute between our two countries
over the delimitation of our maritime boundary. Côte
d’Ivoire, respecting international law, accepted the
decision of the Tribunal. As part of implementing the
decision, the two countries established the IvorianGhanaian committee for the implementation of the
decision of the International Tribunal for the Law of
the Sea, whose first meeting was held in Abidjan three
days ago, on 14 May. Well before the establishment of
the committee, Côte d’Ivoire and Ghana, concerned
about preserving peace, decided to strengthen their
cooperation through a strategic partnership agreement,
concluded on 17 October 2017. By accepting the verdict
of the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea,
Côte d’Ivoire thereby demonstrated that respect for
international legal norms can contribute effectively to
the maintenance of peace and security in the world.
Today’s debate is extremely relevant in an
international context marked by numerous conflicts,
leading to serious violations of international law,
including human rights and international humanitarian
law. To that end, Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the important
role of the Security Council, as the guarantor of the
maintenance of international peace and security, in
promoting the rule of law as a element of peace, stability
and development.
At the end of the post-electoral crisis that my country
experienced, we resolutely committed to a policy of
post-crisis reconstruction and national reconciliation
with a view to strengthening peace. That policy is
based on three essential pillars, namely, economic and
social recovery with a view to equitable development;
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
of ex-combatants, as well as security sector reform;
and combating impunity through the impartial justice

S/PV. 8262

necessary to reconciliation. The implementation of the
third pillar in a post-crisis context meant restoring the
judicial system. My delegation would like to reiterate
its thanks to the United Nations and the international
community for the many initiatives that have been
taken to strengthen the rule of law, including security
sector and justice system reform.
The Charter of the United Nations, which underpins
our collective action, provides for tools to strengthen
the rule of law and promote international law. Among
other things, they include the powers of the General
Assembly, the Security Council and the International
Court of Justice. With regard to the General Assembly,
the powers granted it in Article 11 of the Charter provide
for it to study and discuss all issues and principles
relating to the maintenance of international peace and
security and to bring them to the attention of Member
States and the Security Council. With regard to the
Security Council, Article 24 of the Charter entrusts
it with primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, with specific powers
defined in Chapters VI, VII, VIII and XII.
As for the International Court of Justice, it has
the power to interpret and apply international treaties
and international law in general. However, since the
jurisdiction of the Court depends on the principle of
the consent of States, in practice the administration of
international justice may prove difficult. As a result, it
is up to States to avail themselves of this judicial body,
which makes a significant contribution to ensuring
international peace and security. In that regard, my
delegation strongly encourages all Member States
that have not yet done so to recognize the jurisdiction
of the Court as the principal judicial organ of the
United Nations.
Respecting the Charter of the United Nations
and promoting international law in the context of
maintaining international peace and security also
call for a strong commitment to multilateralism in the
spirit of collective security, and for refraining from the
unilateral use of force in the settlement of disputes. In
promoting the rule of law, the international community
must not lose sight of the importance of respect for the
sovereignty, equality and territorial integrity of States,
which are the founding principles of the maintenance of
international peace and security.
When considering countries in conflict situations,
most Council members have often expressed concern

18-1518025/97

S/PV.8262

Maintenance of international peace and security

about violations of human rights or international
humanitarian law and have consistently called for
the effective implementation of the principle of
accountability. In that regard, my country encourages
States to fulfil their obligation to end impunity and to
prosecute, with thorough and impartial investigations,
those suspected of committing war crimes, genocide or
other serious violations of international humanitarian
law. In this context, Côte d’Ivoire would like to
stress the importance of the prevention of crises and
of ensuring the responsibility to protect, among the
various challenges facing our Organization.
In promoting international law, the United Nations
has the advantage of being extraordinarily productive,
and its impressive number of international legal texts
reflects the vigorous activity of the Organization in this
realm. The real challenge for us all, however, lies in
implementing and upholding those texts.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian delegation would like to welcome
today’s discussion and thank our Polish colleagues
for this initiative. We are also grateful to today’s
briefers, Ms. Viotti and Judges Owada and Meron, for
their opinions.
There is no question that the topic of today’s
meeting is important and timely. It harks back to the
origins of the United Nations and the League of Nations,
to their forefathers and the foundations they created for
international relations, now enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations. The Preamble to the Charter
proclaims that the peoples of the United Nations are
determined
“to establish conditions under which justice
and respect for the obligations arising from
treaties and other sources of international law can
be maintained”.
It also enshrines the founding principles and norms of
international relations, from the sovereign equality of
States and prohibition of interference in their domestic
affairs to the ban on the use of force in international
relations without permission from the Security Council
or beyond the purposes of self-defence.
In Russia we have always considered international
legitimacy as a fundamental aspect of stable peace
and security. As far back as 1899, Emperor Nicholas
II initiated the first Peace Conference at The Hague,
which not only instituted the codification of the rules
26/97

17/05/2018

for the conduct of war but also the procedures for the
pacific settlement of international disputes. Our country
also made a significant contribution to the Nuremberg
principles, which became a milestone civilizational
standard. These and other rules were designed to rid the
world of the terrible legacy of the Second World War
and the errors of the past. The Charter of the United
Nations and the developing international law based
on it created a firm foundation for intergovernmental
relations. It all seemed so simple. Live and let live,
and help those who ask for help. But in spite of that, as
the Polish presidency rightly noted in the concept note
for today’s meeting (S/2018/417, annex), violations of
international law continue in many parts of the world.
I would add that to this day it is not just specific
norms and rules that are violated but rather the
founding principles of international law. The principles
of good faith and cooperation among States are being
increasingly replaced by military, sanctions-based
or political pressure, taking the world back to an era
before the Charter, when all disputes between States
were resolved by force.
Some States still believe that the whole world should
live according to their model, their domestic laws and
principles, their national interests. The old notions of
exceptionalism and domination remain unchanged at
the heart of their approach to international affairs. Their
reckless, opportunistic attempts to impose their will on
the other participants in intergovernmental relations
never cease even for a moment. It appears as if that these
States have continued to cling to a colonial attitude
that divides countries into two categories — those that
possess every right and those to which the standards for
such rights do not apply. That is why we see blackmail,
threats and provocations — all the way to the unlawful
use of force against sovereign States — raised to the level
of Government policy. Our partners from Equatorial
Guinea spoke of that blackmail today, and we share
their concerns. Such things are unacceptable. They do
serious damage to regional and global stability and lead
to the spread of extremist and terrorist ideology. All of
that keeps the world in a state of permanent tension and
makes it less and less predictable.
An analysis of recent events in Syria is extremely
revealing in that regard. First, let us ask ourselves what
was and still is the reason for the military presence
of the United States and the coalition it leads in
Syria. As we all know, they were not invited by the
country’s legitimate authorities, which with the help
18-15180

17/05/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

of friendly States are themselves fighting terrorism
quite effectively. In the early stages, the coalition
partners made awkward references to self-defence
against terrorism. Now, however, they increasingly
justify being uninvited guests with references to
the aims of so-called geopolitical stabilization. And
as for international law, the West long ago came up
with a formula for that — “illegal but legitimate”.
This international legal nihilism culminated in the
aggression against Syria on 14 April. It is not just the
fact that the pretext was cooked up beforehand and was a
crude fake. Even if we imagine that a country may have
theoretically committed some violation, we all know
that armed reprisals are prohibited in international law.
We would like to point out that the use of military force
against a State is permitted only when sanctioned by
the Security Council or for self-defence, as paragraph 4
of Article 2 and Article 51 of the Charter clearly state in
one of its best known and most widely cited provisions.
Today we will be circulating the statement that our
President made on 14 April on the matter as a Security
Council document.
In the circumstances, it is not surprising that we
have not seen the United States, Britain and France
make any special efforts to come up with some sort
of justification for their actions on 14 April. Their
illegality from the point of view of international law is
so obvious that the people in those countries’ capitals
are themselves clearly aware of it all. It seems that was
exactly what the President of Poland was talking about
today when he urged us not to be shy about calling
acts of aggression by their names. And that is what I
am doing now. The only country that has attempted to
explain anything is the Government of Great Britain.
London could not come up with anything better than a
reference to the concept of humanitarian intervention
as essential to preventing the suffering of the Syrian
people. But we all know that the world community has
rejected that even as an abstract theory. Attempting to
present it as some kind of rule that can permit an armed
attack on a sovereign State is all the more absurd.
Ultimately, what we have is three permanent
members of the Security Council — founders of the
United Nations and nuclear Powers, in theory obliged
to uphold the provisions of the Charter on the non-use
of force — committing an act of aggression against a
sovereign State. And many more in the Council went
along with it and shielded them. Is it really not clear
that if such antics are left unanswered, similar lawless

S/PV. 8262

actions could be taken tomorrow against those who
stayed silent today? And it is in circumstances such
as these and with this kind of behaviour by external
actors that the United Nations and its Security Council
are compelled to work on a political settlement in
the Middle East generally and in Syria in particular.
What is astonishing is that those same actors take it on
themselves to lecture States on the rules of conduct in
the international arena. They long ago lost the moral
right to tell others what to do.
The internal crisis in Ukraine is another consequence
of external players’ gross violation of international
law, in this case the principle of non-interference in
the internal affairs of States. It is well known that
the opposition movement, which took the form of an
unconstitutional coup and the Kyiv regime’s war on its
own people, was inspired from outside. The result has
been general chaos and lawlessness, economic collapse
and rampant nationalism and extremism that threaten
even Ukraine’s neighbours. And, shamefully, everyone
turns a blind eye to it. Today in this Chamber our Polish
Presidents spoke about Ukraine and were embarrassed
to talk about the fact that in Kyiv today they glorify
those fighting on Hitler’s side who took part in the
murders of hundreds of thousands of Poles, Jews and
Russians during the Second World War. Are they not
therefore tacitly agreeing with the propaganda about
the gravest crimes and at the same time denying the
decisions of Nuremberg?
If for political or any other reasons they can
allow themselves not to notice this, we have no such
inhibitions. Of course, it is much easier to blame
everything on Russia than to get Kyiv to launch a
dialogue with its own citizens in eastern Ukraine. We
have no intention of listening to lectures about Crimea.
The way it became part of Russia was in full compliance
with international law and specifically the right to selfdetermination. That issue is settled. In anticipation
of the Ukrainian delegation’s statement, which will
certainly not be distinguished by having anything new
to say, I will just state in advance that we will not react
to such insinuations.
Today I am obliged to touch on another topic,
directly related to the work of the diplomatic corps
accredited to the United Nations. The United States
authorities, in their belief in their own impunity,
recently took their unilateral actions so far as to rewrite
even the rules of diplomatic and consular relations.
The issue of the United States authorities’ abuse of

18-1518027/97

S/PV.8262

Maintenance of international peace and security

the benefits of the existence on its territory of the
Headquarters of our global Organization has now also
appeared on the agenda. This is about the undisguised
imposition of sanctions on delegations. The recent
large-scale expulsion of Russian diplomats, including
those working for the United Nations, is a blatant case
of that, but not the only one, unfortunately. This is
about the seizure of Russian real estate on United States
territory, including parts of the Permanent Mission
to the United Nations, restrictions on the freedom of
movement for diplomats from a number of missions to
a 25-mile-radius zone and numerous delays in issuing
and extending visas. Washington’s gross violations of
the conventions on diplomatic and consular relations
and the United Nations Headquarters Agreement have
become commonplace. This is a serious problem that
is hanging over the entire Organization and each of
its members. I want to stress that this is not a matter
of our bilateral relations with the United States, it is a
violation of international law.
Russia has always believed in the importance
of strengthening the rule of law at the international
level. In 2016, together with China, we developed a
joint declaration on enhancing the role of international
law. In addition to the principles of non-interference,
the sovereign equality of States, the non-use of force,
the inadmissibility of unilateral measures and the
extraterritorial application of national law by States
in violation of international law, it gives considerable
attention to the principle of the peaceful settlement of
disputes. The declaration affirms our firm commitment
to that principle and our belief that States are obliged to
settle disputes with the help of means and mechanisms
for resolving disputes agreed on between them. In order
to maintain the world order, it is crucial to ensure that
all such means and mechanisms are used in good faith
and that their aims are not undermined by abuses.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that we
are determined to strengthen our cooperation with all
responsible members of the international community in
order to maintain and enhance the role of international
law and to establish of a just and equitable order based
on international law.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Poland for holding today’s important
debate on upholding international law within the context
of the maintenance of international peace and security.
We are very honoured today to welcome the President
28/97

17/05/2018

of the Republic of Poland. I would also like to thank the
speakers for their very informative briefings.
People’s aspirations have not changed since the
Charter of the United Nations was adopted in 1945.
From Syria to Burma, from Yemen to the Central
African Republic, from the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to South Sudan, in Palestine as in Israel,
human beings want to live in peace in a world where
their dignity is respected and their rights and freedoms
are protected. That goal cannot be achieved without
the rule of law. International law is at the heart of the
DNA of the United Nations. It is the cornerstone of
the multilateral order erected at the end of the Second
World War by a generation that, after experiencing the
terrible consequences of two global conflicts, viewed
the law as an essential instrument for resolving crises
and restoring peace. That is why international law is
at the heart of the principles of the Charter and the
constituent treaties of regional organizations such as
the European Union. Let me touch on some of the major
issues that illustrate the importance of international law
for the maintenance of peace and international security.
First, the Security Council acts as a guarantor of
international legality when exercising its responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
That is what the Council does when it calls on parties
to work to peacefully resolve disputes based on the
methods outlined in Chapter VI of the Charter, and
when it supports the increasing power of regional
partners under Chapter VIII of the Charter. We support
the commitment of the Secretary-General in that
regard, and I welcome his presence and the statement
made by his Chef de Cabinet.
The Security Council also acts as the executive
arm of international law when it calls on Member
States to respect their obligations. In that respect,
international law represents a complex architecture
balanced between the various legal regimes that are
critical to the maintenance of peace and security. It
is the responsibility of Member States to ensure that
the balance between those rules is maintained when
new legal instruments are introduced, so as not to
undermine the framework put in place to maintain
international peace and security. An example of that is
the framework designed to prevent the proliferation of
nuclear weapons.
Finally, Council decisions help to enforce
international law, in particular when it involves the
18-15180

17/05/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

adoption of sanctions or when it authorizes the use
of force under Chapter VII. Such decisions may be
aimed at ensuring that violations of international law
do not go unpunished, particularly when it comes to
preserving the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
a State or preventing attempts to use force to challenge
its borders. In any event, it is important to recall that
States should not recognize any annexation, such as the
illegal annexation of Crimea, resulting from a territorial
acquisition obtained by the threat or use of force. I also
want to reiterate here that the principle of sovereignty
cannot be invoked to excuse a State from complying
with its international obligations under Security
Council resolutions, international humanitarian and
human rights law or treaty obligations. The Charter
was not created to absolve criminals.
That brings me to my second point, concerning the
Council’s contribution to the fight against impunity,
which must be strengthened further. The Security
Council supports the fight against impunity when it
mandates peacekeeping operations to assist national
authorities to arrest and bring to justice those suspected
of being guilty of the most serious crimes, including
by cooperating with the States of the region and the
International Criminal Court (ICC), as is the case with
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It contributes
to the fight against impunity when it supports the
establishment of national and hybrid tribunals, for
example in the Central African Republic, where the
Special Criminal Court is supported by the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic. The Council
also works to fight impunity when it creates tribunals.
I would like to commend, through President Meron,
the impressive work undertaken by the International
Tribunals for the Former Yugoslavia and Rwanda in the
service of international peace and criminal justice.
France stresses the major role in this area of
the International Criminal Court, whose potential
contribution to peace and justice has unfortunately still
not been fully realized, 20 years after its establishment.
That is particularly the case with regard to the situations
in Darfur and in Libya. It is regrettable that in the
absence of sufficient cooperation with the International
Criminal Court, trials could not be initiated in those
two situations to investigate the responsibility of those
suspected of large-scale crimes. The Council has the

S/PV. 8262

responsibility for dealing with failures to cooperate
where they concern its own referrals to the ICC.
Thirdly and finally, if the Council is to fully carry
out its mission, it cannot allow itself to be paralysed or
subject to repeated blockages by some of its members.
That responsibility lies with each member of the Council.
In that respect, and considering the Syrian regime’s
serious and systematic violations of all its obligations,
France will continue its efforts at the highest level and
with all its partners to find a path to a political solution
for Syria, and it is in that spirit that President Macron
will visit Russia at the end of this month.
In 2013, in order to prevent blockages in cases where
mass atrocities have been committed, as in Syria or
Burma, France called for a unilateral suspension of the
veto in the form of a voluntary political commitment by
the five permanent members of the Security Council.
We have advanced that initiative with Mexico, and now
100 States Members of the United Nations support it.
That measure can be implemented immediately and to
the benefit of the entire international community. The
permanent members must be exemplary not only when
it comes to implementing Council resolutions but also
in respecting the accords that they themselves have
agreed to or helped to formulate.
In view of the divergent interpretations that may
exist in the Council, the International Court of Justice,
the presence here of whose President Emeritus I
would like to acknowledge, has a major role to play in
providing the necessary clarifications for a harmonious
interpretation of international law. In that regard, in
certain situations the Council may use its prerogative
to refer one or more points of law to the Court, it being
understood that the exercise of this jurisdiction must
not be used to settle bilateral disputes.
Considering that global threats have never been
so numerous, it makes no sense to accept unilateral
withdrawals and temptations. On the contrary, it is
only through a voluntarist, renewed and demanding
multilateralism that we can tackle the world’s
challenges. International law must be at the heart of the
strong multilateralism that we are calling for. That is
why respect for international law and its development
are top priorities for French diplomacy. It is in that spirit,
in the wake of the Paris Climate Change Agreement,
that France has proposed to consolidate international
environmental law by proposing a global pact for the
environment, launched by the General Assembly a few

18-1518029/97

S/PV.8262

Maintenance of international peace and security

days ago through its adoption of resolution 72/277.
France intends to continue those efforts with all of its
partners in the coming months.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): My delegation would like to
express its deep appreciation to the Polish presidency
for organizing this high-level open debate, and we are
pleased that the President of Poland presided over the
start of the meeting.
We thank the Chef de Cabinet and Judges Owada
and Meron for their informative briefings. I would
like to express my appreciation to Judges Owada
and Meron for their effort to help us to come to grips
with the issues surrounding accountability and the
challenges it presents. I am particularly appreciative
of Judge Meron’s comprehensive treatment of this
very vital legal matter, in which he also very rightly
stressed the importance of avoiding selectivity, which
would unquestionably undermine any efforts to ensure
that a system of accountability is put in place. That is a
problem the Council has yet to overcome.
It is an understatement to say that we are living in
dangerously complex times. We are facing unprecedented
challenges and threats to global peace and security.
Multilateralism and the rules-based international order
are under enormous strain. Collective action and respect
for basic norms and principles of international law have
therefore never been more essential than they are today.
That is all the more true today because we are living
in an increasingly interconnected and interdependent
world. What happens in one corner of the world
can easily affect us all, whether it is terrorism, the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, climate
change or a pandemic.
No one can remain unaffected by these problems,
nor can anyone claim to have a panacea by which to
address them alone. We can do so only if we work we
work together. That is why now more than ever we need a
rules-based international world order. We cannot afford
to remain silent when established international norms
and principles are being challenged and undermined.
History teaches us that indifference to blatant disregard
for the purposes and principles of international law
that govern inter-State relations can only lead to
catastrophic consequences. That is why upholding
international law is absolutely necessary, making
today’s deliberations all the more timely and relevant.
That is in the interest of all States, without exception,
but there can be no question that African States have
30/97

17/05/2018

a deep attachment to rules-based interactions among
nations, for obvious reasons.
There is no peace without law, as the President
of Poland said. The role of the United Nations and
its various organs, including the Security Council,
continues to be crucial in this regard. Of course, the
Organization can only be as good as its Members allow
it to be, and the United Nations has no life independent
of its membership. It is in that context that the existence
of a healthy relationship among members of the Council
is the major determinant of the effectiveness of the
United Nations in advancing its historic mission, which
is so explicitly stated in the Preamble to the Charter of
the Organization. But recent developments have served
only to highlight how much the lofty ideals of the
Charter, instead of being brought closer to realization,
appear in fact to be objectives that are far from doable.
However, this situation should not be allowed to define
what humankind is capable of achieving in politics. It
is therefore imperative that we must make every effort
to undo the situation by redressing the enormous trust
deficit among nations and allowing diplomacy and
multilateralism to work.
We do not need to reinvent the wheel to do that.
All that is required is absolute commitment and strict
adherence to the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations, which remain as relevant today as
they did at the Organization’s inception — safeguarding
international peace and security, promoting respect for
human rights and ensuring sustainable development
for all. Of course, if we are to meet the needs and
aspirations of current and future generations, the
Charter principles have to be applied in a manner that
is consistent with the realities of our time. That is why
we have been giving our full support to the SecretaryGeneral’s reform agenda.
Unfortunately, we have yet to take full advantage
of what the Charter can offer to help us overcome the
constraints of self-defeating policies based on narrow
national-interest calculations, which ipso facto lead to
double standards that in turn undermine the credibility
of the Organization. In that regard, the most critical
matter is to be consistent in our fidelity to the principles
of the Charter — sovereign equality, territorial integrity,
political independence, non-intervention in others’
internal affairs and the peaceful settlement of disputes.
The rules-based global order constitutes a
foundation for the promotion and maintenance of
18-15180

17/05/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

international peace and security as well as for fostering
friendly relations and cooperation among States. It
is certainly never easy or even possible, in fact, to
ensure that the rule of law will become a firm basis
for relations among nations, large or small, to the same
degree that it constitutes the foundation for democratic
governance at the national level. On the other hand, we
cannot abandon the effort to adhere to the principles
of international law governing inter-State relations,
despite the fact that it may be an uphill struggle to
fully achieve such a goal. There is not really another
sane option.
Given its primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security, the Security
Council should indeed play a vital role in ensuring strict
adherence to the rules-based international system. As
much as there have been instances when the Council
has stood its ground in order to uphold principles of
international law, there have also been several when
it failed miserably to do so, tarnishing its image and
credibility immeasurably. We therefore certainly need
to draw lessons from those shortcomings and make
all the necessary efforts to redress them. That is what
the situation calls for, and we should summon our
collective will to do better. That is what will enable the
Council to effectively respond to the challenges of our
time and live up to the responsibilities entrusted to it by
the United Nations Charter.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express my best wishes to the
Arab and Muslim nations on the occasion of the holy
month of Ramadan. I hope it will be auspicious for our
peoples and nations.
I would like to thank you, Madam President, for
convening today’s important debate on the topic of
upholding international law within the context of the
maintenance of international peace and security, and
Ms. Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, Judge Owada and
Judge Meron for their briefings.
The rule of law is the mainstay of the three
pillars of the United Nations — international peace
and security, human rights and development. When
it comes to international peace and security, the key
issue that the Charter of the United Nations refers to is
the achievement, by peaceful means and in conformity
with the principles of justice and international law, of
adjustments or settlements of international disputes or
situations that could result in a breach of peace.

S/PV. 8262

When it comes to human rights, every human being
deserves to be treated with dignity and respect and is
entitled to the full enjoyment of human rights. Those
rights are protected by law, including international
human rights law, international humanitarian law and
other relevant international norms, and all are essential
to a life of dignity.
With regard to development, the States Members
of the United Nations, through the Declaration of the
High-level Meeting of the General Assembly on the
Rule of Law at the National and International Levels
adopted on 24 September 2012 (General Assembly
resolution 67/1), have stipulated that the rule of law
and development are interconnected and mutually
reinforcing. The promotion of the rule of law at
national and international levels is vital to ensuring
sustained and inclusive economic growth, sustainable
development, the eradication of poverty and hunger
and the enjoyment of human rights, including the right
to development. Progress on all those issues further
strengthens the rule of law. After discussing the pivotal
role of the rule of law in strengthening the three pillars
of the United Nations, I will focus on three main issues:
the implementation of resolutions and the enforcement
of resolutions and laws on the ground, the unity of the
Council and the peaceful settlement of disputes.
With regard to the implementation of resolutions
and the enforcement of laws, when we discuss
international law in the Council, it is incumbent on us
as Council members to implement the resolutions that
we adopt and hold accountable those responsible for
violating international law. There are many Security
Council resolutions that have not been implemented
on the ground. There are many Members of the United
Nations who violate international law and the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations with full impunity.
As an example of the violation of international law,
I need only cite the Palestinian question — an issue
that has been discussed in all United Nations forums
for seven decades owing to the repeated violations
of international law and resolutions adopted by the
Council, the General Assembly and other United
Nations bodies. The unilateral measures adopted by
Israel, the occupying Power, which has sought to change
the situation on the ground in occupied Palestinian
territory, including continued settlement activities and
the expansion of existing settlements, are all illegal
and illegitimate activities. They represent a flagrant
violation of the relevant Security Council resolutions

18-1518031/97

S/PV.8262

Maintenance of international peace and security

and the international law — as does moving diplomatic
missions to Jerusalem.
The Syrian crisis has entered its eighth year with
no substantive solution in sight. The Security Council
has adopted many resolutions on the matter, including
resolution 2401 (2018), introduced by Kuwait and
Sweden and adopted unanimously in February, calling
on all parties to halt military activities throughout
Syria to ensure the delivery of humanitarian assistance
and medical evacuations. That is another clear sign
of non-compliance with our resolutions. We must be
frank with ourselves on the Council. As the concept
note (S/2018/417/Rev.1, annex) states, inadequate
implementation of Council resolutions undermines the
credibility of the Council and encourages rogue States
to defy them, while compromising the credibility of the
Council as a tool for maintaining international peace
and security.
Secondly, concerning the unity of the Council,
we stress the centrality of unified action, especially
on the Council, so as to contribute to the maintenance
of international peace and security and the promotion
of the rule of law with the tools at our disposal. The
success of those tools depends on the unity of the
Council. For years, the failure of the Council to resolve
numerous crises owing to divisions among members has
led to the use of the veto. That was clearly evidenced
with regard to the issues of Palestine and the Syrian
crisis. Accordingly, Kuwait supports the MexicanFrench initiative and the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group code of conduct, which call
for refraining from use of the veto in cases of genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes.
We stress the need for the unity of the Council,
especially among its permanent members, so that it
can play its role in maintaining international peace
and security, adopt the necessary effective measures
and resolutions and strengthen the rule of law, while
ensuring accountability and preventing impunity,
especially of those responsible for genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes, as well as other
grave violations of international humanitarian law
and international human rights law, and thereby
prevent their recurrence. The Council has succeeded
on many occasions in carrying out its responsibility
for maintaining international peace and security and
strenghtening the rule of law in a unified and decisive
manner. That success includes the liberation of my
country, the State of Kuwait, in February 1991, in
32/97

17/05/2018

what was a clear manifestation of the purposes and
principles of the Charter. That clearly demonstrates
what we can achieve when the international community
works together under the banner of the United Nations
through Security Council resolutions to promote the
rule of law and justice.
Thirdly, concerning the peaceful settlement of
disputes, the Charter provides many tools to address
the challenges of our time, especially in Chapter VI. We
must use those tools effectively in a peaceful manner to
settle disputes, including through negotiation, inquiry,
mediation, conciliation, arbitration and judicial
settlement. All of those tools help to prevent the
outbreak of conflict. Kuwait fully abides by Chapter
VI of the Charter. Our foreign policy is based on a
number of principles, including preventive diplomacy,
reconciliation and mediation so as to prevent and
contain conflicts.
In conclusion, I would like to read out part of a
statement delivered by former Secretary-General
Kofi Annan.
(spoke in English)
“Those who seek to bestow legitimacy must
themselves embody it; and those who invoke
international law must themselves submit to it. Just
as, within a country, respect for the law depends
on the sense that all have a say in making and
implementing it, so it is in our global community.
No nation must feel excluded. All must feel that
international law belongs to them and protects their
legitimate interests.
“Rule of law as a mere concept is not enough.
Laws must be put into practice and permeate the
fabric of our lives.” (A/59/PV.3, p.3)
The President: I inform all concerned that we will
continue this open debate through lunchtime, as we
have a large number of speakers.
I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Lithuania.
Mr. Linkevičius (Lithuania): Allow me to begin by
commending Poland, as the President of the Security
Council for the month of May, for convening this
exceptionally important open debate. I would also
like to thank our briefers for their contributions to
our discussion.
18-15180

17/05/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

My delegation aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union.
Lithuania is celebrating the centennial anniversary
of the restoration of its independence this year. One
of the factors that enabled us to begin developing our
State was the League of Nations and a system based on
international rules. We joined the League of Nations
and co-founded the Permanent Court of International
Justice, the predecessors of today’s United Nations and
International Court of Justice. Unfortunately, Lithuania
was occupied by the Soviet Union by the time the
League of Nations had ceased its activities. Following
its return to the international family, Lithuania accepted
the compulsory jurisdiction of the International Court
of Justice. Like others, we are happy to note recent
declarations recognizing the jurisdiction of the Court.
When rules are not observed, we are confronted
by a clear threat to international peace and security.
Today ongoing conflicts are destroying many parts of
the globe, while Governments take steps to turn their
contested claims into faits accomplis. In Syria, Yemen
and the Central African Republic, among others, gross
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights law continue on a daily basis. Barbaric crimes are
being committed on a massive scale. A total collapse of
law and order has also led to unspeakable atrocities.
After listening to the remarks by the Russian
representative, who lectured us on international
law, I would like to recall that non-compliance with
international law in Europe has led to clear violations
of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States
in several cases. The protracted conflict in Moldova
has continued for almost 20 years. The violation of
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Georgia is
entering its tenth year. Moreover, we recently witnessed
the occupation and annexation of Crimea by the Russian
Federation and military actions in eastern Ukraine,
including the downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight MHl7. Those do not appear to be isolated events.
Such blatant breaches of the Charter of the United
Nations constitute a threat to international peace,
security and stability and should not be permitted in
the twenty-first century. The United Nations and the
entire international community have to be able to react
effectively to such constantly repeated violations.
During its non-permanent membership on the
Security Council, Lithuania consistently raised the
issue of the violation of international law in Ukraine.

S/PV. 8262

Unfortunately, the Security Council was not able to
take any concrete action. We especially regret that the
Council was not able to ensure that an independent
and impartial international court or tribunal would
investigate the downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight
MH-17. That undermines the credibility of the whole
United Nations.
There are many ways to achieve long-lasting peace
and stability. The Secretary-General’s efforts to put
emphasis on conflict resolution, preventive diplomacy,
peacebuilding and sustaining peace are therefore of
the utmost importance. The advancement of preventive
diplomacy, early action and mediation remain vital to
preventing conflicts and mass atrocities. Early action
matters. Greater commitment and engagement must
also be devoted to supporting political processes.
A crucial element of conflict prevention consists
of putting an end to impunity and ensuring justice for
all. The Council’s strong voice and action in support
of international law, accountability and justice matter a
great deal. Accountability for crimes against humanity,
genocide and war crimes is key to progress on the path
of reconciliation and peace. My Government therefore
commends the work done by the International, Impartial
and Independent Mechanism and the Commission of
Inquiry in laying the foundation for the accountability
process in Syria. Moreover, a new French initiative
launched this year on the International Partnership
against Impunity for the Use of Chemical Weapons is
very timely.
It is the primary responsibility of national justice
systems to investigate and prosecute the most serious
crimes of international concern. However, where
national judicial systems fail to tackle impunity, the
Security Council should be ready to use the full range
of tools at its disposal, including targeted sanctions
and referrals to the International Criminal Court. A
relevant and strong United Nations requires an efficient,
transparent and inclusive Security Council to meet
today’s challenges to international peace and security
and improve global governance. Among other things,
restraint in the use of the veto would make the Council’s
responses to ongoing crises more effective and reduce
veto-induced paralysis. Lithuania therefore strongly
supports the French-Mexican initiative on limiting its
use in cases of mass atrocities, genocide, war crimes
and crimes against humanity. Lithuania also actively
endorses the relevant initiatives of Liechtenstein and
the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group.

18-1518033/97

S/PV.8262

Maintenance of international peace and security

The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Lativa.
Mr. Rinkévics (Latvia): First of all, I warmly
congratulate Poland for presiding over the Security
Council this month and for organizing this open debate
on a very important topic.
My remarks will focus on three areas: first,
the crucial importance of international law in the
maintenance of peace and security; secondly, the
responsibility of the Security Council in that regard;
and, thirdly, upholding accountability for breaches of
international law.
Latvia has always been a staunch supporter of
international law and a promoter of the principles
of democracy, human rights and the rule of law.
Those principles are fundamental to maintaining an
international order based on the predictability, stability
and security of States. By promoting international law,
Latvia promotes our foreign policy values and interests,
as well as sustainable security. We are convinced that
the relations between States must be based on law,
not force.
The Security Council, as the main guarantor of
international peace and security, has a particular
responsibility, as its actions have implications with
respect to international law. The Council has a special
role in preventing conflicts, acts of aggression and
mass atrocities. The Council has a special role in
seeking solutions to ongoing crises and conflicts. It has
not always lived up to its responsibility. The special
privilege of veto power of the permanent members of
the Council is also a responsibility — it must be used
in the interests of common peace and security, and not
when mass atrocity crimes are committed. A failure
to implement its own resolutions is also an issue that
needs more attention.
In the case of Syria, the failure of the Council to
prevent or stop the conflict and end impunity for the
mass atrocities that have taken place has resulted in an
enormous human cost. The polarization of the Council,
including the use of the veto to block any meaningful
action, has delayed the chances for reaching a viable
political solution in Syria. Latvia strongly condemns the
use of chemical weapons, which is a flagrant violation
of international law and Security Council resolutions.
Such violations must be thoroughly investigated, and
the approach to them must be proactive.
34/97

17/05/2018

The principle of territorial integrity is a key
element of the international legal order, enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations. Russia’s annexation
of Ukrainian Crimea and its covert and overt actions in
eastern Ukraine violate that fundamental principle. We
have witnessed similar acts by Russia in Georgia. We
need a rules-based system so that powerful countries do
not annex parts of other countries, or whole countries,
on false pretexts. We must return to the rules-based
security order. A peaceful resolution of the conflict
in Ukraine that respects Ukraine’s independence and
territorial integrity must be a priority. The international
community must continue to seek solutions to the
protracted conflicts in Europe.
Accountability for grave violations of international
law is necessary for the credibility of the whole
international system. Latvia has ratified the Kampala
Amendments to the Rome Statute on the crime of
aggression and is committed to further supporting
the work of the International Criminal Court (ICC).
Referrals by the Security Council to the ICC are
necessary when there is evidence that atrocity crimes
are being committed with impunity. International law
will prevail only if it is rigorously implemented by the
international community, and we all should all strive
to do that.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Estonia.
Mr. Mikser (Estonia): I would like to begin by
thanking the Polish presidency of the Security Council
for convening this open debate on a timely and very
important topic.
Estonia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union.
Maintaining international peace and security
is a vital question for the whole international
community. The role of the Security Council is, and
has been, pivotal in that regard. However, since the
end of the Cold War, it has perhaps never been as
difficult for the Security Council to fulfil its primary
responsibility to maintain international peace and
security as it is now. The crisis situations to which the
Council must respond have become more complex,
transnational and multidimensional. Furthermore,
modern conflicts threatening international peace and
security are characterized by an ever-broader use of
new technologies.
18-15180

17/05/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

Estonia is firmly of the position that crimes have
to be prevented. When they take place, they must be
investigated and prosecuted irrespective of the way
they are committed, be it by using kinetic force or
cybermeans, for example. By its resolution 68/243,
the General Assembly welcomed the report (see
A/68/98) of the Group of Governmental Experts that
confirms the applicability of international law to the
use of information and communication technologies.
International law is therefore applicable when
cybermeans are used to threaten international peace and
security. It is our view that the Security Council can,
and should, use all powers deriving from the Charter of
the United Nations to take action in such cases.
Estonia is committed to promoting respect for
international law and the rules-based international
order. For us, international law is an existential matter.
It is crucial to make full use of all available instruments
and to act with full responsibility to prevent and end
conflicts. That includes in situations involving mass
atrocity crimes. In order to make the whole system
work, every country must play its role. We must
strengthen our common efforts to end conflicts and
make the perpetrators accountable.
It is unfortunate that the rules-based international
system, the foundation of the international community,
is being increasingly challenged and questioned. In
recent times, we have witnessed growing disunity and
disagreement on a number of topics. Yet it is clear that
the international community needs the Security Council
to uphold and promote international law by responding
decisively to grave violations of international law,
including humanitarian law and human rights law. In
that regard, I would like to highlight the code of conduct
of the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
group regarding Security Council action against
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes.
So far it has been signed by 116 Member States in the
expectation that the Council should act in a timely and
decisive manner to prevent and end atrocity crimes.
Furthermore, in ensuring respect for international
criminal law, Estonia is convinced that we need a
more productive relationship between the Security
Council and the International Criminal Court (ICC).
International criminal justice needs greater political
support, in particular from the Security Council. The
Rome Statute reserves a unique role for the Security
Council, as it can refer situations to the International
Criminal Court that would otherwise not fall under

S/PV. 8262

its jurisdiction, such as the situation in Syria. The
Court is an important tool for ending impunity for the
most serious international crimes, but its efficiency
inevitably depends on States’ cooperation in enforcing
its decisions. When States parties do not comply, the
ICC must be able to rely on the Security Council to
intervene with full support.
In conclusion, let me emphasize that we must
keep up our efforts to strengthen the legitimacy of the
Security Council resolutions and their implementation.
In that regard, it is important to strive for deeper
cooperation both within the Security Council and with
the wider United Nations membership and other actors.
Estonia stands ready to engage in that partnership in
order to better uphold international law and maintain
international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia.
Mrs. Marsudi (Indonesia): I would first like to
express my appreciation to Poland for organizing
today’s debate.
This week Indonesia experienced a series of terrorist
attacks. As a nation, we are not afraid. I repeat, we are
not afraid. We will not give space to violent extremism
or terrorism. Our whole nation is standing together
to strengthen its fight against terrorism, and I thank
the Council for its support and words of condolence.
Inshallah, we will succeed in fighting them. Let us
unite to develop a global comprehensive approach to
combating terrorism and violent extremism.
Violent extremism and terrorism are just some of
the many challenges we face today, from transnational
organized crime to conflicts, wars and extreme poverty.
Such issues help to focus our attention on the role of
the Security Council. The Council’s main mandate is to
ensure that peace and security prevail. To that end, it is
very important to uphold international law and ensure
the implementation of all the Council’s commitments
and resolutions, including those on Palestine, many
of which have not been fully implemented. It is also
important to ensure that all members are part of the
solution and not of the problem.
It is also essential that Article 25 of the Charter
of the United Nations be implemented in tandem with
the Charter’s principles, particularly those outlined
in Articles 1 and 2. Why is it important to uphold
international law? It protects the weak and, more

18-1518035/97

S/PV.8262

Maintenance of international peace and security

importantly, prevents a mighty-takes-all approach.
An issue’s rightness should not depend on the degree
to which the most powerful determine that it accords
with their own interests. The Security Council must not
neglect its responsibility to maintain peace and security
for all. The peoples of the world are our constituents.
The Charter begins with the phrase “We the peoples of
the United Nations”. We are responsible for them. The
beneficiaries of the products of the Security Council
must be all people worldwide.
I would like to convey some of our thoughts on
strengthening the maintenance of world peace and
security. First, it is the Council’s responsibility to
function in accordance with international law. The
Council is an executive organ of the United Nations and
must remain on track.
Secondly, ensuring peace and security in our
immediate neighbourhood is key to global peace and
security. In that context, regional arrangements, as
mandated by Chapter VIII, are crucial as a building
block for global peace and stability. The Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) is an example.
ASEAN contributes significantly to creating an
ecosystem of peace, stability and prosperity in the region
by upholding the principle of the peaceful settlement
of disputes, the habit of dialogue and a win-win rather
than a zero-sum approach. ASEAN will remain at the
forefront in this area, including by helping to develop a
peaceful, prosperous and inclusive Indo-Pacific region.
Thirdly, we should ensure synergy between peace
and development. Only through development, guided
by the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, can
we build a peaceful world where people live in harmony.
As a true partner for world peace, Indonesia will
continue to contribute to the maintenance of the world
order. We are ready to share our experience, play our
role in strengthening respect for international law
and promote the peaceful settlement of disputes in
our region and beyond. Indonesia has made concrete
contributions to shaping norms and maintaining peace
in the past and the present, and will continue to do so
in the future.
The President: I now give the floor to the First
Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Georgia.
Mr. Zalkaliani (Georgia): At the outset, let me
express my sincere gratitude to the Polish presidency
for convening today’s debate. I also thank our briefers,
36/97

17/05/2018

Ms. Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, Chef de Cabinet of the
Secretary-General, Judge Hisashi Owada, President
Emeritus of the International Court of Justice, and
Judge Theodor Meron, President of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.
Georgia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the observer of the European Union,
and I would also like to add a few remarks in my
national capacity.
International law and the rules-based international
order are the foundations of a peaceful, prosperous and
just world. The Charter of the United Nations, together
with the wider body of international instruments,
provides a framework for the conduct of international
relations and means to resolve disputes. The principles
of sovereignty, territorial integrity and sovereign
equality of States, the non-use or threat of use of force
and non-interference in the internal affairs of States
are at the core of the rules-based international order.
Article 24 of the Charter of the United Nations grants
the Security Council the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security
on behalf of its Member States. That is why it is so
important that we discuss today, in this Chamber,
how international law is respected and its implications
around the world.
Justice and peace are inextricably linked. For the
past decade, sadly, we have been witnessing a series of
attempts to attack the international order, and at times
to dismantle it, by disregarding the main principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. In
that respect, let me speak to the challenges facing
my country.
Ten years ago, Georgia became the victim of an act
of aggression by a permanent member of the Security
Council following a policy of ethnic cleansing and
meddling in the internal affairs of a sovereign State
for more than a decade. In its decision on the situation
in Georgia, the Pre-Trial Chamber of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) confirmed the international
nature of the 2008 August war and concluded that
the campaign of violence against ethnic Georgians
constituted an attack on the civilian population within
the meaning of article 7, paragraph 2 (a), of the Rome
Statute, thereby attesting that crimes against humanity
had been committed. Notably, following the war, in
blatant disregard of the need to advance the peace
process and ensure an international presence on the
18-15180

17/05/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

ground, the Russian Federation used its veto power
to dismantle the United Nations Observer Mission in
Georgia in order to avoid any kind of international
engagement on the ground.
Since the 2008 Russia-Georgia war, the Russian
Federation has been illegally occupying two of
Georgia’s regions — Abkhazia and Tskhinvali/South
Ossetia — and implementing a policy aimed at the
de facto annexation of those regions. To this day, the
occupying Power is conducting a process of so-called
borderization through the installation of razor-wire
fences and other artificial barriers to divide the country
and to impede the freedom of movement of civilians
living on both sides of the occupation line. Moreover,
the two occupied regions have turned into black holes
in terms of the rule of law and respect for human rights.
The recent brutal killing of two Georgian citizens,
Mr. Tatunashvili and Mr. Otkhozoria, is clear proof of
that. Moreover, right now, there are fully operational
Russian military bases illegally stationed in both
Abkhazia and Tskhinvali/South Ossetia, each equipped
with sophisticated offensive weaponry.
Against that background, Georgia has persistently
pursued a policy of peaceful reconciliation, conflict
resolution and respect for international law. Consecutive
Governments have pledged not to use force and
reaffirmed their commitment to peace policy initiatives.
Georgia used all the international legal instruments to
seek justice at all levels, starting from the European
Court of Human Rights to the International Court of
Justice and the International Criminal Court. Just
recently, the Government of Georgia declared a new
comprehensive peace initiative — a step towards a
better future aimed at bridging the divided communities
by creating avenues for reconciliation in various areas
of life.
For all those efforts to be successful, international
law and its norms and principles need to be respected
by both sides.
First and foremost, it is vital to commit to
international instruments when we speak about
crimes against humanity. Georgia has declared its
full cooperation with the ICC and the Office of the
Prosecutor, as shown by conducting investigations
on an unprecedented scale and by interrogating more
than 7,000 witnesses. The Office of the Prosecutor
of the ICC opened a local office in Tbilisi last year,
and we are fully committed to supporting the Office

S/PV. 8262

in all its endeavours. However, additional investigative
measures are hampered by the lack of access to the
regions due to the occupation. Once again, we call on
the Russian Federation to ensure the administration
of justice, instead of impeding the investigation and
access to the conflict-affected population.
The aggression against Georgia was not an isolated
incident. Similar patterns were identified six years later
in Ukraine and could be repeated elsewhere. Turning a
blind eye to violations of international law emboldens
the perpetrators anywhere in the world. That is why it
is so important to call a spade a spade.
This year we mark the seventieth anniversary of
the establishment of the International Law Commission
(ILC), with numerous events taking place, including
a special session of the Commission here in New
York. The contribution of the ILC to the development
of international law and the role that it has played in
strengthening the rule of law globally for seven decades
now is immense and of paramount importance.
Furthermore, on 17 July — the Day of International
Criminal Justice — we will celebrate the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption of the Rome Statute. We
will achieve yet another milestone by witnessing the
entry into force of the amendments on the crime of
aggression. In the volatile world in which we all live
today it is vital that we all unequivocally support the
international justice system. The Rome Statute created
essentially a permanent and global institution that
embodies the principles of international law recognized
in the Charter of the Nuremberg Tribunal and in the
judgment of the Tribunal to fight impunity and to
prevent the most heinous crimes. It is time to reflect on
the challenges, take stock of the achievements and unite
in reiterating “never again”.
Let me therefore conclude by calling on the
States Members of the United Nations, particularly
the members of the Security Council, to stand strong
in defending the Charter of the United Nations and in
upholding the principles and norms of international law.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Decourcey (Canada): The role of the Security
Council is to maintain international peace and security.
However, there can be no peace without justice. Despite
growing demands for accountability, impunity for

18-1518037/97

S/PV.8262

Maintenance of international peace and security

violations of international law continues unabated. We
can do better.
Justice and accountability are prerequisites for
peace and security. Likewise, they are fundamental to
prevention. Impunity, on the other hand, begets further
human rights violations. International humanitarian
law and international human rights remain at the core of
Canada’s commitment to a peaceful world and a rulesbased international order. Canada is acting to defend
that commitment in the following ways.
(spoke in French)
First, Canada supports the international legal
framework and strongly advocates for respect for
international law. Last month, the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of the States members of the Group
of Seven committed to adopting practical measures to
promote the effective implementation of international
humanitarian law by our partners.
(spoke in English)
More specifically, they committed to using their
support to State and, when relevant, to non-State
parties to armed conflict to encourage the effective
implementation of international humanitarian law by
such parties, among other things. We did that because
we believe that greater adherence to international
humanitarian law can help to reduce unnecessary
human suffering in situations of armed conflict.
Secondly, Canada supports the fight against
impunity. Our Government is deeply committed to
ensuring that those who violate international law
are held accountable. That is why Canada welcomes
and financially supports the efforts of international
organizations such as the United Nations and of
non-governmental organizations that collect and
analyse evidence for the purpose of prosecuting those
responsible for international crimes.

17/05/2018

There can be no impunity for the perpetrators of those
horrific crimes. Canada supports the establishment of an
international accountability mechanism to investigate
and prosecute those responsible for atrocities.
Moreover, Canada is coordinating with like-minded
partners to support existing evidence-gathering efforts,
such as the United Nations Fact-finding Mission on
Myanmar, and explore options to assist in documenting
and investigating the atrocities and grave human rights
violations, especially in Rakhine state. That includes
violations related to sexual and gender-based violence.
Similarly, in the context of Syria, Canada is
supporting the International Impartial and Independent
Mechanism to assist in the investigation and prosecution
of those responsible for war crimes or crimes against
humanity. We also support the Commission for
International Justice and Accountability with regard
to the gathering of evidence for use in the eventual
prosecution of perpetrators.
Lastly, Canada supports the International Criminal
Court (ICC) with crucial leadership and advocacy.
(spoke in French)
Canada is proud of its pivotal role in the
establishment of the ICC and supports the Court’s
efforts to bring to justice those responsible for grave
international crimes. We call on all States to cooperate
with the ICC so that the perpetrators of such crimes
are held accountable. Multilateral structures such as the
ICC play a key role in promoting accountability.
(spoke in English)
The Council can count on Canada’s leadership to
engage constructively with multilateral, international
and bilateral partners to drive positive action on peace
and security issues.
(spoke in French)

Turning to Myanmar, Canada remains outraged at
the crimes against humanity that have been committed
against the Rohingya and other ethnic and religious
minorities in Myanmar. This year, for the first time,
the Secretary-General specifically cited the Myanmar
Armed Forces with regard to patterns of sexual violence
in conflict.

Member States and the Security Council must put
an end to persistent violations of international law and
the widespread culture of impunity. Today we affirm
our determination to enforce accountability by all
possible means. Canada is ready to collaborate.

Wherever and whenever civilian populations
are targeted with such indiscriminate violence, the
international community must act swiftly and in concert.

Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Polish presidency
for the month of May for having proposed this very

38/97

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.

18-15180

17/05/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

important topic for open debate in the Security Council.
I should also like to thank the briefers for their highly
significant presentations.
In the wake of humankind’s painful experiences
in the Second World War, the world understood that
certain purposes, principles and legal norms were
necessary to maintain international peace and security,
ensure development and protect human rights. Those
principles were enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations and attained the highest level of international
jus cogens. They became the modus operandi of
international multilateral actions and international
relations But while the purposes, principles and legal
norms enshrined in the Charter are ideals, it is up
to us to implement and abide by them, and we must
demonstrate political will in order to do so.
We continue to witness conflicts and occupation
around the world, in some case continuing for decades,
as well as terrorism, the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction, and flows of refugees and
undocumented migrants. This situation results from the
fact that some do not abide by the rules of international
law but instead exhibit double standards, undermining
the purposes, principles and norms enshrined in the
Charter. They propose erroneous interpretations of the
Charter, voiding its meaning or transmogrifying it to
serve their own interests.
Against that regrettable international backdrop,
the United Nations, as the principal entity overseeing
international affairs and entrusted with ensuring the
implementation of international law and the Charter,
must shoulder its responsibility and engage in reform to
improve its performance so as to ensure that the United
Nations continues to fully play its due role. If that does
not happen, its role in the international arena will be
eclipsed. The United Nations will no long command
trust, being seen instead as an organization without
credibility and incapable of action. We must first and
foremost show the political will to respect international
law as enshrined in the purposes and principles of the
Charter, particularly those relating to the peaceful
settlement of disputes. If we are truly serious, we must
take the following crucial steps.
The Security Council must be objective in its
deliberations in assessing the scope of threats to
international peace and security. The Council must
adopt the most logical approach in dealing with an issue
before it, in accordance with what the Charter says about

S/PV. 8262

promoting the peaceful settlement of disputes with
respect for sovereignty. The Council must take all the
necessary measures to do so, including recourse to the
concept of preventive diplomacy, which encompasses,
among other things. the provision for the SecretaryGeneral to use his good offices. We must promote the
use of mediation, establish fact-finding commissions
and request advisory opinions from the International
Court of Justice. In addition, we should make use of
Article 36, paragraph 3, of the Charter, which recalls
that the Council should urge parties to a dispute to refer
it to the International Court of Justice.
For the Security Council to successfully discharge
is responsibilities, it must be apprised of the most
up-to-date information on conflicts or situations
risking deteriorating into conflict. The early-warning
mechanisms of the United Nations and various regions
must be functional for that to be the case. The Council
should cooperate with regional mechanisms with a
view to preventing conflict.
There is a crucial need to swiftly resolve protracted
ongoing conflicts, such as that in Palestine. How can
that not be included in the framework of international
law? We must make use of all mechanisms available in
order to ensure that we do not undermine the credibility
of the United Nations internationally, and to avoid a
situation where countries resort to alternative methods
outside the United Nations in order to prevail.
We also need to avoid situations that may lead to the
collapse of States located in conflict regions. We must
not address such situations in a conventional manner or
move slowly, as that would result in the deterioration of
the situation and make such countries fertile ground for
terrorists, who threaten peace and security throughout
the world and make maintaining peace and stability
globally an even more difficult task.
Let us reconsider the veto right. The use of the veto
undermines the implementation of the provisions of the
Charter and of international law. The provisional rules
of the Security Council must be followed.
There is a need to address capacity-building in the
legal and judicial sectors to guarantee accountability
and prevent impunity, especially in the case of
grave crimes.
The United Nations must improve its practices
in peacekeeping and peacebuilding to guarantee the
prevention of outbreaks and renewal of conflicts

18-1518039/97

S/PV.8262

Maintenance of international peace and security

between countries, and to establish peace and stability
in them. When that is successfully achieved, those
countries will see the tangible added value of the
United Nations.
There is a need to promote the economic and social
aspects of United Nations efforts, which are the essential
pillars of its work, particularly following the adoption
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development in
2015. Socioeconomic aspects are of key importance
and could compensate for the failure of the United
Nations to respond to numerous challenges and resolve
conflicts and disputes that threaten international peace
and security. The real problem that we face is that of
adequate international funding for relevant activities
and projects.
Finally, with regard to the fight against terrorism,
we must prove that the United Nations is capable of
undertaking tangible and specific actions, apart from
the resolutions adopted in the Chamber. We must
demonstrate that terrorist organizations and groups are
not the only ones that can plan and act. That is why
we need to do our utmost to achieve tangible progress
on the ground in order to ensure that terrorists do not
propagate their ideology, indoctrinate people, use
social networks to spread their ideology or have access
to funding or weapons coming from various sources.
In that regard, we need the highest possible level of
coordination among the counter-terrorism entities of
the United Nations to carry out such efforts both within
the United Nations and outside the Organization.
In conclusion, I would once again like to thank
Poland for having convened this very important debate.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovakia.

17/05/2018

I would like to highlight a few points that we
believe to be especially relevant in the context of our
debate today.
The international order conceived after the Second
World War is a global rules-based system in which
States are required to develop friendly relations and
settle their disputes in peaceful ways. The work of
the International Court of Justice is fundamental to
the settlement of disputes between States. Slovakia
encourages all States Members of the United Nations to
join the 73 States, including my own, that have accepted
the compulsory jurisdiction of the International Court
of Justice. The adjudication of legal disputes by an
impartial and independent judicial body is essential to
promoting the rule of law in international relations.
The rule of law, and justice in general, would
be an illusion if we did not ensure accountability.
We are convinced that bringing the perpetrators of
international crimes to justice is a basic requirement
for the resolution of any conflict and for subsequent
reconciliation efforts. In that regard, the most
prominent place belongs to the International Criminal
Court (ICC), which will celebrate the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption of its founding instrument,
the Rome Statute, later this year. We call on Member
States to join the 123 States parties to the Statute in
fighting impunity. The Security Council has a special
relationship with the ICC, and Slovakia encourages
referrals by the Council to the Court in cases where war
crimes, crimes against humanity or genocide are being
committed and where the national authorities bearing
the primary responsibility for prosecuting those crimes
are not in a position to do so. It is equally important that
the Security Council follow up on its referrals so that
the required cooperation of Member States is ensured.

Mr. Galbavy (Slovakia): At the outset, I would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on Poland’s
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I also want to thank you for organizing
this useful debate. We strongly believe that the Security
Council has an important responsibility to promote
justice and the rule of law in its efforts to maintain
international peace and security. I would also like to
thank Ms. Viotti, Judge Owada and Judge Meron for
their insightful briefings.

Prevention has been gaining prominence on the
agenda of the United Nations, and my country fully
supports that approach. In the area of law, the preventive
role of the various human rights monitoring bodies
is indispensable. Slovakia is also closely following
the current negotiations in Geneva on a compliance
mechanism for international humanitarian law and
hopes to see the creation of a meaningful mechanism
that will strengthen respect for the rules of international
humanitarian law, thereby contributing to the alleviation
of human suffering during armed conflict.

My delegation associates itself with the statement to
be delivered later by the observer of the European Union.

In conclusion, I wish only to say that the
international community is facing unprecedented

40/97

18-15180

17/05/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

challenges to global peace and security. We must make
sure that such challenges are resolved peacefully and
always within the framework of international law.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Spain.
Mr. Moragas Sánchez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to align myself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
I am grateful for the briefings by Ms. Viotti, Judge
Owada and Judge Meron. I congratulate President Duda
and Poland on the choice of the topic for today’s debate.
Upholding and affirming international law in
the context of maintaining international peace and
security represent a powerful reminder of a key guiding
principle in the establishment of the United Nations, in
which my country strongly believes. Taking decisions
in order to maintain international peace and security
is the best and most natural opportunity to underscore
among Member States the importance of respecting the
obligations arising from international law.
Spain firmly believes that it is possible to uphold
and reaffirm international law while the Security
Council fulfils its mandate to deal with and resolve
situations that threaten international peace and
security. In overcoming the greatest challenges to
peace and security, Governments achieve a higher
political legitimacy and, if I may say, become stronger
when their actions are conducted in full respect for the
rule of law at both the national and international levels.
I would now like to underscore three specific aspects
where Spain believes the Security Council should
expand its activity.
With regard to the fight against impunity for
the most serious acts that are basic violations of
international humanitarian law, in the area of human
rights, Spain believes that it is essential to improve the
Security Council’s cooperation in referring situations
for consideration by the International Criminal Court.
The Council should put its political resources into
following up on the work of the Court, particularly
the Office of the Prosecutor. After deciding to refer
a situation to the Court, the Council should uphold
that decision through close, ongoing and long-term
cooperation with it. In short, in our opinion, the Council
has more than enough tools and an untapped potential
for expanding its cooperation with the Court.

S/PV. 8262

Regarding the need to promote a culture of respect
for international law as a pattern for State behaviour,
we wonder whether it would not be appropriate when
considering the membership of the Security Council to
have in place incentives that would take account of a
State’s specific capacity to contribute to the Council’s
objective of upholding respect for international law
while ensuring the maintenance of international peace
and security.
Finally, I would like to underscore the increasing
work of the Security Council in adopting resolutions
that include important legal norms of international
humanitarian law, reaffirming their content and
encouraging Member States to seek formulas that
would improve compliance with the law and promote
respect for it. Examples include resolution 2286 (2016),
on accessing and protecting health-care facilities
in situations of armed conflict, and resolution 2331
(2016), on human trafficking in armed conflict. In
our opinion, those resolutions, which reflect existing
international law and contribute to its observance, put
the Council on a path that enables it to use its political
resources to strengthen international law. That also
fully complements one of the functions of the General
Assembly — promoting the progressive development of
international law and its codification.
To sum up, my country attaches great importance
to ensuring that the Council, as a principal organ of
the United Nations, can increase its role in promoting
respect for international law as a basic guiding principle
of its decisions. We are certain that will lead to greater
legitimacy and strengthen both the Council itself and
the entire Organization.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Greece.
Mrs. Theofili (Greece): Greece would like
to commend Poland for convening this high-level
meeting. This open debate is timely and topical, taking
into account the ever-increasing challenges to the
fundamental principles of international law and the
Charter of the United Nations.
As a general remark I would like to point out that,
for Greece, international law constitutes the cornerstone
of its policies. Greece has always been a staunch
supporter of the peaceful settlement of international
disputes. In that spirit, the peremptory rule of the
Charter that prohibits the use or the threat of use of
force and acts of aggression in international relations is

18-1518041/97

S/PV.8262

Maintenance of international peace and security

17/05/2018

of utmost importance. States should settle their disputes
by peaceful means, as set forth in Chapter VI of the
Charter. Furthermore, we underline the significance of
judicial mechanisms in the prevention and resolution
of legal disputes. Resorting to those mechanisms,
particularly the International Court of Justice, would
greatly contribute to the maintenance of international
peace and security. At the same time, we believe that
preventive diplomacy and early warning could help to
stop the emergence and escalation of conflicts. In that
respect, the role of the Security Council in addressing
international disputes at an early stage and without
delay is crucial.

Transforming those doctrines into practice
constitutes the quintessence of our approach in
international relations. A recent example of that
approach is the initiative by Greece to organize and
host for the past two years the Rhodes Conference for
Security and Stability, an informal ministerial meeting
of countries of the wider eastern Mediterranean region
aimed at fostering stability and security in the region.
Continuing that tradition, the third Rhodes Conference,
taking place in June, will highlight the importance of
shaping a positive agenda in the wider region.

Furthermore, respect for international humanitarian
law is an essential component of the rule of law in
conflict situations. In that regard, Greece reiterates its
unwavering support for the role of the International
Criminal Court in putting an end to impunity for
the perpetrators of the most heinous crimes, thereby
preventing their recurrence. There is no doubt that the
Security Council has an important role to play and a
responsibility to shoulder by referring situations of
mass atrocities to the Court, ensuring accountability
and thereby enhancing its own credibility.

Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): Not too long
ago, we believed that we had firmly transitioned into
an era of the primacy of international law. That belief
has been weakened in the recent past; however, our
determination to make it so has not. Those who believe
in the rule of law, as we do, are challenged to stand
up for the primacy of international law at the heart of
the international order. The prohibition of the illegal
use of force is a core provision in that respect. It was
incorporated into the Charter of the United Nations in
direct response to the destruction caused by the Second
World War and has been recognized as a key provision
of international law since. It continues to be of crucial
relevance. Resorting to the use of force remains one of
the most serious decisions a State can take and requires
careful legal scrutiny and communication. In assessing
their decisions in that respect, States are now assisted
by the first internationally agreed definition, set out in
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
(ICC), of a crime of aggression, which is met only
in cases where the illegal use of force constitutes a
manifest violation of the Charter.

Last but not least, allow me to point out the
fundamental significance of respect for the rule of law
and the public order of the oceans as reflected in the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. With
its universal and unified character, the Convention
contributes to strengthening peace, security,
cooperation and good-neighbourly relations among
all nations and is a factor of stability and security in
a challenging international context. We therefore
stress the need to abide by its provisions, which have
long been recognized by jurisprudence as reflecting
customary international law.
Greece deems it important that we all comply
with the purposes and principles of the Charter, in
order to fully implement Security Council resolutions
and to safeguard the fundamental, indisputable norms
governing international relations, such as respect for
the principles of the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of nations, non-aggression and good-neighbourly
relations. That is our common duty and obligation. It
is equally important to resolve disputes through such
peaceful means as dialogue and consultation. That is
our common responsibility.
42/97

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.

At the Nuremberg trials, 12 leading figures of Nazi
Germany were convicted of crimes against peace. Since
then, no international criminal tribunal has had the
competence to hold individuals accountable for the most
serious forms of the illegal use of force. In the following
seven decades, we did not even have an internationally
accepted definition of the crime of aggression. In
December 2017 that changed. The 123 States parties to
the Rome Statute made the historic decision to enable
the International Criminal Court to prosecute the
crime of aggression. Exactly two months from today,
on 17 July, the Court’s jurisdiction over the crime of
aggression will commence — marking the first time
that humankind will have a permanent international
18-15180

17/05/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

court with the authority to hold individuals accountable
for this crime. That will be a crucial moment also for
the Security Council, which will have a new tool at its
disposal, namely, the ability to refer situations involving
acts of aggression to the ICC. If applied in a meaningful
way, that new tool could assist the Security Council in
the peaceful resolution of conflicts and in reinforcing
the Charter.
The date of 17 July also marks the twentieth
anniversary of the Rome Statute, an occasion to
both reaffirm our collective commitment to justice
and international law and to address the numerous
challenges we continue to face. Impunity continues
to reign in many situations where grave crimes are
committed. Where the seriousness of the situation so
requires and where all other options fail — in particular
national prosecutions — the ICC must be enabled to
act. It is often up to the Security Council to provide
the Court with jurisdiction, as indeed it should do with
respect to the situations in Syria and in Myanmar. But
more than 10 years after its first referral decision, the
Council still has much room for a more productive
relationship with the Court and lacks a collective
commitment to accountability. As much as we need
to strive to make this relationship more productive,
combined with working towards the universalization
of the Rome Statute, we also must be prepared to act
within the parameters of today’s reality. The Court’s
reach is severely restricted, as the situation in Syria has
illustrated for a number of years.
Given that the path to the ICC was blocked in the
Council through the veto of two permanent members,
the General Assembly responded by creating the
accountability mechanism known as the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism for Syria. We
were proud to lead that effort in the General Assembly.
The Mechanism acts as a model for future action, in
that the General Assembly should step in where the
Council is paralysed and therefore unable to take on
its responsibility to ensure accountability in line
with its authority under the Charter. The collective
commitment of the United Nations membership to
fight mass atrocity crimes is also expressed in the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group’s
code of conduct on mass atrocities. We echo the call by
many speakers in the Chamber on all Member States
to join that initiative, which is supported by 116 States.
There is no doubt that international norms
and international law are under attack today. In

S/PV. 8262

its consequence, that is an effort to undermine the
international legal order and the United Nations itself,
which is at the heart of that order and not only with
respect to the maintenance of international peace and
security. The Organization is the ultimate expression in
the belief of the power of the law. Its continued relevance
depends on our ability to stand up for that belief.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this open debate. I would also like to thank
Ms. Viotti, Judge Owada and President Meron for their
insightful and comprehensive briefings.
Today I will focus on two points included in the
concept note (S/2018/417/Rev.1, annex), namely, the
peaceful settlement of disputes and accountability.
First, on the peaceful settlement of disputes, the
Security Council and the International Court of Justice
are the only two principal United Nations organs
capable of making legally binding decisions. They have
different mandates, but they can work complementarily
and in a mutually reinforcing manner. However, they
both face challenges.
For the Security Council, the primary challenge is
implementation. Member States are legally obligated
to carry out Council decisions in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations, but it is not always easy
for non-members of the Council to follow their content
closely. Without dedicated implementation, the actual
effects of even the best-crafted Council resolutions
will be limited. It is therefore incumbent on Council
members to explain the content of resolutions to the
wider membership through such efforts as briefings by
the Chairs of the sanctions committees. That will help
promote the implementation of resolutions by Member
States, thereby enhancing their effectiveness.
By contrast, judgments of the International Court
of Justice, which are binding on the parties, have seen
relatively good implementation, although not without
challenges. For the Court, the more fundamental issue
is jurisdiction. Japan attaches great importance to the
rule of law and has accepted the Court’s compulsory
jurisdiction since 1958. We encourage others to do so as
well. To that end, it is imperative that the Court continue
to produce solid judgments and advisory opinions that
enjoy the confidence of States.

18-1518043/97

S/PV.8262

Maintenance of international peace and security

Turning to the issue of accountability, the Security
Council cannot do everything by itself. It can benefit
from coordinating with other institutions or mechanisms
and making full use of their resources. For example,
the Council has referred situations to the International
Criminal Court (ICC) twice, in Darfur and Libya. The
Council should at least follow up on non-compliance
in such referrals, as the ICC lacks its own enforcement
mechanisms. Even if the situation does not allow for
a referral to the ICC, the need for accountability for
the most serious crimes remains. In the case of the
use of chemical weapons in Syria, for example, an
accountability mechanism to identify those responsible
is strongly called for.
Before concluding, I would like to take this
opportunity to express our sincere gratitude to Judge
Owada for his service and dedication to upholding
international law as a Judge of the International Court
of Justice for the past 15 years.
Let me conclude by expressing Japan’s continued
commitment to upholding the rule of law and the
peaceful settlement of disputes.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Mr. Duque Estrada Meyer (Brazil): The year 2018
marks the ninetieth anniversary of the Briand-Kellogg
Pact. That is an idea whose value simply cannot be
overstated, that is, the outlawing of war. The prohibition
of the use of force is a peremptory norm; it is the rule.
Self-defence and authorization under Chapter VII are
the exceptions to it. The use of armed force in any
manner inconsistent with the Charter of the United
Nations constitutes aggression, as defined in General
Assembly resolution 3314 (XXIX).
Given the spread of terrorism, there have been
attempts to depart from the collective security system
towards actions that reflect pre-Charter understandings.
They have included reinterpretations of the law on selfdefence as well as problematic readings on the letter of
Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter. Some have been
arguing that self-defence could be applied as a response
to non-State actors, sometimes adding as a condition
the criterion of unwillingness or inability on the part
of the territorial State. Brazil does not agree with such
interpretations. Let me present four assumptions that
inform our position.
44/97

17/05/2018

I would first like to mention the general principle
of law, according to which exception to rules must be
interpreted restrictively. Article 51 is an exception to
Article 2, paragraph 4. Since the latter does mention
States, and the former must be interpreted in that light,
self-defence is a response to an armed attack undertaken
by, or somehow attributable to, a State.
Secondly, with regard to the case law of the
International Court of Justice, in the case of Republic of
Nicaragua v. The United States of America, the Court
made it clear that the territorial State would have to
be “sending” or have “substantial involvement” in the
acts of the non-State actor for the conditions of selfdefence to arise. In the advisory opinion on the Legal
Consequences of the Construction of a Wall in the
Occupied Palestinian Territory, it is stated that
“Article 51 of the Charter ... recognizes the
existence of an inherent right of self-defence in
the case of an armed attack by one State against
another State”.
Thirdly, on the travaux préparatoires, the
framework established in 1945 was a response to the
Second World War, and it is implausible to impute to the
drafters the intention to make self-defence applicable
outside inter-State conflicts.
Fourthly, on treaty law, the Vienna Convention on the
Law of Treaties allows subsequent agreement between
the parties regarding the interpretation of a treaty or
subsequent practice to be taken into consideration.
However, the threshold for a tacit agreement between
the 193 parties to the Charter is far from being met.
The State practice being invoked by those seeking a
reinterpretation is erratic and ambiguous.
An impressive number of States have been cautioning
against expansive interpretations of self-defence. The
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries affirmed that
Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations is
restrictive and should not be rewritten or reinterpreted.
The Community of Latin American and Caribbean
States called for an open and transparent debate on the
issue. The conditions for any reinterpretation of Article
51 are strict. Those norms cannot be changed by the
practice of a few States — all countries have a stake in
the issue of the legality of the use of force.
Similar reasoning applies to efforts to justify the
use of force beyond the two exceptions enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations. Article 2, paragraph
18-15180

17/05/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8262

4, does not envisage the use of force as a self-help
mechanism, or as a response to violations of general
international law. In the past 30 years, we have
witnessed a tendency to unilaterally resort to force for
protecting human rights or forestalling international
crimes. Sponsors of that view tend to read Article 2,
paragraph 4, as prohibiting the use of force only when
it goes against the territorial integrity or political
independence of another State, or when it is inconsistent
with the purposes of the United Nations. Brazil does not
share that view, as it considers that Article 2, paragraph
4, aims to reinforce prohibition of the use of force.

as a defender of the integrity of the norms that form
our collective security system. Whenever the Council
deliberates, international law should be central, not
a distant part of the landscape. Above all, we must
remind ourselves of a notion that should be self-evident,
namely, that full respect for international law is the
only way to achieve peace and sustain it.

Moreover, military action — even when warranted
on grounds of morality and legitimacy — inevitably
results in human and material costs. Those who suffer
the most are the civilians on whose protection the resort
to force is often based. If subjective unilateral criteria
inform decisions on the use of force, peace will be a
far-distant objective. While Brazil is a strong advocate
of prevention, we do not deny that force might be
envisaged in exceptional circumstances. Yet our resolve
to stop human rights violations and defeat terrorism
cannot make us turn a blind eye to international law.
Narratives developed to justify actions in one part of
the world have systemic repercussions.

I would like to begin by aligning myself with
the statement to be delivered on behalf of the
European Union.

Such narratives for self-defence are based on
conceptual uncertainties. Not only do we lack a
definition of terrorism, but also the preferred notion
seems to be non-State actors, a category that can
involve scenarios outside the purview of the Council.
In addition, States cannot disregard the resort to
multilateral solutions to fight hostile non-State actors,
including the authorization of the use of force by the
Security Council. We should be careful not to open
the door for unilateralism, thereby jeopardizing the
collective security system.
Security Council resolutions are adopted on
behalf of the international community. It is a basic
notion that those authorized to take action on behalf
of others are accountable to those that authorize them.
States that engage in military operations to implement
measures envisaged in Article 42 should have to report
periodically to the Council, so that their adherence to
the mandate can be multilaterally monitored. Those
troops might not be wearing blue helmets, but they act
on the authority and legitimacy of a blue text.
In conclusion, as the primary guardian of
international peace and security, the Council should act

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ireland.
Mr. Flynn (Ireland): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today’s important debate.

The Preamble to the Charter of the United Nations
identifies one of the aims of the United Nations as that
of establishing conditions under which justice and
respect for the obligations arising from treaties and
other sources of international law can be maintained.
The Charter, the foundation stone of the Organization,
recognizes that the rule of law must be at the heart of
our shared efforts to create a peaceful world.
It is important that as we strive collectively to
abide by the Charter of the United Nations, we remain
vigilant in differentiating between the rule of law
and rule by law. The difference is human rights, the
universal freedoms and rights of individuals. Rule by
law can negate those rights, whereas the rule of law
operationalizes them, thereby ensuring their promotion
and protection in peace or war.
Ireland’s commitment to an international order
based on the rule of law is enshrined in our Constitution
and reflected in Ireland’s acceptance of the compulsory
jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice. Ireland
is party to the core international and European human
rights treaties and strongly supports strengthening
the multilateral human rights framework and the
importance of respect for international humanitarian
law in all circumstances.
However, legal norms without enforcement are
clearly insufficient. Ireland therefore supports, among
other measures, universal adherence to the Rome
Statute, which established the International Criminal
Court (ICC). We seek to ensure accountability for the
perpetrators of the most serious crimes of concern to
the international community, to deliver justice for the

18-1518045/97

S/PV.8262

Maintenance of international peace and security

victims and, ultimately, we seek to prevent such crimes
from being committed.
The year 2018 is particularly important, as it marks
the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the Rome
Statute as well as the coming into effect of the Court’s
jurisdiction with respect to the crime of aggression.
Ireland is working to ensure ratification of the Kampala
amendment on the crime of aggression, which is a key
foreign policy priority.
Ongoing violations of international law — including
international humanitarian law and human rights
law — in situations of conflict are of grave concern.
Those violations, which include attacks by both State
forces and non-State armed groups on health facilities
and personnel, are unacceptable. The regularity and
severity of those attacks risks normalizing such action
and disrupting the delivery of humanitarian aid to those
in most need. The deliberate denial of humanitarian aid
to vulnerable populations, or the use of humanitarian
access as a bargaining chip in peace negotiations, is
never acceptable.
The Security Council must play its role in referring
violations to the ICC, and the Council must work to
ensure that any referral is accompanied by ongoing
support to the Court, particularly with respect to
the execution of arrest warrants and the provision of
adequate financial support.
Ireland continues to support reform of the Security
Council veto and believes that, at a minimum, the
use of the veto must be restricted, in accordance with
the France-Mexico initiative and the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group code of conduct
regarding genocide, crimes against humanity and
war crimes.
Where the Security Council is unable to act, and
therefore unable to fulfil its primary responsibility
to work towards the purposes and principles of the
United Nations, other organs — including the General
Assembly — must act. In that context, Ireland also
wishes to reiterate its continuing political and financial
support for the International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism for the Syrian Arab Republic to assist in
the investigation and prosecution of the most serious
crimes under international law committed in Syria.
At a time when serious violations of international
law and international humanitarian law are all too
common, and where the multilateral rules-based system
46/97

17/05/2018

itself is under threat, we call on all States to support the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, uphold international law and strictly abide
by the decisions of the Security Council and other
relevant organs.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mexico.
Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): Mexico is grateful to Poland for convening
this important debate on respect for international
law in the context of maintaining international peace
and security.
International law is the essential foundation on
which cooperative and friendly relations between
States Members of the United Nations are based. It is
enshrined as part of the first principle of the Charter
of the United Nations; it is fully valid and we are all
obligated to observe it. Given the scope of the issue, I
will limit my statement to a few main aspects.
We are witnessing unacceptable suffering among
civil populations in armed conflicts around the world.
International law, international humanitarian law
and human rights law have been developed by the
international community so that those situations would
not occur, and if they did take place, so that those
responsible would be brought to justice. Effective
accountability for violations of international law,
closing spaces to impunity, must be a central objective
of the Organization. There can be no sustainable peace
without justice.
We have enough machinery to make those goals
a reality. The International Criminal Court (ICC) is
one of the most comprehensive achievements of the
international community, one that we must strengthen
and perfect. The relationship between the Council and
the ICC should be strengthened with the establishment
of a structured dialogue, for example in order to generate
broader support from the Council when the Office of
the Prosecutor reports the challenges it faces in cases
subject to referral under article 16 of the Rome Statute.
There should be closer cooperation between the
Security Council’s Sanctions Committees and the
ICC, given how useful the adoption of some selective
measures can be in executing arrest warrants and for
reparations to victims. It is also essential to have timely
and objective information on violations of international
law in the field. Independent, impartial investigative
18-15180

17/05/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8262

mechanisms have been shown to be viable options for
shedding light on events and possible accountability.

of the International Court of Justice and thereby
strengthen the international justice regime.

As Mexico has indicated on numerous occasions,
we must avoid having the Security Council, when faced
with atrocity crimes, becoming paralysed and its work
irrelevant. That is why we have developed an initiative
with France that has the support of over 100 States, as
has been mentioned already today. In that same spirit,
some States — certainly a majority of Members — have
found ourselves forced to find alternative solutions
for the enforcement of international humanitarian
law. We call on the Council, and on the membership
in general, to support the work of those alternative
mechanisms, particularly the International, Impartial
and Independent Mechanism for the Syrian Arab
Republic established by the General Assembly.

The Security Council has a crucial role to play in
efforts to guarantee the rule of law at the international
level. Nevertheless, the effectiveness of its decisions
is seriously undermined if there is no consistency
between what the Council says and what it does. The
Council should participate more actively in analysing
the responsibilities of States under the Charter. Recent
justifications presented by some States for using force
in legitimate self-defence, for example, show the need
to consider the limits imposed by Article 51 of the
Charter and the inherent right of States to self-defence.
A lack of rigour in interpreting Article 51 could lead to
abuse, putting international peace and security at risk.

The premises of the Council’s presidential statement
S/PRST/2009/8, which highlighted the importance of
encouraging mediation and the peaceful settlement of
conflicts, continue to be valid. Among them, we note
the encouragement of the participation of more women
in mediation processes and of a stronger mediation
capacity for parties to conflicts. We urge the Council
to continue supporting those actions, which strengthen
sustainable peace, a concept enshrined by the Council
in resolution 2282 (2016).
The Secretary-General can also play an active
role in this area. We note, for example, his recent
decision to recommend that a dispute between Guyana
and Venezuela be referred to the International Court
of Justice. The Council could also resort to the good
offices of the Secretary-General more frequently.
The positive trend of frequently consulting the
International Court of Justice continues. However, its
potential has not been fully taken advantage of, and
the Court’s advisory competence could be even further
used as a preventive tool. The Council should use
this advisory option more often, as that would help to
strengthen international law.
It is important to recall that the Council also has the
ability to carry out the judgments of the International
Court of Justice in cases of non-compliance, as
was mentioned by Judge Owada this morning in an
express reference to the Case concerning Avena and
Other Mexican Nationals (Mexico v. United States of
America). The permanent members of the Security
Council should be the first to carry out the judgments

Of particular concern is the authorization of the
use of force against non-State actors, due to a lack
of legal clarity in that regard. It is equally important
for the decisions and actions of the Council to be
correctly based on and driven by international law.
That would reaffirm the legitimacy and consistency of
this organ, thereby avoiding actions that could lead to
new conflicts.
The Security Council should be reformed to become
truly democratic, transparent, effective and efficient in
compliance with its mandate. To that end, we need a
compromise formula that is realistic and accessible,
such as the one we are promoting with the Uniting for
Consensus movement.
As previously mentioned, the French-Mexican
initiative on the restriction of the use of the veto in
situations of war crimes, crimes against humanity or
genocide should be considered in all seriousness when
the Security Council is reformed. The use of the veto
in situations where mass atrocities are committed
is an abuse of the law that can trigger international
responsibility for the State committing them and an
abuse that leaves the Organization under the sad shadow
of paralysis and irrelevance.
The quest for justice and the rule of international
law is an essential purpose of the United Nations that we
should not forget. Inaction and indifference to human
suffering have no place in the Organization. That is why
we see greater viability every day in the adoption of
alternative solutions when we are faced with stagnation
in the Security Council, such as General Assembly
resolution 377 (V), on Uniting for Peace — a legal
mechanism established by the Assembly so that the

18-1518047/97

S/PV.8262

Maintenance of international peace and security

light of justice, the rule of law and effective compliance
with the Charter return to the United Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): My delegation thanks the
Polish presidency for organizing and convening this
debate. We also thank all the briefers for their insightful
briefings this morning.
Emerging from the ashes of the Second World War,
the United Nations was built on the lofty ideal of saving
our succeeding generations from the scourge of war.
As Members of the United Nations, we resolved that no
matter how great our strength, we must deny ourselves
the licence to do as we please. However, that sense of
idealism has been eroded over the years, and especially
by a series of recent developments. While it is true
that we have not seen any major conflagration during
the past 70 years, the world today is hardly at peace.
Conflicts abound, long-standing disputes fester and the
legitimate rights of the people continue to be denied to
them in many parts of the world.
While Article 24 of the Charter of the United
Nations makes the Security Council an embodiment
of the membership’s collective aspirations for
international peace and security, action by the Council
has often faltered at the altar of political expediency.
Nothing diminishes the standing and credibility of the
Council more than when it watches in silence while
norms of international law and its own resolutions and
decisions are trampled by Member States or remain
unimplemented due to the narrow interests invoked
in big-Power politics. Every time the Council fails to
address those omissions and breaches, it compromises
the moral authority of its decisions, which are otherwise
legally binding.
The Charter of the United Nations represents the
single most important source of international law,
which all Member States have a responsibility and
an obligation to uphold — more so at this critical
point where fundamental tenets of multilateralism
are increasingly under threat and in retreat. Strict
adherence to the purposes and principles of the
Charter is therefore imperative, not only to ensure
the credibility and legitimacy of the United Nations
system, but also to preserve the centrality of a rulesbased international order.
48/97

17/05/2018

Promoting peace has always been the principal
obligation and goal of the United Nations. It is time we
fully committed to the principle of seeking solutions to
today’s challenges through the art of diplomacy, and not
on the front lines of battle. After all, coercive actions
are a blunt instrument and do not create incentives
for consensual solutions. My delegation wishes to
offer the following five key suggestions to move our
process forward.
First, the Council should assume its full
responsibilities under Chapter VI of the Charter to
promote political solutions, mediation and dialogue for
the peaceful resolution of conflict. It should actively
seek the engagement of all stakeholders, including
women and the young, throughout the life cycle of
a conflict. An enhanced role for the Peacebuilding
Commission is equally important.
Secondly, the Council should have greater recourse
to the International Court of Justice on legal matters.
The Council’s recommendation of one solitary dispute
to the Court and its referral of a single case for advisory
opinion to the Court are neither what the framers
envisaged nor what the broader membership wants
or desires.
Thirdly, the Council should be more consistent and
unbiased in its actions. Selectivity in the implementation
of its resolutions and decisions — especially on
long-standing disputes, notably those in Jammu and
Kashmir and Palestine — must end. After all, there
can be no peace without justice. As Martin Luther
King famously said, injustice anywhere is a threat to
justice everywhere.
Fourthly, the tension between demands for
accountability and the imperative of sovereignty must
be resolved according to the norms of international
law. The process of accountability needs to be viewed
as a continuum that goes beyond punishment alone.
Strategies such as truth and reconciliation commissions
have been used effectively in many situations, and we
should use them much more frequently.
Fifthly, the Council should further strengthen
its cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations to bring local insights and perspectives on
emerging threats. In addition, solutions are often more
effective when they are neither externally imposed nor
culturally alien.
18-15180

17/05/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

The United Nations is of course a reflection of its
membership. It will be as strong or as weak as its Member
States wish it to be. Yet for the United Nations to become
fit for purpose, it must reflect the contemporary spirit
of our age and become an organization that is more
democratic, representative, accountable, transparent
and efficient. We wish no less for the Security Council
than that it be able to effectively address the imposing
and complex global challenges of our time.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Heumann (Israel): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Polish delegation for convening this
important debate. I also wish to thank the briefers we
heard this morning.
Recent events in Syria have reminded us of the
value and necessity of international law. Last month,
the Syrian regime again deployed chemical weapons
against its own people, brutally killing innocent men,
women and children. Iran has also recently moved into
Syria and used its base there to conduct attacks against
Israel, another Member State. Those outrageous acts
show what States are capable of doing when they ignore
international law. Israel has already made it abundantly
clear that it holds the Government of Iran, together with
the Syrian regime, directly responsible for those latest
unlawful acts.
Much of international law is rooted in the
assumption that armies battle armies and countries
face off against countries, but today that is often
no longer the case. The world is facing a changing
paradigm in international warfare as more countries
face asymmetric fighting, confronting not States but
terrorist organizations. Terrorist organizations do not
abide by rules, norms or laws. Although international
law is intended to be a constructive tool to minimize
the loss of human lives, terrorists increasingly use
and abuse it as a tool to maximize casualties. In many
instances, we are confronting an enemy with no red
lines. Nothing is off limits.
Those non-State actors do not merely attack
civilians intentionally and systematically, they also
embed their fighters and store weapons in their own
densely populated urban areas, including United
Nations facilities and hospitals. Their calculation is as
simple as it is cynical: either civilian lives will be the
fighters’ defence or civilian deaths will be their rallying
cry. That cowardly strategy is a breach of international

S/PV. 8262

law and an abuse of the very system created to protect
civilian populations.
Unfortunately, the challenges that Israel faces from
non-State actors are not hypothetical situations posed in
a law-school textbook. Deliberations on issues relating
to proportionality or distinction are not confined to
academic debate; rather, they are dealt with on a daily
basis by all our relevant authorities.
To our south, Hamas, the internationally recognized
terrorist organization, is a pioneer in the use of human
shields. It has set up headquarters in hospital basements
and used ambulances to transport terrorists. It has
stored rockets in mosques and hospitals, as well as in
schools and shelters run by the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA), and fired them from those sites.
But it does not stop there. In recent years, Hamas
has built a sophisticated underground tunnel system
beneath the Gaza Strip. Those attack tunnels originate
from the backyards, or even the living rooms, of family
homes, snaking under civilian neighbourhoods and
penetrating Israeli territory. In 2017 Israel discovered
two terror tunnels that Hamas had dug under UNRWA
facilities. Since October we have destroyed nine
additional tunnels — tunnels intended for Hamas
militants to infiltrate Israel.
Let me remind the Council that Hamas used those
tunnels to kidnap two soldiers, Hadar Goldin and Oron
Shaul, whose bodies remain in the hands of those
terrorists, together with two Israeli civilians. Hamas
refuses to provide any information on the status of
those civilians and fallen soldiers, allow international
organizations to access them or return the soldiers’
bodies. That refusal is in and of itself a breach of
international law.
Over the past few weeks, we have encountered
a new variation on Hamas’s old strategies. Hamas is
now encouraging Palestinians to bring women and
small children to the so-called peaceful protests it
has instigated at Israel’s security fence. Peaceful?
Far from it. They are violent riots that are incited by
Hamas, which they use as a cover to carry out attacks
on the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) and try to reach
Israeli communities just over the fence. The terrorist
group even goes as far as to circulate on social media
instructions to bring weapons to the demonstrations,
hide them under their clothes and use them to capture
soldiers or residents of Israel. The rioters are also

18-1518049/97

S/PV.8262

Maintenance of international peace and security

requested to hand over anyone captured to the Hamas
terrorists to be used as bargaining chips against Israel.
More than 40,000 Palestinians, civilians and
militants alike, took part in the violence on Monday,
14 May, at 13 locations spread along the 30-mile
security fence. Many of the rioters were seen hurling
firebombs and flaming materials, detonating explosive
devices and throwing rocks at Israeli soldiers. Armed
attacks were also carried out under the cover of the
riots, including an incident where the IDF thwarted
attacks by eight Hamas gunmen who opened fire on
IDF members.
Those are therefore not the acts of a peaceful
protest. The events of recent days are part of a Hamasled military operation intended to carry out attacks on
Israeli soldiers and civilians. Indeed, just yesterday, a
senior Hamas representative acknowledged that of the
deceased, no fewer than 50 were Hamas members.
Just to our north, in Lebanon, and now also in Syria,
we face the Iranian proxy Hizbullah. Its tactics and
strategies are no different: locating missiles, launchers
and command posts next to and inside Lebanese homes,
schools and hospitals. We have warned the Council time
and again that Hizbullah has an estimated arsenal of
more than 100,000 missiles. That build-up is not only a
blatant and flagrant violation of resolutions 1701 (2006)
and 1559 (2004), but it is also a deliberate attempt to
exploit the international law that is meant to protect the
civilian population.
Despite the constant threats that we face on almost
all fronts, our legal system ensures that our reaction
and responses comply fully with international law. As
a retired President of Israel’s Supreme Court, Justice
Aharon Barak, once said,

17/05/2018

law. Israel also maintains independent investigative
bodies to examine credible allegations and reasonable
suspicions of misconduct by its armed forces.
In conclusion, we must acknowledge that the very
rules that were created to protect civilians have become
one of the main tools used by terrorist organizations to
put them in harm’s way. The Council, the international
community and everybody in this Chamber must ensure
that international law is no longer exploited by terrorists
for violent purposes. Those protections exist to shield
civilians; they must not turn civilians into shields.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Zehnder (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland thanks Poland for convening this open
debate on a topic that, although often addressed
within the United Nations, remains highly relevant. In
that regard, allow me to draw the Security Council’s
attention to the following five recommendations.
First, we witness almost daily violations of
international law, perpetrated in numerous armed
conflicts worldwide. Faced with such crimes, the
Security Council has a responsibility to take action to
prevent atrocities and, if they cannot be prevented, to
bring the perpetrators to justice. We welcome the fact
that 116 Member States, including nine members of
the Security Council, have signed the code of conduct
of the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
group. We encourage the other members of the Council
and all other Member States to follow suit.

“Although a democracy must often fight with one
hand tied behind its back, it nonetheless has the
upper hand.”

Secondly, it is essential that the Security Council
establish a coherent policy on resolutions referring
situations to the International Criminal Court (ICC) and
ensure an effective follow-up. Switzerland calls once
again on the Council to refer the situation in Syria to
the ICC. After seven years of conflict, accountability is
more important than ever for a return to lasting peace.

Justice Barak’s words reflect the fact that Israel remains
steadfastly committed to the law and our democratic
values when acting to ensure our national security.
Accordingly, checks and balances of international
law are built into every stage of Israel’s policy and
decision-making processes. For example, military
personnel receive instructions on the law of armed
conflict, soldiers prepare for encounters with civilians
through dedicated training drills and skilled attorneys
advise the forces to ensure compliance with international

Thirdly, we invite the Security Council to welcome
the fact that, from 17 July, the ICC will have jurisdiction
to prosecute the crime of aggression, thereby
contributing to the enforcement of the prohibition of
the use of force set out in the Charter of the United
Nations. More than 70 years after the Nuremberg trials,
a permanent international tribunal now has jurisdiction
to hold those who lead wars of aggression to account
for their actions. We hope that, from 17 July, the
Council will be ready to refer situations to the ICC to

50/97

18-15180

17/05/2018

S/PV. 8262

Maintenance of international peace and security

ensure accountability and discourage future crimes
of aggression.

Norway, Sweden, Switzerland and my own country,
Belgium.

Fourthly, Switzerland calls on the Security Council
to carefully consider the consequences of its sanctions
for the integrity of international humanitarian law. The
Council’s decisions to impose sanctions have, in some
instances, been interpreted as restricting the activities
of humanitarian organizations that provide impartial
assistance to affected populations, regardless of which
side they belong to. The Council should consider ways
to avoid such undesirable consequences.

As a principal organ of the United Nations, the
Security Council has an obligation to comply with the
rules of the Charter of the United Nations, including
respect for human rights and the fundamental freedoms
of individuals. The rights of due process and fair and
clear procedures, which are also rules of customary
international law and have been recognized as
general principles of international law, are part of that
important cause.

Fifthly, and as will be explained in the statement
to be delivered by the representative of Belgium, it is
essential that an ombudsperson be appointed as soon as
possible to head the Office of the Ombudsperson to the
Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning
ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities. The post has been
vacant for nearly 10 months, which undermines the
credibility and legitimacy of United Nations sanctions
and could constitute an obstacle to their uniform and
universal implementation. The lack of procedural
safeguards is all the more striking in relation to the
other 13 sanctions regimes, which also require the
creation of independent mechanisms to receive and
process delisting requests.

In that regard, we would like to recall that the
position of the Ombudsperson for the Security
Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning ISIL
(Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities, has remained vacant since
8 August 2017. The longer that vacancy continues, the
more likely it is to undermine Members States’ trust
and confidence in Security Council sanctions and
to jeopardize the progress made over many years in
establishing and implementing fair and clear procedures
to place and remove individuals and entities on Security
Council sanctions lists. We are particularly concerned
about the pending cases. Delays in those cases are
a direct result of the vacancy. In other words, the
vacancy is directly affecting the rights of individuals
to due process.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to make one
last remark. Since 2011, together with the International
Committee of the Red Cross, Switzerland has led an
inter-State process aimed at establishing a regular,
non-politicized and, above all, constructive dialogue
among States to strengthen respect for international
humanitarian law. While we call on the Security Council
to assume all its responsibilities, we are also striving to
contribute to better compliance with international law.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belgium.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke
in French): I thank Poland for convening this debate,
which is important for all of us.

We therefore call on the Secretary-General
to appoint an Ombudsperson with the necessary
qualifications specified in resolution 1904 (2009)
as soon as possible and to take all the necessary
measures to further strengthen the independence and
impartiality of the Office of the Ombudsperson, as
decided in resolution 2368 (2017). We also call on the
Secretary-General to take measures to guarantee that
the important work of the Ombudsperson can continue
until the new Ombudsperson is appointed and to avoid
the recurrence of a similar situation.
(spoke in French)

(spoke in English)

I will now
national capacity.

make

some

remarks

in

my

If the President will allow me, I would first like to
address the Security Council on behalf of the Group
of Like-Minded States on Targeted Sanctions, which
is made up of Austria, Chile, Costa Rica, Denmark,
Finland, Germany, Liechtenstein, the Netherlands,

The fight against impunity is at the heart of
our actions, and Belgium has been a pioneer in the
development of international criminal law. We continue
to work to consolidate the existing legal framework, and
we welcome the fact that three amendments to add three

18-1518051/97

S/PV.8262

Maintenance of international peace and security

17/05/2018

war crimes to the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court were adopted last December. We are
pleased that the Assembly of States Parties to the
Rome Statute decided at the same session to trigger
the jurisdiction of the Court with respect to the crime
of aggression. All those amendments contribute to
creating a world in which such atrocities become less
likely. We therefore call for their ratification by each of
the States parties.

for the Syrian Arab Republic. Belgium is proud to have
been able to contribute effectively to that collective
effort, alongside Liechtenstein and Qatar.

Within the context of its mandate related to the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
Security Council clearly has a special role to play
both in promoting respect for international law and in
fighting impunity. If elected on 8 June, Belgium will
be committed to consistently and concretely promoting
those essential objectives.

We thank today’s briefers, and we congratulate
Poland on holding this open debate, which revolves
around the crucial issue of emphasizing the role that
law must play in international relations, particularly
when peace and security are at stake.

The following four main principles define Belgium’s
vision of the role of the Security Council in this area.
First and foremost, we must remember that
respecting international law is not only the business of
international tribunals, it is above all the responsibility
of each State. With regard to the most serious crimes,
that implies the obligation to prosecute perpetrators so
that they cannot escape justice, wherever they may be.
Next, the actions of the Council must primarily form
part of a preventive approach. The Council must first
intervene to support States. The peaceful settlement of
disputes must be the favoured approach. In that respect,
we consider mediation to be an essential instrument.
In addition, the rule-of-law components of the
mandates of United Nations political and peacekeeping
missions should be strengthened and systematized by
taking into account the specific circumstances of each
mission. There can indeed be no lasting peace without
justice and solid institutions.
Finally, when it takes note of mass atrocities, the
Security Council must not allow disagreements among
its permanent members to lead to inaction. Its credibility
as a key player in the maintenance of international
peace and security is at stake. That is why Belgium
supports the Franco-Mexican initiative to regulate the
right of veto in the case of crimes of atrocity and why
we signed the code of conduct of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group.
In the light of the Council’s inaction, we welcome the
role played by the General Assembly in establishing the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
52/97

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Zappalá (Italy): Italy aligns itself with the
statement to be delivered shortly by the observer of the
European Union.

International law must be the common language
of our relationships. If we fail to uphold it, the
consequences, especially in the light of modern
weapons and present challenges, can be very serious
and potentially devastating for the future of humankind.
Sovereignty is at the heart of international law. And
yet sovereignty does not and cannot imply that anyone
can be above the law. Today we must strive to uphold
and promote a responsible concept of sovereignty,
one aimed at the well-being of people in a holistic
perspective, at sovereignty as accountability to present
and future generations and at protecting people — all
people — without discrimination, in full equality.
States have broad discretion in choosing
mechanisms to settle disputes and tackle challenges
to peace and security. However, it is imperative that
disputes be addressed and resolved peacefully. There
are too many that remain unresolved and situations
in which States do not engage in meaningful talks.
States should show good faith and goodwill to address
issues and settle their differences, including through
non-judicial means, provided that those are inspired by
adherence to fundamental legal principles.
As a follow-up to the 2012 high-level meeting of
the General Assembly on the rule of law at the national
and international levels, Italy accepted the jurisdiction
of the International Court of Justice, in accordance
with Article 36, paragraph 2, of the Statute of the
International Court of Justice. We encourage all States
to consider doing the same, so as to place international
law even more solidly at the centre of international
relations. That is an objective that we must pursue
together, each individual Member State, the Council and
the other organs of the Organization — in other words,
18-15180

17/05/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

the international community as a whole. We all have
a duty to respect and promote respect for recognized
international public goods. International law is our
compass in identifying and preserving those common
goods and in further promoting the most fundamental
legal principles.
Italy, including during its chairship of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe this year, promotes respect for human rights,
fundamental freedoms and the rule of law, which are
aspects indissolubly tied to our security. In that regard,
we will continue to promote the universality and
indivisibility of all fundamental rights, in addition to
combating all forms of discrimination and intolerance.
This year we celebrate the seventieth anniversary
of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of
the Crime of Genocide and the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, as well as the seventieth anniversary
of the International Law Commission, which, on an
exceptional basis, is currently meeting in New York to
mark the occasion. It is also the twentieth anniversary
of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
(ICC).
Accountability for serious international crimes,
particularly those that threaten fundamental and
universally recognized norms, is one of those areas
where the international community should be more
united. In situations where peace and security are at
stake, if the Council fails to uphold international law,
there are strong risks that more chaos and disorder
will ensue. When the Council does not act — for
example, because of divergences among its permanent
members — there are situations where other organs
ultimately have to step in. That is what happened with
the establishment of the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, which
we support.
The Security Council could strongly contribute
to strengthening our collective engagement to ensure
respect for international law, as it did when it established
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
and the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda,
as well as their successor institution, the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. Today the
Council could promote accountability, for example,

S/PV. 8262

by referring to the ICC situations in which war crimes
and crimes against humanity are perpetrated and by
supporting the Court, by limiting the veto power in
cases of mass atrocities or by establishing appropriate
subsidiary organs or procedures to provide for a prompt
and effective follow-up on reports of serious violations
of fundamental rules of international law.
Upholding international law has a unique
preventive power. We must work together to reinforce
that power by holding accountable those who violate
the international norms regulating our relations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): Allow
me to first express my delegation’s appreciation to
the Polish presidency for convening this open debate.
Indeed, the choice of this crucial topic for our debate is
very appropriate and timely.
First and foremost, I align myself with the statement
to be delivered by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
I also thank the Secretary-General and the former
President of the International Court of Justice for
their input.
Today more than ever, multilateralism and
the international legal order are under threat by
unilateralism, disregard for international law and
disrespect for the common interests of the international
community as a whole. The prerequisite for a rulesbased international legal system is full respect for the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
all States and upholding the principles of international
law and customary international law.
Since the establishment of the United Nations,
maintaining international peace and security has been
one of the key concerns of the international community.
With that in mind, the prohibition of the threat or use
of force, as enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations, is an achievement of the United Nations sine
qua non. Unfortunately, certain Member States tend to
use intimidation and the use or threat of force to impose
their will on others. Those practices undoubtedly lead
to disorder, instability and insecurity, as we see in some
regions, especially in the Middle East.

18-1518053/97

S/PV.8262

Maintenance of international peace and security

At the same time, some developing countries are
unjustly targeted by arbitrary unilateral economic
sanctions. Such morally wrong and ethically unjustified
unilateral measures not only defy the rule of law at the
international level, they also infringe on the right to
development, which ultimately leads to the violation
of basic human rights. It is a fact that such measures
have almost always been initiated by a single Member
State, the United States, which is apparently addicted
to sanctions and sees them and the use of threats as the
only tools available to it in pursuing its agenda. These
practices obviously contravene international law and
the Charter of the United Nations, especially where they
deprive nations of their lawful and legitimate rights
under treaties as well as the fundamental human rights
of individual citizens in the targeted States. In many
cases, unilateral sanctions are imposed as a result of
the extraterritorial application of domestic legislation
against legal and natural persons in other countries, in
spite of the many General Assembly resolutions against
such unlawful measures.
Unilateral measures, in the form of illegal recourse
to war, occupation, aggression, denial of the sovereignty
of Member States or disregard for the immunity of
States under unsubstantiated legal doctrines, are
obvious manifestations of the rule of power, not the rule
of law. Such practices can undoubtedly be qualified as
internationally wrongful acts that negatively affect
a rules-based international order and endanger the
maintenance of peace and security.
It is ironic, given the holding of this open debate,
that this very month the international community has
witnessed two specific situations where the credibility
of international law and international agreements was
severely damaged. On 8 May 2018, the United States
announced its unilateral and unlawful decision to
withdraw from the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA) and reimpose all United States nuclear-related
sanctions. This was a material breach of the JCPOA and
of resolution 2231 (2015), of which the JCPOA is an
integral part.
The official announcement came after multiple and
prolonged violations of the JCPOA by the United States,
including bad faith, nominal implementation, undue
delays, new sanctions and designations, anti-JCPOA
statements, refusal to issue the necessary licences,
particularly in the past 16 months, as well as systematic
and concerted efforts to sabotage the deal by actively
dissuading others from doing business with Iran.
54/97

17/05/2018

Considering the fulfilment by the Islamic Republic of
Iran of its commitments under the JCPOA, as repeatedly
and consistently verified by the International Atomic
Energy Agency, these acts and omissions on the part
of the United States reflect a complete disregard for
international law and the United Nations Charter. They
undermine the principle of the peaceful settlement
of disputes and endanger multilateralism and its
institutions. It is a regression to the failed and disastrous
era of unilateralism and encourages illegality.
On 14 May, Netanyahu and his guests celebrated
the illegal move of the United States embassy to
Jerusalem, violating and mocking international law as
well as the many United Nations resolutions regarding
the situation of Jerusalem and the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian people. At the same time, the Israeli
army was creating its latest bloodbath in Gaza, killing
more than 61 people and injuring more than 2,500
unarmed Palestinian protesters in a single day — a
shameful violation of international humanitarian law
and international human rights law. These criminal acts
took place in an atmosphere of total impunity shown to
the Israeli regime by the United States.
Any serious effort to uphold international law must
entail accountability for such wrongful and criminal
acts, especially when they fly in the face of the United
Nations Charter and international law. Violators
should be compelled to bear responsibility for their
wrongful acts.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union.
Ms. Adamson: I am honoured to speak on behalf of
the European Union (EU) and its member States. The
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro
and Albania, as well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova
and Georgia, align themselves with this statement.
I would like to thank you, Madam President,
for holding this open debate on this crucial topic at
a moment where the international situation poses
increasing challenges to the fundamental principles
underlying the Charter of the United Nations,
particularly respect for international law and the rulesbased international order.
One of the main objectives of the European
Union’s external action is support for the rule of law
and the principles of international law, as well as
the preservation of peace and the strengthening of
18-15180

17/05/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

international security, including through the peaceful
settlement of disputes.
These core objectives of the EU are reflected in
its Global Strategy, which identifies the integrated
approach to external conflicts and crises as one of
our priorities and strongly resonates with the overall
United Nations approach. It requires the EU to further
strengthen the way it brings together institutions,
expertise and instruments, and to work with its Member
States on prevention, peacebuilding, crisis response and
stabilization in order to contribute to sustainable peace.
Regarding the peaceful settlement of disputes, the
EU and its member States support all the means of
peaceful settlement referred to in the United Nations
Charter. We would like to see the Security Council
continue on a more systematic basis its practice of
holding early discussions on situations at risk of violent
conflict, with a view to identifying the possibilities
for early collective action to prevent violence. In this
regard, in situations where the Security Council could
act to prevent or stop violence, it should do so. In
particular, members of the Security Council should
not vote against a credible draft resolution on timely
and decisive action to end the commission of genocide,
crimes against humanity or war crimes, or to prevent
such crimes.
In the same vein, the Council could strive to make
greater use of the possibility offered by Article 34
of the Charter to investigate any dispute or situation
that might lead to international friction or give rise to
a dispute. The EU and its member States stand ready
to contribute to this process by establishing a regular
informal dialogue with the Security Council. We could
in particular look at how we could contribute to United
Nations action decided upon by the Council under
Chapter VI of the Charter and share our own experiences
as regards the peaceful settlement of disputes and
upholding international law, in the framework of EU
crisis-management operations. An example of such
informal dialogue between the EU, its member States
and the members of the Security Council was the recent
EU-United Nations seminar on sanctions, held by the
EU delegation in March. Such a format could also be
used to discuss the questions set out in the concept note
(S/2018/417/Rev.1, annex).
The United Nations Convention on the Law of
the Sea also makes a pre-eminent contribution to the
strengthening of peace, security, cooperation and

S/PV. 8262

friendly relations among all nations. The Convention is
recognized as the constitution of the oceans, reflecting
also customary international law, and the EU and its
member States urge all States to abide by its provisions.
All States must refrain from actions that are in violation
of Article 2, paragraph 4, of the United Nations Charter,
which prohibits the threat or use of force.
Turning to the question of strengthening compliance,
we would like to recall that the rule-of-law components
within United Nations peacekeeping operations play a
crucial role in integrating the promotion of justice and
the rule of law, including respect for human rights and
international humanitarian law, in the States where
they are deployed. Clear and comprehensive mandates
as well as appropriate means are vital to the success
of these rule-of-law components. The Council should,
working with other parts of the United Nations system,
in particular the Peacebuilding Commission, the Rule
of Law Coordination and Resource Group, and the
Rule of Law Unit, pay particular regard to ensuring the
sustainability of rule-of-law assistance measures after
the termination of a United Nations operation.
The EU currently deploys 10 civilian missions,
which operate in the framework of strengthening
the rule of law, including in cooperation with United
Nations missions. I mention in that connection Mali,
Libya, Kosovo and Somalia. We would also like to
encourage the Security Council to support the Geneva
intergovernmental process on strengthening respect for
international humanitarian law.
For our part, in order to promote law and
international humanitarian law in a visible and
consistent manner, the EU has developed operational
tools in the form of guidelines on human rights and
international humanitarian law.
With regard to the most effective responses to
flagrant violations of international law concerning
international peace and security, the EU and its States
members stress the importance of complying with the
Charter and United Nations resolutions adopted under
Chapter VII of the Charter. The Security Council has
a duty to act, when necessary, to restore international
peace and security, which it has sadly failed to do in
certain situations. We are of the view that, as applicable,
the Council should be more systematic in including in its
relevant resolutions, including those imposing targeted
sanctions, language regarding respect for international
human rights law and international humanitarian law.

18-1518055/97

S/PV.8262

Maintenance of international peace and security

With regard to listing and delisting decisions, fair
and clear procedures are important. The EU urges the
Secretary-General, in accordance with resolution 1904
(2009), to swiftly appoint an Ombudsperson for the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, a post
that has been vacant for more than nine months.
We would also like to stress the importance of
ensuring respect for international law, including
humanitarian law, human rights law and refugee law, as
a fundamental basis of the struggle against terrorism.
Respect for human rights, fundamental freedoms
and the rule of law, and efforts to counter terrorism,
are mutually reinforcing objectives. With regard to
the issue of accountability for serious violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law,
the EU believes in strengthening international courts,
tribunals and mechanisms that serve that purpose and
promote the rule of law, especially in conflict and
post-conflict situations. In our view, peace and justice
must go hand in hand. We are of the opinion that the
Security Council’s inability to take action regarding
situations such as that in Syria, including referring
them to the International Criminal Court (ICC),
seriously undermines the credibility and legitimacy of
the United Nations.
The EU and its States members have from the
beginning supported the International Criminal Court.
We encourage the broadest acceptance of its jurisdiction.
We also believe that when the Security Council makes
a referral to the ICC, the Council should demonstrate
support for it in instances of non-cooperation with the
Court by States and consistently and rigorously apply
its own guidelines on contacts with persons who are
the subject of arrest warrants and summonses. Looking
ahead towards the twentieth anniversary of the Rome
Statute, we would like to note the activation of the
International Criminal Court’s jurisdiction over the
crime of aggression as of 17 July.
Lastly, in a world faced with increasing and
complex challenges to international peace and security,
our working methods need to evolve accordingly. By
addressing situations earlier and in a more coherent,
integrated manner, and by mobilizing the entire toolbox
at our disposal, we can help transform our approach to
conflicts and crises and thereby further empower the
Security Council in fulfilling its core mandate. The EU
56/97

17/05/2018

and its States members stand ready to assist the United
Nations and the Council in that process.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Mr. Zaayman (South Africa): I congratulate
the delegation of Poland on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of May and
for organizing this timely open debate on upholding
international law within the context of the maintenance
of international peace and security.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement to
be delivered by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
Let me be clear. The law in itself does not protect. It
is only effective implementation of the law and respect
for it that protect. We want to stress that in order to
uphold international law, the international community
must be governed by a system in which all players
are accountable to laws that are equally enforced and
independently adjudicated. Without that, the fabric
of international law will lack credibility. We should
not selectively condone breaches of international law,
including non-compliance with Council resolutions,
because of the political reluctance of a few. In our
consideration of the upholding of international law, we
must start with the resolutions of the Council, which
are at times ignored or deliberately breached. The
Council should ensure that there is accountability for
its decisions, or they will be rendered worthless.
Respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law is an essential component of the rule
of law, particularly in conflict situations, and it plays a
crucial role in the maintenance of international peace
and security. Security Council resolutions on specific
country situations, as well as on thematic issues,
have reiterated that link on numerous occasions. The
Council should continue promoting compliance with
the principles and rules of international humanitarian
law by parties to armed conflicts.
The United Nations could play at least two important
roles with regard to the implementation of international
humanitarian law. First, during times of peace, it is
important for the United Nations to assist Member
States, at their request, with the dissemination and
effective domestication of international humanitarian
law instruments. Secondly, the United Nations should
18-15180

17/05/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

continue to play a vital role in monitoring adherence
to and prosecution of international humanitarian
law violations during times of armed conflict. It is
important to note that a proactive approach, involving
dissemination and education, should be the primary
focus, rather than a reactive one in which action is
taken only following grave breaches of international
humanitarian law. The way forward also lies in States
adopting, ratifying and codifying in national laws
the various conventions and protocols on the law of
armed conflict, and assuring their implementation on
the ground. Just as national Governments have the
primary responsibility for ensuring the safety and
protection of their civilians, national courts also have
a clear obligation to bring to justice those accused of
grave breaches of international humanitarian law and
national laws based on it.
The fight against impunity, and efforts to ensure
accountability for genocide, crimes against humanity,
war crimes and other egregious crimes, have been
strengthened through work on those crimes and their
prosecution in the international criminal justice system,
in ad hoc and mixed tribunals as well as specialized
chambers in national tribunals. The Council is also
increasingly recognizing the contribution that national
justice systems are making to combating impunity for
serious violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights law. The importance of strengthening
national accountability mechanisms, with full respect
for due process and the rights of the defence, including
building investigative, prosecutorial and witnessprotection capacities in post-conflict countries, should
be recognized and nurtured.
The evolution of global threats to international
peace and security has seen significant innovation in
the design and imposition of United Nations sanctions.
The rational for sanctions has expanded to include the
protection of civilians and the prevention of human
rights atrocities, by thwarting the development of
unconventional arms and their delivery systems and
the financing of conflict through the exploitation
of natural resources and criminal activities. As the
focus of United Nations sanctions has narrowed to
target specific goods and services, as well as specific
individuals and entities, we should ensure that those
sanctions are reconciled with the rule of law, especially
with regard to due process and human rights.
The vital link between the promotion of justice
and the attainment of a peaceful world is inherent

S/PV. 8262

in the building blocks of the United Nations. The
establishment of the International Court of Justice as
a principal organ of the United Nations reflects the
recognition of that link. We continue to encourage the
Council to make better use of the International Court
of Justice, the principal judicial organ of the United
Nations, by making requests for advisory opinions
when confronted with complex legal questions. It would
confirm that notwithstanding the primary role of the
Security Council in the maintenance of international
peace and security, the Council operates within the
framework of international law in all its actions. The
Security Council can play a role in the promotion of the
rule of law by regularly requesting advisory opinions
from the International Court of Justice.
We are pleased that the General Assembly has
been ready to use that prerogative to request advisory
opinions, and we encourage the Council to follow suit
when faced with questions of legal complexity. The
Security Council has an important role to play in the
enforcement of decisions of the Court in accordance
with Article 94 of the Charter. We believe that
responsibility applies equally, though differently, where
the implementation of advisory opinions is concerned.
Although advisory opinions of the International Court
of Justice are not binding, they are not without legal
consequence, and failure to comply with them indicates
a violation of whatever rule or law that the Court may
have deemed to be at issue.
Lastly, my delegation would like to reaffirm the
importance of partnership and cooperation between the
Council and regional and subregional organizations, in
accordance with Chapter VIII, in supporting conflict
prevention and peacebuilding activities, as well as
forging greater regional and national ownership.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to congratulate you, Madam President, on
presiding over the Council this month. I would also like
to thank you for convening this open debate on a topic
of major importance for the international community.
We also welcome Mr. Andrzej Duda, President of the
Republic of Poland, who presided over the discussion
this morning.
Threats to international peace and security are
greater today than ever. Some refuse to fulfil their
obligations under international law. That serious

18-1518057/97

S/PV.8262

Maintenance of international peace and security

challenge is compounded by weak levels of cooperation
in containing those global threats and peacefully
resolving conflicts and crises. Impunity also helps to
aggravate such crises and constitutes a serious violation
of international law, international human rights law and
international humanitarian law. Experience has shown
that the international community cannot counter threats
to international peace and security without cooperating
and working collectively in strict adherence to
international law, something that we have seen in the
context of our common fight against terrorism, for
example, which has shown us very clearly that respect
for international law adds value to such efforts.
International law and the relevant institutions
concerned with its implementation reflect the profound
will of States, which is the basis on which the United
Nations was created, as well as of other bodies,
particularly the various tribunals and legal entities
that have made respect for international law possible.
Thanks to international law, humankind has made
strides forward, but every time it is breached or ignored,
the credibility of international institutions is called into
question. That in turn affects our ability to cope with
international challenges and crises and jeopardizes
international efforts to maintain international peace
and security. We are also seeing serious contradictions
in the world today. While the reality in many areas is
very promising, at the same time we are very worried
about the conflicts that are increasing and worsening
day by day, with the international community unable to
resolve them. We should therefore work to enable our
international institutions to implement their mandates
and thereby ensure respect for international law.
Now more than ever, given the magnitude of the
danger emanating from those threats to international
peace and security, we need to strengthen the
mechanisms created by the international community in
the area of collective security in order to end the various
conflicts and resolve international crises. Any attempt
to change the status quo illegally has to be stopped.
We must avoid any undermining of international
peace and security, uphold Article 1 of the Charter
of the United Nations and dissuade any party trying
to violate international law. We have to make sure that
the sovereignty and security of States are respected
and that the use of force in international relations is
prohibited. We should also respect the right of people
to self-determination, and we must prevent conflicts,
58/97

17/05/2018

resolve them peacefully and act in conformity with
Article 8 of the Charter.
Today, as the Council is discussing respect for
international law, we can see that the Palestinians,
unarmed as they are, have gone undefended for several
days while under attack in the Gaza Strip as they
peacefully and legitimately protest. That is a serious
violation of international law, and the State of Qatar
denounces it in the strongest possible terms. Given
the serious nature of the violations committed by
the Israeli occupying forces, we call on the Security
Council and the international community to shoulder
their responsibility by protecting Palestinian civilians
on the basis of the relevant international instruments.
Maintaining international peace and security is a
collective responsibility, which is why no efforts should
be spared to find just solutions to our common challenges.
The State of Qatar has always acted in accordance with
its obligations within the partnership we have with the
international community to fulfil the purposes and
principles of the Charter. We have undertaken a number
of measures within the framework of the international
community to strengthen dialogue and mutual
understanding, promote tolerance and cooperation,
fight extremism and terrorism and work to bring an end
to impunity. We have called for accountability for those
who commit mass atrocities and have made numerous
efforts, which have been documented and welcomed
by the Council, to ease tensions, prevent conflicts and
resolve them peacefully. We have been guided in that
by the Charter, international law and the resolutions of
the General Assembly and the Security Council.
Despite that record of regional and international
cooperation to fulfil the aims and purposes of the
Charter, for almost a year the State of Qatar has been
a victim of an unjust blockade and other questionable
unilateral actions that contravene the provisions of
international law and human rights and disregard
principles of cordial relations, which could have
grave consequences for regional and international
peace and security. Ensuring respect for international
law — the very law that the Security Council is
defending today — is the shared responsibility of all
Member States in our efforts to achieve international
peace and security. That cannot happen when countries
institute policies based on threatening to undermine
and violate other States’ integrity and on fabricating
non-existent crises in order to promote their illegal
aims. International law and the United Nations Charter
18-15180

17/05/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

must be upheld, especially in regions that are mired in
conflicts and crises, as is the case in the Middle East.
Lastly, the State of Qatar reiterates its commitment
to respecting our cooperation with the international
community, upholding international law and rising
to our common challenges within the framework of
the Security Council mandate, which is to maintain
international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Ms. Bird (Australia): Thank you, Madam
President, for convening today’s important debate.
The maintenance of international law, and through
that, of international peace and security, is a pillar of
the Charter of the United Nations. In past statements,
the Council has explicitly affirmed its commitment
to an international order based on the rule of law
and international law. In doing so, it has explicitly
recognized the contribution that the international order
makes both to addressing our common challenges and
to the maintenance of peace and security. Australia
would like to take this opportunity to highlight two
key issues — the Council’s role in ending impunity
for serious international crimes and in promoting the
peaceful settlement of disputes.
First, the Council has itself made clear its
commitment to combating impunity for serious
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights law. It has underlined the important role that
international justice plays in the prevention of armed
conflict. Australia agrees that justice and accountability
must be at the core of the international rules-based
order, as it is at the core of the social contract between
States and their citizens at the domestic level.
Judge Meron’s remarks give us cause to reflect on
the significant legacy of the ad hoc tribunals for the
former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda, which were created
when the Council expressed a common resolve to deny
impunity to perpetrators of serious international crimes.
That resolve was evident in the Council’s referrals of
the situations in Darfur and Libya to the International
Criminal Court. Regrettably, we have not witnessed the
same resolve for Syria. We have been dismayed by the
use of the veto to block the Council’s ability to act in the
face of the horrors we have witnessed there. We urge
the Security Council to once again lead by example in
the fight against impunity and the maintenance of the
international rules-based order.

S/PV. 8262

Secondly, Article 1 of the Charter states that the
settlement of international disputes should be undertaken
in conformity with international law. That was included
on the initiative of a permanent member of the Council.
The Council has also stated its commitment to actively
supporting the peaceful settlement of disputes between
Member States, in conformity with Chapter VI of the
Charter. Australia and Timor-Leste have demonstrated
how that can be done to the benefit of both parties,
this year concluding the first-ever conciliation under
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
and setting maritime boundaries. Australia calls on
the Council to continue to actively encourage States to
settle disputes by peaceful means, including through
the use of the principal judicial organ of the United
Nations, the International Court of Justice.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the Holy See.
Archbishop Auza: I would like to begin by
commending Poland’s presidency of the Security
Council this month for organizing today’s debate on the
crucial issue of promoting and strengthening the rule
of law in maintaining international peace and security.
The efforts of the United Nations to promote the
rule of law are essential to international peace and
security. As Pope Francis affirmed in his address to the
General Assembly in 2015,
“The work of the United Nations, according to
the principles set forth in the Preamble and first
Articles of its founding Charter, can be seen as the
development and promotion of the rule of law in the
understanding that justice is an essential condition
for achieving the ideal of universal brotherhood”
(A/70/PV.3, p.3).
It is by strengthening the rule of law that we will
not only avoid many conflicts but will ultimately avoid
falling into an international relations based on fear and
distrust. The Charter of the United Nations, which is a
fundamental juridical norm, obliges the Organization
to ensure that the rule of law is uncontested and that
we have consistent recourse to negotiation, mediation
and arbitration.
The Security Council has an essential role to play
in the fair and impartial application of the rule of law.
The fundamental importance of that responsibility is
manifested in the legally binding nature of its decisions.
Member States and all other stakeholders must seek

18-1518059/97

S/PV.8262

Maintenance of international peace and security

out ways to enable the Council to better shoulder its
responsibilities and ensure respect for the values
enshrined in the Charter. That is why my delegation
believes that today’s open debate is being held at a
very important time for us to recall that the primary
responsibility for ensuring prosecution for serious
international crimes and other gross violations of human
rights lies with Member States. We therefore appreciate
the commitment of Member States, expressed on many
occasions, to ensuring that impunity is not tolerated
for genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity,
or for violations of international humanitarian law and
gross violations of human rights law.
That commitment has been manifested in the
creation of ad hoc international criminal tribunals
to investigate possible crimes of genocide, war
crimes and crimes against humanity during past and
ongoing conflicts. That demonstrates Member States’
determination to ensure that such crimes are properly
investigated and appropriately sanctioned, among
other things by bringing the perpetrators of crimes
to justice through national or, where appropriate,
regional or international mechanisms, in accordance
with international law. Accountability is an essential
component in strengthening the rule of law and must be
at the centre of our efforts for peacebuilding, sustaining
peace and preventing conflict generally. In that regard,
my delegation appreciates the work of national and
international justice mechanisms in maintaining and
further consolidating the rule of law, as well as in
helping to crystallize legal concepts and establish
jurisprudence that contribute to the positive evolution
of international law and to the rule of law itself.
Accountability for grave injustices and human
rights violations and the need to restore justice cannot
be overlooked or sacrificed in the name of a volatile,
provisional pseudo-stability. Peace can be sustainable
only if it goes hand in hand with justice. Truthfinding efforts are crucial in the process of peace and
reconciliation, which represent essential building blocks
for the establishment of lasting peace in post-conflict
settings. A multifaceted and properly sequenced
transitional justice strategy is needed to address
violations of human rights and international law, one
that includes prosecutions, reparations and institutional
reform. Priority should be given to ensuring access to
justice for those who often suffer disproportionately in
conflict, particularly women, children and persecuted
religious or ethnic groups, whose voices are most likely
60/97

17/05/2018

to remain the least heard in peace negotiations and
post-conflict processes.
Together let us work to advance the rule of law.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): At the outset, I would
like to thank you, Madam President, for convening
today’s meeting to highlight the indisputably central role
of international law in the maintenance of international
peace and security, which is the most solemn task and
duty of the Council. After all, proper consideration of
most, if not all, Security Council agenda items is hardly
possible without taking into account relevant legal
aspects such as centuries-old treaties, customary rules,
general principles and judicial practice.
Before going further into the subject in my national
capacity, I would like to note that Ukraine aligns
itself with the statement made earlier on behalf of the
European Union.
Today many delegations highlighted the importance
of respecting and maintaining the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. I
am proud to recall that my country, as a founding
Member of the United Nations, chaired the drafting
of the Charter’s Preamble and Chapter I at the San
Francisco Conference. The principal objective of our
Organization, as set up in Article 1 of the Charter, is
to maintain international peace and security. How can
we achieve that vital goal? The answer can be found
in the same Article — through collective, peaceful and
preventive action.
By joining the United Nations, Member States
undertake the responsibility to act in conformity with
international law, including the Charter’s purposes
and principles. In that regard, I would like to stress
that every time a Member State votes on matters of
war and peace, either here in the Security Council or
in the General Assembly, that vote should be assessed
according to how it contributes to the implementation
of the United Nations Charter.
There are numerous examples of Charter violations
in the history of the United Nations. I will address
the most recent and blatant one. Russia’s temporary
occupation of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and
the city of Sevastopol, and of territories in the Donetsk
and Luhansk regions of Ukraine, clearly demonstrates
that the violation of fundamental principles of
18-15180

17/05/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

international law by a permanent member of the Security
Council is one of the most serious current threats to
peace and security. If we think back to mid-2013, trying
to recall the situation in the world at the time, and then
fast-forward five years later and look around, we now
find ourselves in a dangerous downward spiral. The
responsibility lies squarely with the Russian Federation,
which, with no remorse, committed what is clearly
defined by General Assembly resolution 3314 (XXIX)
of 14 December 1974 as an act of aggression against
my country, both in Crimea and Donbas. The pathetic
citations of the Charter and never-ending lectures on
the United Nations by the Russian delegation, which
have become a trademark of their statements in this
Chamber, should not mislead anyone.
Incidentally, the worrying trend of Russia’s revanchist
policy of using military force against other States had
already started to emerge in the 1990s in Moldova,
came to the fore in 2008 in Georgia and culminated in
Ukraine in 2014. Moreover, the list of its transgressions
and wrongful acts has continued with its overt support
of the oppressive Syrian Government and covert
operations in the United Kingdom, as well as clandestine
murders in my country. All of those violations have
taken place against a backdrop of Russia’s systematic
abuse of the right of veto and blatant disregard of its
obligation to maintain peace and security.
On several occasions over the past four years,
Ukraine has urged the Russian Federation to accept
its international legal responsibility and has demanded
that such wrongful acts end. We remain committed to
a peaceful resolution of the conflict in our country, in
accordance with Article 33 of the Charter. Ukraine has
always prioritized peaceful, legal and diplomatic means
of conflict resolution. We stand for multilateralism
by turning to the United Nations, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the Council
of Europe and other international bodies for support.
And we will continue along that path by resorting to all
means available to the States Members of the United
Nations to resolve the situation that has arisen as a result
of the Russian military aggression against Ukraine.
In that spirit, we have initiated proceedings in
the International Court of Justice against the Russian
Federation concerning the application of the International
Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of
Terrorism and the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination. In
April Ukraine requested that the International Court of

S/PV. 8262

Justice provide a definitive interpretation of the order it
issued one year ago imposing provisional measures on
the Russian Federation, which remains unimplemented.
We did so because the situation in temporarily occupied
Crimea continues to be characterized by gross violations
of international humanitarian law and international
human rights law and the systematic persecution of
Ukrainians and Crimean Tatars. We are also witnessing
further deterioration of the security and humanitarian
situation in the occupied parts of Donbas.
Together with a number of other States, we are
working on establishing an accountability mechanism
for the downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17. We
initiated an arbitration proceeding against the Russian
Federation under the 1982 United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea.
We again urge the Russian Federation to reverse
the occupation of Crimea and Donbas, to stop its
aggression, including by withdrawing its regular armed
formations and mercenaries, weapons and equipment
from the temporarily occupied territories of Ukraine,
and to fully implement its commitments under the Minsk
agreements and obligations under international law.
It is worth mentioning that the principle of the
peaceful settlement of disputes creates not only
obligations for Member States but also responsibilities
for the principal organs of the United Nations, including
the Security Council, especially in the application of
the provisions of Chapter VI and Chapter VII of the
Charter. The role of the Secretary-General is also
crucially important. As to the Security Council,
its failure to exercise its primary responsibility in
dealing with threats to peace, breaches of peace, or
acts of aggression should trigger a reaction by the
General Assembly.
In conclusion, let me share a few more practical
suggestions. First, we deem it necessary for the
Council to reinforce its preventive function. In order
to better understand preventive efforts, we suggest, as
a starting point, requesting the Secretariat to prepare
an analytical report on actions taken by the Council
before and after conflicts, in order to detect weak
points and help to avoid similar gaps and mistakes in
the future. Secondly, we also consider the Council’s
reaction to grave violations of international law to
be slow and inconsistent. In that regard, we propose
elaborating a kind of test-based algorithm that could
serve as an informal guide for Council members

18-1518061/97

S/PV.8262

Maintenance of international peace and security

on how to timely, properly and transparently fulfil
the Council’s primary responsibility with regard to
conflict situations, including acts of aggression. The
Framework of Analysis for Atrocity Crimes, presented
by the Secretary-General in 2014, could be used as a
reference document.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the African Union.
Ms. Mohammed: Allow me first to congratulate
you, Madam President, on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for this month and to thank you for
convening this timely open debate. The presence of His
Excellency President Duda at this meeting, as well as
the high-level participation from Member States, bears
witness to the critical importance of today’s debate
as well as to the Security Council’s commitment to
advancing global understanding on the need to uphold
international law within the context of the maintenance
of international peace and security.
Today’s debate is taking place amid greater
preoccupations and fears about the future of the
multilateral international order. In recent years,
multilateralism has been increasingly challenged by
the growing use of unilateral measures that undermine
the very foundations of the Charter of the United
Nations. We have also witnessed with serious concern
the deepening rifts in international relations that
have already given rise to serious implications for the
fulfilment of existing norms and established practices
in international law.
In the face of those challenges, the international
community must voice its concerns and reiterate its
commitment to a rules-based system, which remains the
best and safest way to enhance cooperation in order to
address the global issues of peace and security. We also
need to reaffirm the validity of the founding principles
of the Charter of the United Nations, which have stood
the tests of time and the world’s continued upheavals.
More important, the relevant provisions of the Charter
must be strictly observed, especially when it comes to
the use of force in international relations.
Furthermore, the primacy of the United Nations as
the global forum for legitimate, effective and inclusive
multilateralism must be enhanced. But we need to restore
confidence in the capacity of the United Nations to stay
relevant in the face of multiple and severe challenges.
In that regard, we are encouraged by the SecretaryGeneral’s reform agenda, which, in our view, should
62/97

17/05/2018

be supported and pursued so as to advance meaningful
changes in perspective on adapting the United Nations
to the complex realities of today’s world.
The scope of those reforms should not be confined
to the Secretariat aspects alone. Every effort should be
made to conclude the long-stalled process concerning
the reform of the Security Council. The time has come
to make the Security Council effectively democratic,
transparent and truly representative by correcting the
historical injustice done to the African continent.
Africa has been both a major beneficiary of and
crucial contributor to the evolution and functioning of
multilateralism. I wish to recall in that context the central
role of multilateralism in Africa’s decolonization and
post-independence experiences, including the struggle
against apartheid.
Africa has always been supportive of existing
international norms, as well as of genuine processes
of codification and progressive development of
international law in order to promote friendly relations
and cooperation among Member States and the
peaceful settlement of disputes and conflicts. In that
regard, I wish to refer to the recent statements made
by the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
on Syria, Palestine and Iran, to say that those positions
were profoundly grounded in our strong belief that,
whatever the circumstances are, international law
must be respected. Through the African Union and
its regional mechanisms, Africa will spare no effort
in countering the emerging erosion of multilateralism
in accordance with the following principles: first,
respect for African ownership and priority-setting
in a spirit of mutual respect; secondly, flexible and
innovative application of the principle of subsidiarity;
thirdly, mutual respect and adherence to the principle
of comparative advantage; and, fourthly and finally, a
division of labour underpinned by complementarity.
Africa will continue to strengthen relationships
with its partners in a structured, strategic and mutually
beneficial manner. The challenging and increasingly
complex situations on the ground require more enhanced
and properly calibrated interventions. Strengthening
our strategic partnership with the United Nations will
therefore continue to be an essential pillar of our joint
efforts to achieve an inclusive, peaceful, prosperous
and better world for all.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
18-15180

17/05/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mrs. Puerschel (Germany): Like others, I would
like to commend Poland for convening today’s debate
on this very crucial topic and to thank this morning’s
briefers. We were especially moved by Judge Meron’s
statement reminding us of the atrocities of the Second
World War, which are at the basis of why Germany
is a staunch support of strengthening our rules-based
international order. Germany is strongly committed to
supporting, defending and developing that order. Our
campaign for a seat on the Security Council for the
2019-2020 term reflects that commitment.
International peace and security can be achieved
only if we respect and adhere to international law and
the rules-based international system that we as States
have built together. We have a responsibility not only to
create law but also to respect and implement it. That law
includes first and foremost the Charter of the United
Nations, which entrusts the primary responsibility
for upholding international peace and security to the
Security Council and keeps at hand a whole system of
measures, in Chapters VI, VII and VIII of the Charter,
to be deployed to that end. Upholding international
law also means respecting and implementing Security
Council resolutions and international agreements.
Unilateral breaches undermine the entire system.
It is deplorable that we still witness breaches of
international law on a daily basis. It is not hard to
list numerous breaches of human rights law and
international humanitarian law — for example, in the
ongoing conflicts in Syria, Yemen, Myanmar and other
places around the world. We can also list violations of
sovereignty and territorial integrity — for example, in
Ukraine with regard to Crimea and Donbas.
We need to adhere to what has been agreed on,
including upholding the consolidated international
position on Jerusalem embodied in resolution 478
(1980). Addressing breaches of international law that
pose a threat to peace and security is key to preventing
conflicts early on. The Security Council needs to be
informed at an early stage of such breaches and take
early action.
There is a close correlation between protecting
human rights and safeguarding peace and security.
Repeated, grave or systematic violations of human
rights are crucial early-warning signs for crises. For
that reason, human rights situations should be brought
before the Security Council. The Council should also
work more closely with the Human Rights Council and

S/PV. 8262

its mechanisms. In the past, clear warnings have not
always been registered by the Security Council. The
situation of the Rohingya is just one example. Since
2014, the Human Rights Council has time and again
called on the international community to react to the
grave situation in Myanmar.
In addition to investigations, Article 33 of the
Charter provides numerous other instruments for
the prevention of conflicts, of which mediation is
one. Peace mediation is an essential instrument of
Germany’s crisis and stabilization policy, and it has
significantly strengthened its mediation efforts over the
past three years.
Let me also highlight judicial settlement as a
means of prevention, which was also mentioned by
a couple of colleagues today. Germany shares the
opinion that international courts and tribunals, such
as the International Court of Justice, the International
Tribunal for the Law of the Sea and other tribunals and
arbitration mechanisms, can and should play a more
important role in the peaceful settlement process. For
that to happen, Member States must also respect and
implement their decisions.
Another aspect of prevention is deterrence.
Germany is strongly committed to the fight against
impunity and to advancing international criminal law.
We are the second-largest financial contributor to the
International Criminal Court (ICC). In the twentieth
year since the adoption of the Rome Statute, we believe
that the International Criminal Court is more important
than ever, and its work sends an unequivocal signal
to perpetrators and potential perpetrators of the most
serious and horrific crimes that they will be held
accountable. It also sends a message of hope to the
victims of atrocity crimes that they will not be forgotten
by the international community.
Allow me to illustrate that point with an example.
When the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia closed its doors last December, none
of the 161 indictees were still at large. The Tribunal
concluded proceedings in all its cases. Ninety
people were convicted, among them Heads of State,
ministers and generals. The Tribunal proved that the
law can prevail even against perpetrators who once
seemed untouchable.
Germany believes that the Security Council
should refer situations to the ICC in the case of
serious allegations of breaches of human rights and

18-1518063/97

S/PV.8262

Maintenance of international peace and security

international humanitarian law. The use of chemical
weapons constitutes a serious violation of international
humanitarian law. Those responsible for such crimes
must be identified and held accountable by all means at
our disposal. We sincerely urge the Security Council to
live up to its responsibility and establish an independent,
impartial and objective attribution mechanism for the
situation in Syria.
In conclusion, I would like to add that I fully
support what the observer of the European Union and
the representative of Belgium said on sanctions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Jamaica.
Mrs. Mills (Jamaica): Jamaica would like to
congratulate you, Madam President, and Poland on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of May. We welcome this opportunity to
participate in this open debate, which is both timely and
relevant. Our thanks also go to the Secretary-General,
the former President of the International Court of Justice
and the President of the Mechanism for International
Criminal Tribunals for their remarks.
The concept note prepared for this debate
(S/2018/417/Rev.1, annex) provides very pointed
questions to guide our collective reflection on how best
to ensure that the tenets of international law are not only
upheld but also fully respected by all Member States.
My delegation believes, however, that reform of the
Security Council must be at the core of our discourse.
As the main organ charged with the maintenance of
international peace and security, it is critical that
the Council be able to meaningfully, effectively and
convincingly respond to threats to international peace
and security. Consequently, clear and decisive action
has to be taken in that regard. Security Council reform
must be pursued as a matter of urgency if real progress
is to be realized.
Secondly, ensuring respect for international
obligations has to be promoted as part of a larger
agenda that takes account of action being undertaken at
the national level. Efforts to promote peacebuilding and
sustaining peace through a concentrated focus not only
on conflict resolution but also on conflict prevention
will be essential. Such an approach is necessary in the
face of traditional as well as new and emerging threats
to international peace and security, which are being
fuelled by a myriad social, economic and political
64/97

17/05/2018

factors that provide a breeding ground for discontent,
conflict and strife.
Thirdly, innovative and creative approaches are
effective insofar as they are grounded in the legality of
the action that they purport. We must, at a minimum,
put a greater premium on reliance on the tools that we
already have at our disposal, including those provided
for in Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations.
Although it is accepted that many disputes arise from
bilateral disagreements, it should be incumbent on the
parties involved to explore all available prospects for
peaceful resolution, and for the United Nations to be able
to play a part in facilitating that solution, particularly
in the face of protracted disagreements for which all
reasonable approaches have not been fully exploited.
My delegation remains convinced that combined
action at the bilateral, regional and multilateral levels
remains the best course of action for conflict resolution,
and that the Council should be prepared to engage on
all fronts before resorting to Chapter VII mechanisms
or to individually undertaking unilateral action. We
would therefore join those who argue, for example, for
a greater use by the Council of the advisory opinions
of the International Court of Justice in the course of
its deliberations. Creating more strategic partnerships
with regional organizations could also prove useful.
My delegation’s argument for greater reliance on
measures in Chapter VI of the Charter is not advocated
in a vacuum or to the complete exclusion of those
provided for under Chapter VII. We must, however,
continue to find a way to ensure that sanctions achieve
their intended objectives and, given their legally
binding nature, are fully respected by Member States.
To that end, we would propose that the adoption of
draft resolutions imposing new sanctions also continue
to coincide with the organization of briefings of
Member States, as well as the possible publication of
more user-friendly information on the main features
of the proposed sanctions regime. We believe that
would increase the chances for better awareness among
national stakeholders of the importance of compliance
and their appreciation of it. The prospects for assistance
to Member States to support implementation should
remain a viable option, and would necessitate the
provision of the requisite resources for that to be
undertaken in a sustained manner.
In conclusion, let me assure the Council of
Jamaica’s unswerving commitment to the maintenance
18-15180

17/05/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

of international peace and security, and to upholding
international law in pursuit of that common objective.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Mr. Fernández Valoni (Argentina) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, I would like to commend the
Republic of Poland for organizing this debate, and to
welcome the presence of President Andrzej Duda this
morning. I would also like to thank the Chef de Cabinet
of the Secretary-General, the President Emeritus of
the International Court of Justice and the President of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals for their briefings.
Argentina reaffirms its strict adherence to
international law and to the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations in particular, and
implements its international policies accordingly in the
belief that multilateralism is essential to international
peace and security.
That is why we welcome the initiative of the Polish
presidency of the Security Council in organizing
today’s debate, which coincides with the seventieth
anniversary of the International Law Commission and
the twentieth anniversary of the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court. At a time when we are
seeing frequent challenges to international law, we want
to reaffirm the importance of ensuring that the Council
duly considers the legal aspects of the situations it deals
with in discharging its great responsibility under the
Charter of the United Nations.
Argentina reiterates the cardinal importance of the
principle of the peaceful settlement of international
disputes and maintains that any method for the peaceful
settlement of disputes is equally valid for resolving
conflicts. It is only through such methods that just and
lasting solutions can be secured. In the framework of
the Charter, the International Court of Justice plays a
central role as the principal judicial organ of the United
Nations. In addition to the Court, we note the role of
other courts specializing in particular branches of
international law, such as the International Tribunal for
the Law of the Sea.
Negotiation is the primary means of resolving
disputes. In that context, my country stresses the
importance of ensuring that the parties to disputes
comply in good faith with the calls for negotiations
made by United Nations bodies, including the General

S/PV. 8262

Assembly, in order to help to settle them peacefully.
Whenever the organs of the Organization, particularly
the Assembly, call on the parties concerned to negotiate,
those parties should do so in good faith, refraining from
any action that could undermine their obligation to
resolve the conflict by peaceful means. States outside
a dispute should also refrain from conduct that could
sabotage a peaceful settlement. Among the means of
peaceful settlement available to the Organization and its
Member States we also note that the Organization can
entrust the Secretary-General with exercising his good
offices. Whether that or any other means of peaceful
settlement can achieve its aims and purpose depends on
the fulfilment in good faith of the obligations incumbent
on the parties concerned.
We agree with the idea expressed in the concept note
for the debate (S/2018/417/Rev.1, annex) emphasizing
the importance of the fight against impunity and of
ensuring accountability for the most serious violations
of international law, and we want to highlight the
central role that the International Criminal Court can
play in that context. Given that States have the primary
responsibility for judging the responsible parties, it is
important that States parties to the Rome Statute abide
by the necessary standards to that end. It is also crucial
to ensure that all States cooperate with the Court. In
that connection, I want to underscore the historic
importance of the decision taken in December 2017 by
the Assembly of States Parties on activating the Court’s
jurisdiction over the crime of aggression, which marks
the end of a long road that goes back to Nuremberg and
completes the legal edifice provided for in the Statute.
Accountability mechanisms have an important
preventive role to play. That is why the Security Council
must strengthen its commitment to fighting impunity
for such crimes. We reiterate the importance of an
effective follow-up by the Council to its referrals to the
International Criminal Court, as well as the possibility
of recourse to the International Humanitarian FactFinding Commission, as provided for in the Additional
Protocol I to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949,
relating to the protection of victims of international
armed conflicts.
Lastly, I would also like to stress the importance
of respect for due process in the Council’s own work
in its Sanctions Committees. That is why Argentina
is in favour of extending the role of Ombudsman to
all Sanctions Committees. We also wish to echo the
concern expressed about the issue of notifications

18-1518065/97

S/PV.8262

Maintenance of international peace and security

under Article 51 of the Charter, in which the Council
should ensure greater transparency on its follow-up to
such communications.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Norway.
Ms. Stener (Norway): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the five Nordic countries, Denmark, Finland,
Iceland, Sweden and my own country, Norway. Today
is Norway’s national day. We are celebrating more than
200 years of our Constitution, adopted in 1814, which
is why my colleagues and I are wearing our national
costumes.
We welcome this timely initiative by Poland,
because respect for and the promotion of international
law are crucial to preserving peace, human rights,
sustainable development and lasting access to the
global commons.
Russia’s illegal annexation of Crimea and the
continued conflict in eastern Ukraine underline
the importance of today’s debate. So do the blatant
violations of international humanitarian law and the
widespread abuses of human rights law in some current
armed conflicts, including the horrific use of chemical
weapons in Syria. There can be no impunity for such
acts. Under the Charter of the United Nations, the
Security Council has the primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security. With that
come vast responsibilities.
First, the Charter sets out an obligation to resolve
disputes by peaceful means. The Council should use
the full potential of Chapter VI, which contains rules
for the peaceful settlement of disputes. The early and
swift Council response to the crisis in the Gambia last
year helped to prevent a potential outbreak of violence.
The collective security system worked, and the rulesbased international order was upheld.
Secondly, the Council should show unity in giving
full support to mediation efforts and good offices.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s initiatives for
strengthening conflict prevention and mediation.
We also urge the Council to make consistent efforts
to implement the women and peace and security
agenda, which has the potential to help restore peace
and security in conflicts and prevent violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
Thirdly, the Council acts on behalf of all Member
States, and must do so in accordance with the Charter.
66/97

17/05/2018

The use of the veto to protect narrow national interests
in situations of mass atrocities is not in line with the
spirit of the Charter. We urge all Governments to join
the code of conduct of the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group regarding Security Council
action against genocide, crimes against humanity and
war crimes, as well as the Political Declaration launched
by France and Mexico on the suspension of veto powers
in cases of mass atrocity.
Fourthly, regional organizations have a key role
to play in preventing conflict and settling disputes
at a regional level. The Council should make full use
of Chapter VIII of the Charter and encourage the
settlement of disputes through regional arrangements.
In that context, we welcome the regular meetings
between the Council and the African Union Peace and
Security Council.
Fifthly, judicial bodies such as international courts
help to resolve disputes and uphold international law.
The International Court of Justice continues to play
a important role in this area as the principal judicial
organ of the United Nations. In addition, all States
have a duty to investigate and prosecute the alleged
perpetrators of atrocity crimes. Situations where States
are unable or unwilling to prosecute should be referred
to the International Criminal Court.
Lastly, we welcome the Secretary-General’s
commitment to the Human Rights Up Front initiative
and to making use of the early-warning tools at his
disposal.
Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I will not waste the Council’s time replying
to all those who have abused this meeting to push the
so-called International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism to assist in the Investigation and Prosecution
of those Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011.
We have sent many letters to the Secretary-General,
as have many other countries, pointing out that the
establishment of that mechanism is a flagrant violation
of international law and a deliberate distortion of the
law’s provisions. We would like to recall here the truth
that reveals the malicious goals behind that murky
mechanism’s establishment. Among the countries
that support it are some that have been financing the
Al-Nusra Front terrorist organization; some that are
home to financial institutions that facilitate money18-15180

17/05/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

laundering for financing terrorism; and some that, along
with their intelligence agencies, have been implicated in
the creation of the foreign terrorist fighter phenomenon
and have facilitated their funding, training and entry
into Syria and Iraq.
My delegation has studied the concept note
(S/2018/417/Rev.1,
annex)
by
the
Permanent
Representative of Poland carefully. We affirm that its
contents could be a guide for us and our work if the
Governments of the world adhered to it without double
standards or selectivity. In that case we could avoid
many conflicts and halt various acts of aggression
and oppression, and would be able to guarantee the
implementation of international law and maintain
international peace and security.

S/PV. 8262

to violations of international law, and we believe that
the Council has the necessary tools to achieve those
goals. However, noble goals and theories are one
thing and reality is another, and there are so many
examples to prove that. The Palestinian people and the
Syrians under Israeli occupation have been waiting
for more than 50 years for the Council to implement
the resolutions of international legitimacy that would
put an end to their brutal occupation. But the reality
is that permanent Member States of the Council are
obstructing that implementation, providing cover
for the Israeli occupation to expand its settlement
activities and displace and kill Palestinians while the
world watches.

Syria is enduring the seventh year of a terrorist war
that was imposed on us. We have a real stake in a peaceful
settlement led by Syrians without external or foreign
intervention, through diplomacy, negotiation, good
offices and mediation. My Government is participating
seriously in every initiative that seeks to achieve a
sustainable solution to the crisis. However, we cannot
ignore or deny the truth that we now live in a politically
polarized world because some Governments believe
that political, military and economic power gives them
the right to determine the fates of other peoples.

The Council has been unable to fulfil its mandate
when it comes to holding the racist terrorist entity of
Israel accountable. Just two days ago Israel brutally
killed 60 defenceless civilians and injured more than
3,000 others. The Syrian people are still waiting for
the Council to fulfil its mandate with respect to the
aggression of the so-called global coalition to defeat the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant led by the United
States against our sovereignty and unity. We are also
waiting for it to respond to the aggression by Turkey,
the continued aggression by Israel, and the tripartite
act of aggression against Syria on 14 April led by the
United States, the United Kingdom and France.

Most countries in this Organization, however,
believe in the rule of law at the international and
national level, without double standards or selective
measures. They believe that international relations
must be governed by respect for national sovereignty,
cooperation, partnership and development for all so as
to prevent conflicts and maintain international peace
and security. This meeting is an important opportunity
to assess the position of international law in the
framework of the maintenance of international peace
and security. However, that requires us to be serious
about upholding the rule of law, guaranteeing equality
for all and ending hotspot issues around the world. It
also requires us to be serious about ending all forms
of aggression and occupation, as well as attempts to
abuse international law or distort its concepts in order
to interfere in the domestic affairs of States.

However, the reality is that some permanent
members have been able to render the Council unable
to act. It has not even been able to release a statement
of condemnation because some of its members are
accomplices in those crimes of aggression and have
abandoned their responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security. The peoples of the
world, and the Syrian and Iraqi peoples in particular,
are waiting for the Council to fulfil its mandate to hold
those Governments and their intelligence agencies
accountable for creating the monster of foreign terrorist
fighters, who are still killing thousands of innocent Iraqi
and Syrian civilians. However, the reality is that some
in the Council are obstructing the implementation of
resolutions established under Chapter VII that provide
for holding to account all those implicated in the influx
of foreign terrorist fighters to Syria and Iraq.

We are true believers in the concept note’s
positions. The Security Council must shoulder its
responsibility by working for the peaceful settlement
of conflicts. Respect for international obligations and
the rule of law must be shown by responding effectively

In conclusion, now more than ever the credibility
of the United Nations and the Security Council is being
put into question by the conscience of the peoples of
the world. If we truly seek to restore that credibility
and the role of the United Nations, the path is crystal

18-1518067/97

S/PV.8262

Maintenance of international peace and security

clear and the tools are available. All that remains to
be done is for some Governments to show a genuine,
sincere and serious will to bring their practices in line
with the purposes and principles of the Charter and the
provisions of international law.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uruguay.
Mr. Bermúdez Álvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, I would like to commend the
President of the Council for choosing this subject as
the topic for one of the open debates during the Polish
presidency for the month of May.
The United Nations came into existence in 1945
with the aim of achieving world peace and agreeing on
a union of States that, through friendly and cooperative
relations, would resolve their conflicts using peaceful
means. The Charter of the United Nations established
a series of principles to guide relations between the
States and joint bodies to advance the achievement of
the Organization’s objectives. The Security Council
was created as part of its organic system and tasked
with safeguarding international peace and security. In
that regard, Article 24 of the Charter establishes that
“In order to ensure prompt and effective action
by the United Nations, its members confer on the
Security Council primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security,
and agree that in carrying out its duties under
this responsibility the Security Council acts on
their behalf.”
The Charter thus gives the Council responsibility for
the maintenance of peace and security, which must be
fulfilled within the framework of international law and
with respect for the principles it establishes. The most
basic principle in the system that we have created is
refraining from resorting to the threat or use of force
against the territorial integrity or political independence
of any State. International peace is also maintained
through the peaceful settlement of disputes, as the
Charter indicates. In that area, we should strengthen
relations with the International Court of Justice, the
judicial organ of the United Nations charged with
resolving disputes. That is the arena that the Security
Council should use to promote the settlement of
disputes, especially legal ones, when other means such
as negotiation or mediation have proved ineffective.
68/97

17/05/2018

Uruguay, as a member of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group, advocated for
transparency in the work of the Security Council
during the period when it had the honour of being one
of its non-permanent members. We therefore always
stress the need for, and act in such a way as to uphold,
such transparency.
In keeping with the responsibility conferred on
it, the Security Council must strive to ensure respect
for human life in situations where conflict could not
be averted, through resolutions aimed at ensuring
respect for humanitarian law, and impose sanctions
when necessary.
Along the same lines, the Security Council should
resort to the special international tribunals, and, in
compliance with the mandate set out in the Statute of the
International Criminal Court in its article 13 (b), play
a more active role in the prosecution of crimes against
humanity, war crimes and genocide, as well as the
crime of aggression, which will now be covered. Under
this mandate, as appropriate, the Council must refer
allegations of such crimes to the International Criminal
Court and undertake the relevant investigations,
prosecuting and punishing perpetrators and combating
impunity. The Security Council could also, through
a resolution, request the Prosecutor not to initiate or
defer an investigation, as provided for in article 16 of
the Statute.
On this point, unfortunately, much has been
said about attributing criminal responsibility to
perpetrators — widely known as accountability — but
very little has been done. We should give thought
to the deterrent effect that a functioning, effective
international criminal-justice system would have on
potential perpetrators and warlords.
The international community can safeguard peace
by maintaining a balance that depends on every one of its
member States and by upholding the legality emanating
from this Organization — a common body of law that
differs from States’ domestic legislation and consists of
compliance with international norms or derives from
certain generally accepted and practiced behaviours.
We are currently witnessing a worrisome trend of
many Member States’ non-compliance with Security
Council resolutions, reflecting a lack of or weak
adherence to the international law emanating from that
body and the system as a whole. In abiding by these
norms, account should be taken of the scope of action
18-15180

17/05/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

and functions of the Security Council, which must not
overstep its mandate. We must not lose sight of the
principles of non-intervention and self-determination
in dealing with internal conflicts. The Council must act
using the means and within the scope established in the
Charter, and, when the conditions and situation demand
it and in adopting measures, it should particularly bear
in mind the principle of proportionality.
As has been noted, Council resolutions should
bolster as well as be motivated by and focused on the
protection of human beings and the strict observance
of international humanitarian law and international
human rights law.
In a situation such as this, where we are trying
to strengthen preventive action by various means,
the Security Council can use all the available tools
granted to it to maintain peace. Perhaps we should try
to find new and imaginative ways to achieve this by
promoting fresh forms of dialogue that start right here
in the Security Council itself. Uruguay believes that the
time has come for a change of pace in the work of the
Security Council, which, without abandoning its focus
on legality or overstepping its mandate, could become
more unified and effective in a framework of respect
for all and on the basis of all the guiding principles set
out in the Charter, which gave rise to the Organization.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kenya.
Ms. Grignon (Kenya): I would like to commend
the Polish presidency for the manner in which it has
steered the work of the Council for the month of May.
We welcome the convening of this meeting, which
focuses on an important subject that has not been
given the centrality it deserves, and we are grateful
for the concept note (S/2018/417/Rev.1, annex). I would
also like to recognize and thank the briefers for their
statements this morning.
The delegation of Kenya aligns itself with the
statement to be delivered by the representative of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
I reaffirm Kenya’s commitment to the rule of law
and to the principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations, which guarantee the sovereign equality
of States and the peaceful resolution of disputes. I would
also like to reaffirm that international law is essential

S/PV. 8262

in addressing the challenges to peace and security on
the global agenda.
My delegation proposes four measures that the
Security Council could take to strengthen and uphold
international law.
First, on the guarantee of equality of States in the
application of international law, my delegation wishes
to emphasize that in order to strengthen respect for and
acceptance of international obligations critical to the
maintenance of international peace and security, there
should be fairness, uniformity and consistency in the
application of international law by the Council.
International law is a product of political
interactions between States. Member States should
not allow individual political interests to override the
collective commitments to international solidarity,
peace and security. A politically skewed application
of international law erodes the foundations of a rulesbased international system and multilateralism and
brings into question the credibility of the Council.
The application of international human rights law
and international humanitarian law must also be equally
regulated within acceptable norms. The alternative has
proved to be an even greater threat to international
peace and security as compared to the traditional
drivers of conflict.
We are seeing violations at the international level
under the cloak of the maintenance of international
peace and security. A reformed Security Council would
ensure that the Council is a master of its own mandate.
Kenya is an active participant in the African Union
Committee of Ten Heads of State and Government,
aimed at spearheading the security reform process,
because we believe that the Security Council should
be inclusive.
Secondly, with regard to respect for national
ownership, the Council, in maintaining international
peace and security, could better uphold international
law without undermining national ownership and
sovereignty. The actions and interventions of the Council
should support national efforts in political, legislative,
judicial and institutional reform programmes, including
national healing and reconciliation aimed at upholding
international law. This is particularly important for
delicate reform processes and politically sensitive
transitions in conflict-affected countries or in countries
emerging from conflict.

18-1518069/97

S/PV.8262

Maintenance of international peace and security

The Council should strive to find the right balance
on how to offer support for national efforts while
addressing impunity and violations of international
human rights law and international humanitarian
law. Strengthened national legal and institutional
frameworks are preventive tools that can enhance
national ownership and sovereignty and allow
countries to exercise their respective sovereign right
and responsibility to guarantee justice, peace, security
and development for their own citizens. The principle
of complementarity should always be upheld and given
first priority. We should invest more in efforts to
promote the peaceful settlement of disputes.
We recognize the value added by international
jurisprudence platforms, in particular the International
Court of Justice, which has proven its important role in
settling disputes between States. However, the Council
has referred parties to the Court only once, in 1947. The
Council should look into ways on how to objectively use
that platform, given the increasing inter-State tensions
we face, with their tragic implications for regional and
international peace and security.
The process of upholding international law should
be more sensitive and objective, especially in connection
with national realities on the ground. Unilateral
economic sanctions should not be applied in situations
where they are counterproductive or contradictory to
continued support for sustainable peace and sustainable
development, specifically the implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
My third point concerns partnerships. The
Security Council should pay closer attention to the
regional dimension of peace processes. The Council
is a meaningful partner of regional and subregional
mediation mechanisms. That partnership needs to be
strengthened, because regional and national actors are
usually the immediate responders in averting situations
that could easily escalate into critical conflicts. The
Council therefore should trust more, for example,
in Africa’s ability to understand its realities, and
especially its ability to act in the best interests of its
peoples and countries.
Partnership with regional and subregional
organizations can ensure that the Council is part of
a multilateral mechanism that ensures the peaceful
settlement of disputes everywhere. The Council may
wish to partner more robustly with other organs and
subsidiary bodies of the United Nations system,
70/97

17/05/2018

including the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council and the Peacebuilding Commission,
so as to ensure that conflict prevention and the
sustainability of peace and development are upheld. In
particular, such partnership should create space for the
role of the General Assembly in international peace,
particularly when the efforts of the Security Council
fail to guarantee it, as has been the case on many
recent occasions.
Lastly, it has been 15 years since the Council held its
first thematic debate on the rule of law (see S/PV.4835).
Since then, there have been several debates, presidential
statements, reports of the Secretary-General and
resolutions that in various ways address the importance
of supporting and strengthening the rule of law and
justice as indispensable elements in conflict prevention
and the maintenance of international peace and
security. Additionally, conclusions have been drawn
regarding the importance of an integrated approach
and the coherence of political, security, development,
human rights and rule-of-law activities.
However, as the concept note rightly observes,
despite the strong positions and commitments expressed,
violations of international law and insufficient
implementation of Security Council resolutions persist,
with an adverse impact on international peace and
security. Member States should therefore support
the Council’s efforts for the peaceful settlement of
disputes, in accordance with Chapter VI of the Charter,
in genuine partnership with the Council.
Kenya is a proud member of the community of
nations that has contributed immensely, despite its
limited resources, to the achievement of peace, security
and multilateralism. We remain committed to the
maintenance of international law to address current
global challenges and realities on the ground. To that
end, we expect genuine international cooperation
and partnerships.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Rabi (Morocco) (spoke in French): I would
first like to commend the Polish presidency for
convening this open debate, which addresses a subject
central to our multilateral work, particularly within the
Security Council.
Thanks to international law, which has been
established and strengthened over the years, peace,
18-15180

17/05/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

security and stability prevail in the majority of countries
of our world today. To take stock of the importance of
international law, let us imagine, for a moment, that our
world existed without it. Chaos would reign supreme
everywhere. We would see wars everywhere. We would
would still be in the era of the law of the jungle, defined
by some philosophers as the survival of the fittest. We
must therefore welcome the success that international
law has guaranteed us.
Clearly, international law is not respected
everywhere. It is unfortunate to have to note that while
old conflicts continue, new ones are emerging in which
international law is constantly trampled. Accordingly,
the Charter of the United Nations must maintain its
primacy. Its purposes and principles must guide the
actions of States and the international community. It is
incumbent on us to respect and protect the sacrosanct
principles enshrined in the Charter, namely, the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and national unity
of States.
Moreover, respect for international law is
predicated on the adoption of a comprehensive and
multidimensional approach based on the primacy of the
law in all aspects of international relations, particularly
through respect for the Charter. In that regard, particular
attention must be paid to the peaceful settlement of
disputes through dialogue, negotiation and mediation.
Furthermore, warring parties in conflicts are obligated
to respect international law, in particular international
humanitarian law and international human rights law,
as they guarantee the protection of civilians.
For its part, the international community should
invest more in conflict prevention, particularly
by strengthening States’ capacities in the areas of
democracy and the rule of law. To that end, it is essential
that States be provided with the national mechanisms
enabling them to promote and protect human rights
and establish democratic, transparent, legitimate and
credible institutions able to meet the needs of the people
in all aspects of daily life. The goal is to guarantee the
principles of accessible, effective and equitable justice,
ensure respect for the law based on equality, protect
individuals and allow them to exercise their political,
economic, social and political and cultural rights
effectively.
In conclusion, I reaffirm the Kingdom of Morocco’s
strong commitment to a multilateralism that respects the
rules and principles of international law. In that regard,

S/PV. 8262

Morocco remains engaged with the United Nations
as the legitimate and representative Organization and
the appropriate framework within which to pursue
collective efforts to establish an international society
that enjoys peace, security, sustainable development
and respect for human rights.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Austria.
Mr. Kickert (Austria): Austria aligns itself with
the statement delivered earlier by the observer of the
European Union.
We would like to thank Poland for convening this
open debate, as Austria strongly believes that a rulesbased international system with clear and predictable
rules is an indispensable precondition for lasting
peace and development. We call on all Member States
to actively promote an international order based on
international law and the rule of law, with the United
Nations at its core.
The President has asked us to consider what can be
done, in concrete terms, to improve the state of respect
for international law in three main areas.
Regarding the first area — the peaceful settlement
of disputes — we call on all Member States to accept,
without reservations, the compulsory jurisdiction
of the International Court of Justice, in accordance
with Article 36 of the Charter of the United Nations.
Crucially, we must also work much harder to prevent
violence and conflicts in the first place. One way to
do so is to enhance capacities for early warning and
response, as well as national expertise in mediation
and preventive diplomacy. Austria is working with
partners, for example, with the Economic Community
of West African States, as well as the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, in that regard.
The United Nations must also do more to
support Member States in implementing the rule
of law and related elements of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. The Security Council has
often reaffirmed that justice and the rule of law are
fundamental building blocks of conflict prevention and
resolution and sustainable peace. The Security Council,
in cooperation with the United Nations system, must
therefore ensure that peacekeeping operations have
the necessary resources to deliver justice and promote
respect for the rule of law and human rights, including
in the transition to United Nations country teams.

18-1518071/97

S/PV.8262

Maintenance of international peace and security

Secondly, we must do much more to ensure
compliance with international law during conflicts.
The intergovernmental process within the International
Committee of the Red Cross to strengthen respect
for humanitarian law and the good offices of the
International Humanitarian Fact-Finding Commission
under Article 90 of the Additional Protocol I to the
Geneva Conventions are important tools in that regard.
As Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe last year, Austria
was able to contribute to the initial activation of the
International Humanitarian Fact-Finding Commission,
in connection with an incident on 23 April 2017 in
eastern Ukraine.
We emphasize that our collective response to
threats to international peace and security must be
guided by the rule of law. When it comes to Security
Council sanctions, fair and clear procedures, including
an independent mechanism for review, are a prerequisite
for the legitimacy of sanctions and compliance
with them. Austria urges the Secretary-General to
exercise his prerogative by swiftly appointing an
Ombudsperson for the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015), concerning ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and
associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities, in accordance with resolution 1904 (2009), a
post that has been vacant for more than nine months
now. The longer that vacancy lasts, the more likely
it is to undermine trust and confidence in Security
Council sanctions and jeopardize progress made over
many years in establishing and implementing fair and
clear procedures.
Austria urges the members of the Security Council
to refrain from using the veto to curtail Council action
where it could prevent or stop violence or conflict, in
accordance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter. Austria therefore supports the code of conduct
of the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
group, as well as the initiative by Mexico and France in
that regard. We also hope that open debates such as this
one, or Arria Formula meetings, can be further utilized.
As to the third main area on which we are asked
to comment, Austria believes that accountability and
the fight against impunity for violations of human
rights and humanitarian law are central to rebuilding
post-conflict societies and sustaining peace. Austria is
a strong supporter of the International Criminal Court
(ICC), and we call on the Security Council to refer the
72/97

17/05/2018

situation in Syria to the ICC and to ensure cooperation
and follow-up in situations it has already referred to
the Court.
Austria supports the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism for the Syrian Arab Republic and
the Commission of Inquiry, which document violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law
and gather evidence in view of future legal action. With
regard to the Investigative Team to support domestic
efforts in Iraq to hold Da’esh accountable, it is the duty
of the Security Council to ensure that it will operate
impartially and in accordance with international human
rights standards. Austria would also like to highlight
that, as of 17 July, the twentieth anniversary of the
Rome Statute, the ICC’s jurisdiction over the crime of
aggression will be activated, which will contribute to
upholding international law within the context of the
maintenance of international peace and security.
In conclusion, I would like to stress that our efforts
to promote international law and the rule of law do not
serve an abstract goal, but the protection of the rights
and interests of every individual. Austria, including in
its role as coordinator of the Group of Friends of the
Rule of Law, will continue to give the utmost priority
to that subject.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Djibouti.
Mr. Doualeh (Djibouti) (spoke in French): Djibouti
congratulates the delegation of Poland on convening
this important open debate on the crucial issue of
upholding international law within the context of the
maintenance of international peace and security.
The bloody news of the past few days proves, if
proof were needed, the vital nature of upholding
international law. Under the false pretext of legitimate
defence, Israel has systematically resorted to the use of
brutal and excessive force and violated international law
and the human rights of the Palestinians systematically
and with impunity.
We express our deep gratitude to our briefers,
especially Judge Hisashi Owada, Senior Judge of the
International Court of Justice, who will soon retire
after many fruitful years in the service of promoting
international law. We applaud his dedication and
reiterate our best wishes to him for the future.
18-15180

17/05/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

(spoke in English)
Consistency and the full implementation of Security
Council resolutions are critical to the maintenance of
international peace and security. Regrettably, Eritrea,
a neighbour of ours, continues to cynically defy all
Council resolutions. My country continues to face the
threat to international peace and security that has been
created by Eritrea’s unlawful use of force against us, the
occupation of Djiboutian territory by Eritrean military
personnel and the refusal of Eritrea to account for
Djiboutian prisoners of war captured in 2008. Threats
of force continue to emanate from the Eritrean side, and
the risk of violent confrontation is once again high.
There is an urgent need for a dispute-settlement
mechanism. We would prefer that the dispute be
referred to judicial settlement or arbitration by mutual
agreement. The result of either means of settlement
would be a legally binding judgment or award based
on international law, which would assure both parties
of a fair process and an equitable settlement that fully,
finally and permanently resolves their dispute.
In response to the President’s request to make
specific contributions today, Djibouti would like to
humbly submit the following observations.
The first measure we advocate is encouraging
disputing parties to submit their dispute for binding
judicial or arbitral settlement. There is precedent for
that. The Security Council did so in 1947, and the
Court rendered the judgment that resolved the dispute.
Remarkably, since then the Council has been reluctant
to encourage States to submit their disputes to the
International Court of Justice for arbitration. There is
no good reason for such reluctance. Ironically, under the
League of Nations, the Council frequently encouraged
States to submit their disputes to the Permanent
Court of International Justice, the predecessor of the
International Court of Justice.
Some States on the Council might be reluctant
to interfere with the principle of consent. Under that
principle, no State may be compelled to submit to the
jurisdiction of a court or arbitral tribunal without first
giving its consent. That is in recognition that each State
is sovereign. However, there is no reason to be concerned
here. The Security Council would not be compelling
any State to go to court or arbitration. Rather, it would
be using its influence to have disputing States consent
to it. That is an effective means of resolving disputes

S/PV. 8262

that, if left unresolved, may constitute threats to
international peace and security.
The second point concerns requesting the SecretaryGeneral to use his good offices to have the parties agree
to judicial settlement or arbitration. As an alternative
to working directly with the disputing parties, the
Security Council can request the intervention of the
Secretary-General and the use of his good offices to
help the disputing parties agree on the settlement of
their dispute by one of the means listed in Article 33,
including judicial settlement or arbitration. More use
could certainly be made of the good offices of the
Secretary-General.
Third is greater use of the advisory jurisdiction of the
International Court of Justice. On numerous occasions,
the General Assembly has requested the Court to issue
advisory opinions on the legal aspects of disputes, with
the objective of assisting the Assembly in exercising its
role of promoting peaceful settlements. The Security
Council has requested an advisory opinion from the
Court on only one occasion. Nevertheless, that is an
important precedent. The Council could make greater
use of its power to request advisory opinions in order
to promote peaceful dispute settlement in accordance
with international law.
The fourth point is encouraging the ratification
of international human rights and humanitarian rights
treaties without reservations. Participation in the
world’s most important human rights and humanitarian
rights treaties is still not universal. A number of
States still have not ratified major conventions, or
have ratified them subject to reservations excluding
themselves from the treaties’ dispute-settlement
provisions. The Security Council could engage in a
campaign to achieve universal acceptance on the part
of those treaties and encourage States not to exclude
themselves from the dispute-settlement provisions, or to
encourage States that have already excluded themselves
to remove their reservations. Those treaties include the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide, the Convention against Torture, the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination, the Convention relating to the Status of
Refugees and the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women, and so forth.
Fifth is promoting judicial recourse under
international human rights and humanitarian rights
treaties. Where a State is responsible for horrendous

18-1518073/97

S/PV.8262

Maintenance of international peace and security

human rights abuses, such as Myanmar in its campaign
against its Muslim Rohingya population, the Security
Council could consider encouraging one or more States
that are parties to the same conventions as Myanmar
to invoke their rights under the dispute-settlement
provisions of the conventions to bring Myanmar before
an international court or arbitral tribunal.
My sixth and last point is encouraging States
to accept the jurisdiction of the International Court
of Justice. More than 70 States have voluntarily
submitted declarations accepting the jurisdiction
of the International Court of Justice under its socalled optional clause, Article 36, paragraph 2, of the
Statute, vis-à-vis other States that have made similar
declarations. That is still a minority of States, however.
The Security Council could encourage other States to
accept the Court’s jurisdiction. That would not violate
the principle of consent, because there would be no
compulsion, and submission to the Court’s jurisdiction
would be entirely voluntary.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Perera: I would like to express our sincere
congratulations to the Polish presidency of the
Security Council for convening today’s timely debate
on upholding international law within the context of
the maintenance of international peace and security. I
also want to express our profound appreciation for the
insightful briefings delivered earlier today by Judge
Hisashi Owada, Senior Judge and President Emeritus
of the International Court of Justice, and Judge
Theodor Meron, President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.
Today’s debate takes place at a crucial time, when
strengthening and invigorating collective measures for
the maintenance of international peace and security
have become imperative. The fabric of the global order
is increasingly coming under threat with the rise in
flashpoints, conflicts and the spread of the spectre
of terrorism and violent extremism. It is therefore
vital that Member States forge new and innovative
partnerships in the context of preserving international
peace and security. In doing so, Governments must
act under the imprimatur of the law — the foundation
upon which a peaceful, equitable and prosperous
international community is built. It must therefore be
the common responsibility of all Member States to
74/97

17/05/2018

strengthen the international order based on respect for
international law.
If we are to strengthen international law amid
such challenges, we must ensure that there is equality
before the law and a guarantee of the independence
of international judicial mechanisms, and that legal
remedies remain accessible to the most vulnerable
among us. It is vital that all States have an equal
opportunity to participate in the international lawmaking process. That is the essence of the evolution
of modern international law from its classical origins
as a law that governed only a limited community of
States prior to decolonization. It is also a principle that
protects all States, especially developing countries,
from the harshness of an empirically unequal world.
Upholding international law within the context of
the maintenance of international peace and security
requires absolute adherence to Article 2 of the Charter
of the United Nations, namely, to the core principles of
the sovereign equality of States and non-interference,
the prohibition of the threat or use of force and the
obligation to settle international disputes through
recourse to peaceful methods of dispute settlement, as
prescribed in Article 33 of the Charter.
The efficacy of international law in preserving
international peace and security would require the
achievement of a global consensus, which must factor in
the hopes and aspiration of all States and not just those
of a select few. Historically, the General Assembly and
its legal committee, the Sixth Committee, have provided
a platform for the effective and equitable participation
of all States in the international norm-creating process.
Earlier today Judge Owada drew our attention
to another vital aspect and clearly underlined the
importance of the organs of the United Nations acting
in concert within their respective areas of functions,
as stipulated in the Charter. Their synergies must
be harnessed in achieving our collective goal of
maintaining international peace and security.
In today’s world, disputes that threaten the
international order have complex political and legal
dimensions. In addressing such issues, key organs
of the United Nations — the Security Council, the
General Assembly and the International Court of
Justice — can make a collective contribution and
strengthen international peace and security.
18-15180

17/05/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

The contribution that the International Court
of Justice has made over the years in the field of the
maintenance of international peace and security
has been invaluable. I want to refer particularly to
the advisory opinion of the Court on the question of
the Legality of the threat or use of nuclear weapons
(A/51/218, annex). Greater recourse to the advisory
jurisdiction of the Court in addressing critical
and complex issues with both political and legal
ramifications is an option that could be usefully
pursued in matters relating to international peace and
security. As Judge Owada pertinently observed during
today’s debate, in exercising its advisory jurisdiction,
the Court is expressing “an authentic legal opinion”
in order to clarify legal issues to the other organs of
the Organization.
Let me also take this opportunity to appeal to
Member States to recognize the invaluable work
of the main legal organ of the United Nations, the
International Law Commission, as it celebrates its
seventieth anniversary here in New York, and to pay
tribute to its invaluable contribution over the years
in the codification and progressive development of
international law. Its pioneering work on the draft
code of offences against the peace and security of
humankind and on the draft statute of an International
Criminal Court was path-breaking, and set the pace for
the current developments in the area of international
criminal responsibility. Items on its current agenda,
such as universal jurisdiction, the immunity of State
officials from foreign criminal jurisdiction and the
issue of genocide, are of particular significance in
that regard.
In conclusion, Sri Lanka wishes to draw the attention
of the Council to the challenges faced by developing
States in their full and effective participation in the
multilateral treaty-making process. That is an area
where the United Nations can and must play a crucial
role, in particular by assisting States with capacitybuilding, thereby contributing to the universality of
international lawmaking.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Government of Poland for convening
today’s important open debate.
Current challenges to peace and security facing the
world call for a strengthening of the international legal

S/PV. 8262

order and redoubled efforts at all levels to prevent and
resolve conflicts. Strict compliance with the generally
accepted norms and principles of international law
guiding inter-State relations is imperative to that
end. International law requires not just an outcome
that prevents or resolves conflicts; it requires that the
outcome be accompanied by a process that is consistent
with particular norms.
In that context, it is important that frameworks
and mechanisms for conflict prevention and conflict
settlement not be used as a tool to entrench situations
resulting from the unlawful use of force, war crimes,
crimes against humanity, acts of genocide or ethnic
cleansing. It is also critical that the international
community consistently and overwhelmingly oppose
and reject any attempts to cover up or consolidate
aggression and other illegal acts by misinterpreting
international legal norms and principles.
Serious breaches of obligations under general
international law give rise to special consequences,
among other things, the duty of States to cooperate
in order to end a serious breach by lawful means and
not to recognize as lawful a situation created by such
a breach nor render aid or assistance in maintaining
that situation.
Furthermore, apart from preventive efforts and the
peaceful settlement of disputes and conflicts as early as
possible, an effective deterrent is undoubtedly to ensure
a speedy end to impunity for violations of international
law, including international humanitarian law and
human rights law. Unfortunately, in some situations of
armed conflict, including those of a protracted nature,
wrongs left unpunished and unrecognized continue
to impede progress in achieving long-awaited peace
and reconciliation.
Special attention should be given to the
implementation of resolutions adopted by the principal
organs of the United Nations, in particular those
relating to the peaceful settlement of disputes and
conflict prevention and resolution. It is unacceptable
and intolerable that the territories of Member States
remain under unlawful military occupation and that
deliberate actions aimed at changing their demographic
composition and cultural character along racial,
ethnic or religious lines continue, Security Council
resolutions notwithstanding. The established principle
of the inadmissibility of the use of force for the
acquisition of territory and the ensuing obligation of

18-1518075/97

S/PV.8262

Maintenance of international peace and security

non-recognition of situations resulting from serious
violations of international law must be applied and
enforced universally and unconditionally.
Azerbaijan’s consistent position with regard to the
issue under consideration is well known and stems,
among other factors, from its experience from facing
armed aggression, ethnic cleansing and unlawful foreign
military occupation. In its resolutions 822 (1993), 853
(1993), 874 (1993) and 884 (1993), the Security Council
acknowledged the fact that acts of military force were
committed against Azerbaijan, that those acts were
incompatible with the Charter of the United Nations
and that they constituted violations of the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of my country. In accordance
with international law and the resolutions I have just
mentioned, the political settlement of the conflict and
the achievement of durable peace, security and stability
must be based on the immediate, unconditional and
complete withdrawal of the occupying forces from the
Nagorno Karabakh region and other occupied territories
of Azerbaijan, the restoration of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of my country and the exercise by
internally displaced Azerbaijanis of their right of return
to their homes and properties in safety and dignity.
The duties under concrete policies and actions in
that connection can in no way be replaced with halfmeasures introduced as a compromise or used as a
bargaining chip in the conflict-settlement process. The
fulfilment in good faith of the obligations assumed by
States, good-neighbourly relations based on full respect
for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States
and the inviolability of their international borders
are necessary prerequisites for the maintenance of
international and regional peace and security and are at
the core of economic cooperation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lebanon.
Ms. Mudallali (Lebanon): I would like to
congratulate Poland on its assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council, and to thank the presidency
for holding this much-needed debate at a time when we
are witnessing an erosion of multilateralism and blatant
violations of basic rules and principles of international
law, the latest example of which is the brutal killing of
civilians in Gaza.
For my country, Lebanon, international law
represents the essence of the progress of civilization
towards a multilateral rules-based system. The Charter
76/97

17/05/2018

of the United Nations in particular acts as a safeguard of
our sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence,
which is why it is important to fully and strictly adhere
to it. The key words here are “full implementation” and
“compliance”.
First, Security Council resolutions must be fully
implemented and bind all Member States. It is the
responsibility of this organ, which is entrusted with
the maintenance of peace and security, to ensure full
respect for its resolutions in order for international law
to prevail. Let us not forget that Article 24, paragraph
2, of the Charter requires the Security Council to abide
by the purposes and principles of the United Nations.
Only through faithful respect for those provisions will
we avoid double standards and selective application of
international law.
Secondly, there must be full compliance with the
judgments and advisory opinions of the International
Court of Justice, the primary judicial organ of the
United Nations and a court of universal character.
Justice is a strong guarantee for the peaceful settlement
of disputes, and the Security Council must use the
authority vested in it by Article 94 of the Charter to
give effect to decisions by the Court.
Lebanon believes that Member States should make
full use of the tools set out in Chapter VI to settle their
disputes peacefully. I would like to remind the Council
of my country’s 2016 initiative, based on the Charter of
the United Nations and paragraph 10 of resolution 1701
(2006), to seek the good offices of the Secretary-General
in the delineation of the disputed maritime border and
the exclusive economic zone between Lebanon and
Israel. It goes without saying that, absent a resolution,
this issue remains a source of conflict that could
threaten the peace and security of our region. Lebanon
has also reaffirmed its commitment to the rules and
principles of international law through its voluntary
commitment to the French-Mexican initiative and the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group’s
code of conduct, which are both aimed at preventing
and halting the commission of mass atrocity crimes.
In conclusion, it remains imperative that we achieve
universal, fair and just acceptance of the existing rules
and principles of international law, especially the
Charter, as well as their full implementation, rather
than entering into new treaties. Conversely, in the
light of the emerging concepts that are debated at the
United Nations, it is fundamental to define them or
18-15180

17/05/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

clarify their legal basis, so as to prevent or limit their
politicization. International law is a precious asset that
we must fully protect.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cuba.
Mrs. Rodríguez Camejo (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the holding of today’s open debate, which
is highly relevant in the context of the current state of
international relations.
Cuba aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
Violating universally recognized principles of
international law threatens international peace and
security. The threat of the use of force and the unilateral
use of force against sovereign States, interventions and
actions aimed at imposing regime change and unilateral
coercive measures all undermine international law and
international peace and security. It is very regrettable
that the Security Council, owing to the repeated
obstruction of one of its members, has not been able to
guarantee respect for international law and international
humanitarian law in relation to the Palestinian
question, particularly the massacre committed by the
Israeli army against a peaceful political demonstration,
which left dozens dead and thousands wounded. It is
unacceptable that the Council should remain indifferent
when unilateral actions are taken, such as the attack
by the United States and some of its allies on military
and civilian installations in the Syrian Arab Republic
on 13 April. Furthermore, ignoring the commitments
it has made and showing profound disrespect for
international standards, the United States Government
has announced its withdrawal from international
agreements relevant to humankind.
As nations united, we are responsible for the
preservation and defence of international law.
Cuba reiterates its firm commitment to respecting
international law as enshrined in the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, such
as multilateralism and the international system that we
have built within the framework of the United Nations.
The principles of international law enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations — essentially, sovereign
equality among States; respect for national sovereignty,
territorial integrity and the political independence of
States; non-intervention in affairs that fall under the

S/PV. 8262

domestic jurisdiction of States; refraining from the
threat or the use of force; and the peaceful settlement
of disputes, as set out in the Declaration on Principles
of International Law concerning Friendly Relations
and Cooperation among States in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations — must continue to form
the basis of international law and at all times guide the
actions of States and the development of the rule of
law. Strict compliance with those principles and with
international obligations that have been undertaken is
the essence of the promotion of international law.
Cuba rejects attempts to apply concepts that are not
universally recognized and that some seek to establish
as principles of international law, such as limited
sovereignty, humanitarian intervention, preventive war
and the responsibility to protect in the face of atrocities,
which are used to further agendas of domination and to
whitewash aggressive actions and interventions.
The promotion and strengthening of international
law is based on the recognition of, and full respect for,
the sovereign right of peoples to choose their political,
economic, social and cultural systems and to create the
legal and democratic institutions that are best suited to
their sociopolitical and cultural interests, as well as the
recognition of those institutions by the international
community. Attempts to impose laws and institutions
by means of certain preconceived notions hatched in the
centres of power, the promulgation and application of
extraterritorial laws, the politically motivated exercise
of jurisdiction by national or international tribunals,
and distortion or double standards on issues of global
importance not only undermine existing laws, but make
them inapplicable.
Cuba condemns all attempts to supplant or replace
national authorities in their efforts to strengthen their
respective political, economic and legal systems and the
functioning of their institutions. Any United Nations
initiative aimed at strengthening national institutions
must respect the purposes and principles of the Charter,
abide by the framework of the approved mandate,
comply with the principles of neutrality, impartiality,
State consent, national ownership and should not
impose any preconditions or political pressure.
The reform of the United Nations, which is aimed
at building a truly democratic and participatory
Organization, with a transparent and democratic
Security Council and a revitalized General Assembly
playing a central role and occupying a pivotal position,

18-1518077/97

S/PV.8262

Maintenance of international peace and security

and which supports States in independently building
the future that each nation decides for itself, is an
essential ingredient in ensuring the preservation of
international law.
Both at the national and international levels, systems
of norms and institutions are needed to guarantee the
full participation of all peoples and every human being
in the adoption of decisions that affect them and in the
implementation of programmes and policies aimed at
promoting and strengthening equity and social justice,
as well as the enjoyment of all rights by all peoples
and individuals.
Cuba reiterates its unwavering commitment to
continuing to work with other Member States and
the United Nations to establish a democratic and
just international order that responds to the demand
for peace, development and justice of the peoples of
the world and that guarantees the preservation and
strengthening of international law.
We will continue to promote the Proclamation of
Latin America and the Caribbean as a Zone of Peace,
which was signed in 2014 in Havana at the second Summit
of Heads of State and Government of the Community
of Latin American and Caribbean States, and which
demands that the Member States of the international
community fully respect that Proclamation in their
relations with the member States of the Community of
Latin American and Caribbean States.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Croatia.
Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): I want to thank the Polish
presidency for holding this open debate on this highly
important topic. The multitude of speakers today is
testimony to that importance.
Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union, and I will add
some remarks from our national point of view.
Upholding international law and adhering to and
faithfully implementing its rules and principles are
practices that play an indispensable role in lasting
peace and security worldwide and to which we are
deeply attached. Negligence and rejection of the rule
of law weaken State institutions and undermine their
independence, impartiality and effectiveness. Croatia
places great emphasis on peace, justice and strong
institutions as an inseparable part of all three United
78/97

17/05/2018

Nations pillars. That is as important for peace as it is for
development, economic prosperity and human rights.
We believe that all disputes should be resolved
through peaceful means and in conformity with
international law. In addressing crises across the globe,
our focus should be on early warning, prevention and
diplomacy. While a consistent approach to conflicts by
the United Nations, and in particular by the Security
Council, is essential for the Organization’s credibility,
copied-and-pasted, one-size-fits-all approaches are not
the most effective way to proceed. In understanding
the situation and risks on the ground, we must above
all draw on the knowledge and experience of local
populations, neighbouring countries and regional
organizations. Respect for the legal traditions of every
Member State is an essential part of that.
Croatia believes that when addressing conflicts and
crises it is important to have a global, comprehensive
approach based on solidarity and a coordinated
international effort under strong United Nations
leadership. Such an approach would include political,
humanitarian, socioeconomic, stabilization and security
elements, and reconstruction goes hand in hand with an
efficient judiciary and a culture of accountability.
Croatia recognizes the critical importance
of the rule of law in post-conflict peacebuilding,
peacekeeping and conflict prevention activities, and
fully supports greater coherence and mobilization of
the United Nations system-wide expertise on that issue.
We continue to promote the centrality of the rule of
law in the daily efforts of conflict-affected countries
to ensure sustainable peace and development. As
a victim of aggression in the first half of the 1990s,
Croatia has gained an in-depth understanding and
first-hand knowledge of peacebuilding and post-war
recovery in all its aspects. We stand ready to share that
valuable experience.
Croatia strongly supports the full and unequivocal
implementation of all applicable rules of international
humanitarian law and criminal law, as well as all
efforts aimed at ending the culture of impunity, which
includes, among others elements, the full investigation
and punishment of all atrocities. Accountability for
crimes is extraordinarily pertinent to our times.
Croatia greatly values the contributions of
international courts and tribunals in advancing the
rule of law at the international and national levels. In
that context, we particularly stress the importance of
18-15180

17/05/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

scrupulous interpretation and rigorous application of
existing international humanitarian law in the processes
in front of those bodies, as well as strict observance of
due process guarantees. Only justice that is sufficiently
expeditious and competent beyond any doubt can
bring relief to the victims, rigorously confront the
perpetrators with their deeds and ensure responsibility.
As a State party to the Rome Statute, Croatia strongly
supports the work of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) and invites all stakeholders to be accountable
for their commitments to the ICC. As a member of the
Human Rights Council, we advocate strengthening its
links with the Security Council. We also acknowledge
the importance of the principle of the responsibility to
protect. We welcome the establishment of the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism, as it is evident
that there is a real need for strategic coordination and
leadership for our global counter-terrorism efforts.
In conclusion, the United Nations plays a central
role in cases of flagrant violations of international law,
including the judicial settlement of disputes through the
International Court of Justice. In our view, with regard
to strengthening respect for international obligations,
which are critical for the maintenance of peace and
security, it is crucial to have unity among all members
of the Security Council. Organizing Arria Formula
meetings of the Council with relevant persons or global
non-governmental organizations and open debates
on specific topics, such as today’s, can contribute to
that goal.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cyprus.
Mr. Menelaou (Cyprus): At the outset, I would
like to commend the Polish presidency for convening
this timely open debate on upholding international
law within the context of the maintenance of peace
and security.
Cyprus aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union and
wishes to make some additional remarks in its
national capacity.
International law and the Security Council are
inextricably linked. The United Nations is founded
on a legal instrument, the Charter of the United
Nations, and all of its activities are based on the legal
authority that instrument provides. The action of the
Security Council itself has important international

S/PV. 8262

legal implications, such as those related to resolutions
adopted under Chapter VII of the Charter. Despite being
legally binding, Council resolutions are unfortunately
not always upheld. Council resolutions on Cyprus, for
example, continue to be systematically violated.
It remains our conviction, particularly when
dealing with matters of peace and security, that the
obligation to act in accordance with the Charter, and
with international law in general, has the power not
only to prevent conflict but also to resolve it. In the
case of Cyprus, if the rules of international law had
not been violated by Turkey, the Cyprus problem
would not have arisen. If those rules were applied
today — in other words, if Turkey had implemented
what it preaches — the main aspects of the problem,
especially the international aspects, which form the
heart of the issue, could be resolved fairly for all parties
concerned and in the interest of international peace.
The Republic of Cyprus remains unequivocally
committed to the principle of the peaceful settlement
of disputes. Two examples of that are its steadfast
commitment and continued support to the United
Nations-brokered peace process in Cyprus and its
acceptance of the compulsory jurisdiction of the
International Court of Justice. That commitment is also
the cornerstone of our policy of trilateral partnerships,
which we have established with our neighbouring
countries — Greece, Israel, Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon
and Palestine — founded on our adherence to the
need for stability and good-neighbourly relations as
the bedrock for peace and prosperity for all countries
and peoples in the extremely volatile region of the
Eastern Mediterranean.
Turning to the maritime domain, the same
adherence to international law, as reflected in the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
(UNCLOS), has the potential to both prevent and
to resolve maritime conflict. With its universal and
unified character, the Convention effectively regulates
all activities in the largest space on the planet by setting
out the legal framework within which all activities
in the seas must be carried out. Considering that the
UNCLOS provisions reflect customary international
law, and are therefore binding on all States, we urge
States to act in conformity with the Convention and
refrain from actions in violation of Article 2, paragraph
4, of the Charter — prohibiting the threat and the
use of force and promote the peaceful settlement of
maritime disputes.

18-1518079/97

S/PV.8262

Maintenance of international peace and security

Turkey’s actions in the Eastern Mediterranean have
escalated to the threat of use of force. They interfere
with the authority of Cyprus to exercise its inherent
and inalienable sovereign rights to explore and exploit
its offshore natural resources, and they constitute
a striking example of Turkey’s gunboat-diplomacy
methods, thereby endangering the peace and security
of the region.
While acknowledging the role of the veto as a
tool that can provide the needed checks and balances
among major international actors, Cyprus reiterates its
unequivocal support for the code of conduct regarding
Security Council action against genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes. We also welcome the
historic activation of the jurisdiction of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) over the crime of aggression as
of 17 July, thereby allowing ICC action following a
referral by the Security Council. It is significant that by
virtue of its mandate, the Council will be able to do so
without restrictions and with respect to all States. We
see that development as eventually contributing to the
suppression of acts of aggression, cited in Article 1 of the
Charter as a primary purpose of the United Nations. We
also seize this opportunity to encourage the ratification
and implementation of the updated version of the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court.
Moreover, with regard to recent developments, we
are seriously concerned about attempts to open the door
of Article 51 of the Charter to the threat of terrorism
in response to armed attacks perpetrated by non-State
actors, which carries the potential for escalating
violence and abusive invocations of self-defence.
Lastly, the Republic of Cyprus is concerned
with the serious escalation of the situation in Gaza,
resulting in loss of life. The situation puts into even
sharper focus the imperative need for the two sides
to resume negotiations for a peaceful resolution to
the Palestinian-Israeli conflict in the framework of
the two-State solution, which will be to the benefit
of both Palestinians and Israelis and will contribute
significantly towards peace and security for the
whole region. Cyprus maintains the position that the
final status of Jerusalem is to be determined through
negotiations on the basis of Council resolutions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey
80/97

17/05/2018

Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this timely open debate on such a
significant topic for the Security Council and beyond.
Today’s discussion cannot be addressed merely in
a conceptual manner. International law continues to be
violated in several conflicts around the world, resulting
in immense human suffering. Unfortunately, however,
current Council dynamics do not allow for a meaningful
discussion on upholding international law. That is most
visible on critical issues such as Palestine and Syria. As
a result, the Council simply cannot adequately deliver
on its primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Pursuant to Article 24 of the Charter of the United
Nations, the primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security has been entrusted
to the Security Council by the States Members of
the United Nations “in order to ensure prompt and
effective action”. The Council’s failure to carry out that
responsibility on behalf of the whole membership is
therefore a serious blow to international law. Addressing
crises only when situations deteriorate is not how the
Council should uphold international law. Resorting to
the use of the veto as a tool to advance national interests
is not how the Council sets the record right in the face
of those who continuously violate their obligations.
Those examples only undermine the credibility of
the Council and the rules-based international order that
we have established together. Effectively upholding
international law requires that there be no impunity for
its violations. Unless we consistently call to account
those who violate their obligations, the credibility of
the United Nations will continue to be tarnished. The
absence of an accountability mechanism for inaction by
the Council also emboldens those who do not refrain
from breaching international law. That is in stark
contradiction with the letter and the spirit of the Charter.
We welcome initiatives aimed at limiting negative
votes by both permanent and elected members in
cases of mass atrocities. The initiatives by France
and Mexico, as well as Liechtenstein on behalf of the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group,
are steps in the right direction.
It is also worth noting that the Council’s failure
to act has activated the General Assembly on several
instances. The lack of action by the Council with
respect to Syria led the General Assembly to create the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
18-15180

17/05/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

for Syria. That is another illustration of Member States’
strong commitment to accountability for the crimes
committed in Syria. Such action can be replicated on
issues where much-needed Council action is lacking.
The Council also has a special role to play in the
promotion of international law. Some of its actions,
such as resolutions adopted under Chapter VII of the
Charter or the establishment of ad hoc tribunals and
sanctions, have implications for international law. The
Council has taken decisive steps in that regard in the
past. Turkey has been a supporter of those mechanisms,
which contributed to the fight against impunity as
well as to the restoration of peace and stability. More
recently, resolution 2379 (2017), on the creation of
an Investigative Team to hold Da’esh accountable
for its actions in Iraq, is a welcome development.
Turkeywas a sponsor of the resolution and hopes to see
it fully implemented.
In the context of maintaining international peace and
security, the Charter of the United Nations underlines
the sovereign equality of States, the prohibition of the
use of force, the legitimate and inherent right to selfdefence, enshrined in Article 51, and the peaceful
settlement of disputes. In that regard, the Charter
prescribes that the Security Council shall call on the
parties to settle their disputes by peaceful means, such
as negotiation, mediation and others. We are convinced
that we should do more to prevent conflicts. For that, we
have to intervene at the early stages. Resorting to wider
and more effective use of mediation can prove helpful.
The Secretary-General has been very vocal about the
importance of the role of prevention and mediation
since he took office, and we fully support his vision.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that
safeguarding international law in conformity with the
principle of pacta sunt servanda has been a key foreign
policy priority for Turkey. We have also contributed
to its development through our participation in the
International Law Commission, which will mark its
seventieth anniversary next week. Today’s debate
illustrates the keen interest of the wider membership
in this matter. The Council should assume its
responsibilities accordingly. Turkey remains ready to
further engage in this discussion.
I would now like to respond to the statement made
by the speaker who preceded me. The name of my
country was mentioned several times in the context
of Security Council resolutions and international

S/PV. 8262

law. First, I would like to underline that the country
in question violated the agreement that led to its
foundation by beginning ethnic cleansing on the island
between 1963 and 1974 with the aim of eliminating the
Turkish community. It was as a result of the ethniccleansing campaign pursued by that country that
Turkey exercised its right to intervene under the Treaty
of Guarantee between Turkey, Greece and the United
Kingdom, and established the current status quo. Since
then, talks have been held on the settlement of the
ongoing Cyprus issue. We will continue to defend the
rights of Turkish Cypriots in that respect.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Namibia.
Ms. Scott (Namibia): At the outset, we would like
to commend the Polish presidency for presiding over the
Security Council during the month of May and to thank
it for convening today’s open debate, focused on the
maintenance of international law, peace and security.
We would also like to thank the briefers.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement to
be delivered by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
As mentioned in the concept note (S/2018/417/
Rev.1, annex), the Preamble to the Charter of the
United Nations states that the United Nations seeks to
establish conditions under which justice and respect
for the obligations arising from treaties and other
sources of international law can be maintained. For a
small country such as ours, in order to ensure equity
and justice, there are few options besides insisting on
the maintenance of international law. Article 96 of the
Namibian Constitution states that our international
relations foster respect for international law and
treaty obligations. As a child of the international
community and a product of the successful application
of international law, that is a fundamental aspect for the
implementation of our foreign policy.
Namibia’s independence in 1990 came at a great
price and meant that families were split for many
years, resulting in deep divisions in our society. Yet
our policy of reconciliation, and the application of
international law in our own country and in the face
of tremendous odds, has resulted in both independence
and development, even when we have not always
agreed politically. For that reason, and in accordance
with our firm commitment to regional peace, when

18-1518081/97

S/PV.8262

Maintenance of international peace and security

Namibia and Botswana found ourselves in a territorial
dispute, our first reaction was to take the matter to the
International Court of Justice. We were committed to
accepting the outcome of that judgment. In addition,
our two Presidents, on 5 February, signed a boundary
treaty to reaffirm our common boundary and commit to
cooperation on transboundary issues. Namibia therefore
reaffirms its commitment to the promotion of the
peaceful settlement of disputes, in accordance with the
provisions of the Charter as well as with international
law and the relevant United Nations resolutions.
It is our belief that international peace and security
must be sought and guaranteed through the multilateral
system. Since we joined the United Nations, Namibia
has actively and constructively engaged, supported
and participated in the various functions of the United
Nations system, including peacekeeping operations.
We will continue to do so. In that spirit, we call on
States to address abuses of human rights and violations
of treaties and protocols. We call on all States to respect
agreed-upon United Nations processes.
The reprehensible events in Gaza and Israel this
week have been a stark reminder of the need to uphold
international law as it pertains not only to territorial
disagreements but also to humanitarian law and human
rights law. Indeed, the application of international law
is a foundation for peaceful relations and coexistence.
Finally, I want to stress that, in order to promote
the peaceful settlement of disputes, the United Nations
should continue to forge stronger relations with
regional and subregional organizations, particularly the
African Union. We welcome the enhanced cooperation
between the African Union and the United Nations in
peacekeeping in Africa, and underscore the important
role of regional and subregional arrangements in
promoting international law and peace and security.

17/05/2018

gratitude to his delegation for organizing this open
debate on such an important topic and for drafting the
concept note (S/2018/417/Rev.1, annex).
Approximately one month ago, the Coordinating
Bureau of the Movement issued a communiqué that in
due course was transmitted to the member States of
the Security Council. The communiqué reaffirmed the
validity of the purposes and principles enshrined in the
Charter of the Nations and the norms of international
law, as well as our unwavering commitment to the
peaceful settlement of disputes, in accordance with
Article 2 and Chapter VI of the Charter of the United
Nations and the provisions of General Assembly
resolution 2625 (XXV), of 24 October 1970, which are
key elements in both preventing and ending conflicts,
including prolonged conflicts.
In that respect, we would like to take this
opportunity to commend the role of the International
Court of Justice in fostering the pacific settlement of
international disputes under the relevant provisions of
the Charter of the United Nations and the Statute of the
Court, in particular Articles 33 and 94 of the Charter,
while at the same time we urge the Security Council to
make greater use of the Court as a source of advisory
opinions and interpretations of the relevant norms of
international law and controversial issues. In addition,
we urge the Council to consider having its decisions
reviewed by the Court, given the need to ensure its
compliance with the Charter of the United Nations and
international law.

Mr. Suárez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): It is an honour for the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to speak on behalf of
the 120 Member States that make up the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries (NAM).

NAM reaffirms its commitment to the promotion of
the pacific settlement of disputes under the provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations, the entire corpus
of international law and the relevant United Nations
resolutions, including those adopted by the Council,
which are legally binding for every State Member of
the Organization and are intended to contribute to
strengthening international peace and security and save
future generations from the scourge of war and armed
conflicts, by bolstering the role of the United Nations
in the pacific resolution of disputes, the prevention and
settlement of conflicts, the establishment of trust and
national reconciliation, post-conflict peacebuilding,
rehabilitation, reconstruction and development.

First of all, on behalf of the States members of
the Movement, we would like to pay our respects to
His Excellency Mr. Andrzej Duda, President of the
Republic of Poland. We should also like to express our

In that connection, we reiterate our full willingness
to ramp up the role of the Movement as an anti-war and
peace-loving force. To that end, it is critically important
to defend international law, which is the only shield

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.

82/97

18-15180

17/05/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

that we, the small developing countries of the South,
can count on to protect ourselves against new threats
and the emerging multiple and complex challenges
that we face today, including acts of aggression by
imperial Powers. Similarly, in the context of the
maintenance of international peace and security and
the prevention of armed conflicts, there should be no
exceptions. International law must always be protected
and respected. Likewise, in cases in which violations
of international law occur — as stated in the concept
note for this debate — those responsible must be held
accountable so as to prevent any recurrence of violations
and find a path towards sustainable peace, justice, truth
and reconciliation. Otherwise, impunity will run amok
and perpetrators will be effectively encouraged to
continue the commission of their crimes.
During the eighteenth mid-term ministerial
conference of the Non-Aligned Movement, the
Ministers stressed that the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and the principles and
norms of international law are essential to maintaining
and promoting peace and security, the rule of law,
economic development and social progress, as well as
human rights for all. In that context, they agreed that
the States Members of the United Nations, including
the members of the Security Council, must renew
their commitment to respecting, defending, preserving
and promoting the Charter of the United Nations and
international law with the goal of forging ahead until
full respect for international law is achieved. On that
occasion, they also emphasized that strict observance
of the principles of international law and compliance in
good faith with the obligations assumed by States under
the Charter is of vital importance for the maintenance
of international peace and security. Additionally, they
reaffirmed that NAM member States must respect the
territorial integrity, sovereignty, political independence
and inviolability of the international borders of
Member States.
The States members of the Movement also
reaffirmed their commitment to refraining from
recognizing, adopting or implementing illegal,
coercive, extraterritorial or unilateral measures and
laws — including unilaterally imposed economic
sanctions, intimidation measures and arbitrary
restrictions on travel — whose purpose is to pressure
non-aligned countries while threatening their
independence, sovereignty and freedom of trade and
investment and preventing them from exercising their

S/PV. 8262

right to decide, of their own volition, their own political,
economic and social systems, when such measures
and laws constitute flagrant violations of the Charter,
international law and the multilateral trading system,
as well as the norms and principles that govern friendly
relations among States. In that regard, we reaffirm our
opposition and condemnation of such measures and laws
and their continued implementation and enforcement,
and we ask States that apply such measures and laws to
revoke them immediately and in full.
Lastly, NAM would like to take this opportunity
to appeal to the international community to keep its
promise with the peoples of the United Nations, as
enshrined in the founding Charter of the Organization,
in which we affirmed our commitment to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war, which
twice in our lifetime has brought untold sorrow to
humankind. Let us redouble our efforts and show our
true political will so as to make peace a reality and not
a mere pipe dream, as part of our collective efforts to
create a prosperous and peaceful world,
In our national capacity, we would like to take
this opportunity on behalf of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela to reaffirm our full commitment to
the promotion and defence of international law.
Accordingly, before this organ, entrusted with ensuring
the maintenance of international peace and security,
Venezuela condemns the systematic campaign of acts
of aggression that the United States regime is waging
against our country. The adoption and implementation
of unilateral coercive measures, including even the
threat of military intervention, are in flagrant violation
of the norms of international law, as well as the purposes
and principles of the Charter, and are intended not only
to try to destabilize Venezuelan society and institutions
but to destroy democracy in our country.
Today we therefore affirm that only the United
States regime, with the current Administration’s
warmongering, supremacist, discriminatory, racist
and interventionist policy, represents a real threat to
peace and regional and international stability. How
can a country lacking any shred of authority purport
to set an example and try to assign itself the role of the
world’s policeman, which no one has conferred upon
it, while trampling on decisions made by this organ?
International law clearly establishes the principle of
the legal equality of States. The United States is not
above any sovereign State and must strictly respect its
obligations under international law.

18-1518083/97

S/PV.8262

Maintenance of international peace and security

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Viet Nam.
Mrs. Nguyen (Viet Nam): Allow me, at the outset,
to thank the President of the Republic of Poland and
his delegation for organizing today’s very important
open debate. I would also like to express my sincere
appreciation to the briefers for their valuable insights.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
just delivered by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries. I would like to make three
points in my national capacity.
First, international law plays an indispensable
role in preserving the rules-based international order.
However, we are now facing acute challenges in
achieving full respect for international law. Flagrant
violations of international law have been seen in many
parts of the world, including power politics, unilateral
measures, violations of the sovereignty, political
independence and territorial integrity of States and
the threat of use or use of force. In that context, the
Security Council needs to further uphold the full
implementation of and compliance with international
law, including humanitarian and human rights law, and
strengthen the role and validity of international law in
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Secondly, it is the obligation of each and every
State to peacefully resolve disputes in accordance with
international law. That main principle of international
law is clearly set forth in Chapter VI of the Charter of
the United Nations, which provides for diplomatic and
legal measures and processes with a view to achieving
the pacific settlement of disputes. We would also like
to highlight the importance of international judicial
institutions in maintaining the rules-based international
order and resolving disputes among States.
Thirdly, regional organizations play a crucial
role in the maintenance of regional and international
peace and security through various effective means,
including the promotion of the peaceful settlement of
conflicts, mediation, inquiry, preventive diplomacy,
confidence-building measures and mutually beneficial
partnerships. The Security Council should make full
use of, encourage and further enhance cooperation with,
regional organizations in solving disputes, preserving
peace and preventing conflicts.
84/97

17/05/2018

In our region, the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations has made great contributions to strengthening
dialogue,
fostering
friendly
and
cooperative
environments and promoting peaceful solutions to the
disputes in the East Sea — also called the South China
Sea — in accordance with international law, the United
Nations Charter and the United Nations Convention of
the Law of the Sea, and at the same time ensuring the
implementation of the Declaration on the Conduct of
Parties in the South China Sea in its entirety and the
early conclusion of an effective and legally binding
code of conduct.
Wars and conflicts remain unresolved mainly
because international law has not been observed. More
than ever before, we should renew our commitment to
the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations and the norms of international law.
In conclusion, as a candidate for a non-permanent
seat on the Security Council for the term 2020-2021,
Viet Nam will spare no effort to uphold international
law and make contributions to the Council’s noble
endeavours to maintain international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Portugal.
Mr. Duarte Lopes (Portugal): Portugal aligns
itself with the statement delivered earlier on behalf of
the European Union.
I would like to congratulate Poland on choosing
this particular topic for an open debate at the Security
Council. Reflecting on how respect for international law
affects peace and security is relevant for the success of
the United Nations. International law is not merely a set
of rules and mechanisms aimed at prescribing conduct
and settling disputes. It also embodies a powerful
ethical discourse and, as such, is an important referent
for action as well as a tool of international progress.
The Charter of the United Nations, itself an
international legal instrument, confers on the United
Nations the fundamental responsibility to maintain
international peace and security. But it also affirms
that measures to fulfil that mission must be taken
in conformity with the principles of justice and
international law. The Security Council, a collective
organ for collective action, is therefore not only bound to
act in accordance with the applicable international law,
but also has an important responsibility to promote and
contribute to respect for international law. That is not a
18-15180

17/05/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

simple abstraction; it is in fact a condition of success for
its crucial mission in maintaining international peace
and security. Allow me to share some quick thoughts
on how, in our view, the Security Council can increase
its contribution to international peace and security by
upholding international law through concrete steps.
Portugal considers that the Security Council can
further promote recourse to methods for the pacific
settlement of disputes, including negotiation, inquiry,
mediation, conciliation, arbitration, judicial settlement
and use of regional mechanisms, as provided for in
Chapter VI of the Charter. Portugal also considers that
when acting under Chapter VII, the Security Council
could reinforce its legitimacy by clearly stating the
reasons for which it understands that a given event is
a threat or breach of the peace or an act of aggression.
Those are concepts for which international law provides
useful guidance.
Regarding respect for international obligations, a
closer monitoring of the implementation of Security
Council resolutions can certainly help in preventing
future violations of international law. The emergence
of new and interlinked types of global threats, such
as climate change, new typologies of conflicts,
transnational organized crime or terrorism, must also
be kept in mind, as it may be necessary to further
develop the existing legal framework in order to better
deal with new challenges.
Upholding accountability is a never-ending
challenge for the United Nations and each and every
Member State. Portugal considers that despite the
progress that has been made in the past few decades,
the current accountability framework can be further
improved. Although the Council is not, and should
not be, a judicial organ, it can contribute to ensuring
accountability, including by referring situations
to the International Criminal Court or mandating
peacekeeping operations to help in investigations or the
arrest of those responsible for the most serious crimes
of international concern. In the same vein, restraint
on the part of the permanent members from the use of
veto, at least when crimes of genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes are committed, would be a
very important step.
In conclusion, although the international context is
now quite different from what it was in 1945, the need
for the United Nations, and the Council in particular, to
be at the very heart of international peace and security

S/PV. 8262

is ever more acute. Respect for international law is at
the core of that effort, both as the reason for and purpose
of United Nations action.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United Arab Emirates.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I
congratulate Poland on its presidency of the Security
Council this month and for giving due attention to
the critical question of respecting and upholding
international law. The late hour this evening shows
the membership’s high level of interest in this very
important subject. We thank Chef de Cabinet Viotti,
Judge Owada and Judge Meron for their informative
briefings this morning.
The United Arab Emirates chose to participate in
today’s open debate because the foundational principles
that underpin the Charter of the United Nations and
the wider body of international law also form the
backbone of the our foreign policy. For small States,
the multilateral rules-based system and international
law are vital because they ensure us equal rights as part
of the community of nations and protect us all from the
abuse of power and hegemony of a few.
As such, the United Arab Emirates is deeply troubled
that respect for international law is faltering around the
world. A world without a rules-based international order
is one filled with chaos and instability, where rogue
actors disregard international norms with impunity,
the system of trusted relationships between countries is
broken and the most vulnerable in every society are left
to suffer without recourse to justice.
Nowhere is respect for international law being
challenged more than in the Middle East, which is where
I will focus my remarks this evening. Developments in
our region this week in particular affirm that fact. The
tragedy in Gaza escalated on 14 May and resulted in the
abhorrent murder of more than 60 innocent civilians,
perpetrated by a State Member of the United Nations. The
lives of the victims — men, women and children — are
no less human than those of anyone else in the Council
or in any Member State. But the Council’s inaction has
made it appear as though somehow they are less human
and that they suffer and mourn their losses differently.
No one has the right to dehumanize any people that way.
The most recent acts on the Gaza border violate multiple
rules of international humanitarian law and cannot be
condoned or ignored by the international community.
Moreover, Israel’s settlement activity in the occupied

18-1518085/97

S/PV.8262

Maintenance of international peace and security

17/05/2018

Palestinian territories continues to defy international
law and numerous Security Council resolutions.

in need, while conducting operations at the request of
the legitimate Government of Yemen.

The United Arab Emirates believes that Israeli
and Palestinian people both have the right to secure
statehood. But when the Council’s resolutions on the
matter are repeatedly ignored and innocent human life is
recklessly and violently taken, the fabric of international
law and the international framework that could make
that aspiration possible is thoroughly weakened.

The United Arab Emirates acknowledges President
Duda’s statement earlier today, in which he noted that
Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations is
the most useful tool at the international community’s
disposal in cases of disagreements and imminent
conflict. And the Polish presidency has asked for
practical recommendations from Member States for
today’s discussion. To better uphold Chapter VI, the
United Arab Emirates proposes that the Security
Council request a report by the Secretary-General on
the various modalities of dispute settlement included
in it. Such a report would be a resource for all Member
States and would outline the use and practice of such
modalities in mitigating disputes that have come before
the United Nations and other United Nations system
entities, lessons learned that can be employed in present
and future disputes and used as a guide for Member
States in applying such modalities.

It is not just in Palestine that international law is
being flouted. For seven years now, the Syrian people
have suffered chemical-weapon attacks and been
denied humanitarian aid. These are grave violations of
international humanitarian law. We call on all parties
to the conflict to cease such behaviour and for the
perpetrators to be held to account. Given the Security
Council inaction on Syria, the United Arab Emirates
supports the code of conduct of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group that calls on
Council members not to vote against any credible draft
resolution intended to prevent or halt mass atrocities.
Not just in Syria but throughout the Middle East,
Iran is flouting international law and Security Council
sanctions regimes in pursuit of its agenda of regional
hegemony. Iran’s behaviour violates the fundamental
international legal principle of non-intervention. Its
support for terrorist groups in our region is in violation
of numerous Security Council resolutions. The United
States recently recognized that fact by withdrawing
from the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, and other
countries should also hold Iran to similar standards.
Lastly, the financing and support of extremism and
terrorism persist in our region and around the world,
threatening the rule of law. All countries that engage
in such behaviour should be held accountable through
Security Council resolutions and the monitoring of
financial flows. If they are not held accountable by the
international community, States have the sovereign
right to act independently to defend their own security,
as we and our partners in the region have done.
Fundamentally, the rules and norms that make
up the body of international law are only as strong
as the commitment of all States to defending and
upholding them. That is why the United Arab Emirates
stands ready to do its part in reinforcing the pillars of
international law, including improving our own efforts
to practice what we preach. In Yemen, we will continue
to do our utmost to ensure that aid reaches those most
86/97

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ghana.
Mrs. Pobee (Ghana): My delegation joins others in
expressing appreciation to His Excellency Mr. Andrzej
Duda, President of the Republic of Poland, and his
delegation for convening today’s open debate on the
theme of upholding international law within the context
of the maintenance of international peace and security.
We are grateful for the briefings delivered by Ms. Maria
Luiza Ribeiro Viotti on behalf of the Secretary-General,
and by Judges Hisashi Owada and Theodor Meron.
It is significant that today’s debate comes in
the wake of the high-level event on sustaining peace
convened by the General Assembly in April (see A/72/
PV.83-87). Today’s debate once again reinforces the
need to seek integrated approaches to the maintenance
of international peace and security, while highlighting
the political, developmental, human rights, rule-of-law
and justice dimensions of peace and security.
Respect for international law, as an essential tool
for preventing conflict, conflict resolution and in
building sustainable peace is most critical given the
current complex and multidimensional threats to peace
and security. There is therefore an urgent need for a
renewed commitment by all Member States to respecting
international law in order to ensure that this tool can
be effectively utilized for the maintenance of peace
and security. Respect for a rules-based international
18-15180

17/05/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

system, as provided for in the Charter of the United
Nations, international human rights law, international
humanitarian law and international criminal law, is the
responsibility of all Member States, without exception.
In meeting that responsibility, we must take every
opportunity to promote and enhance the prospects
for the pacific settlement of disputes, using binding
legal procedures, in accordance with Chapter VII of
the Charter, and all available mechanisms, including
conciliation, arbitration, negotiation, mediation and
judicial settlement.
In contributing to today’s important debate, Ghana
wishes to make the following recommendations on
the subject.
First, we need increased capacity-building at the
national level in order to enhance wider appreciation
and respect for international obligations in the context
of peace and security. The United Nations Programme
of Assistance for the Teaching, Study, Dissemination
and Wider Appreciation of International Law, which
has been in existence for approximately 50 years,
could be instrumental in those efforts and should be
supported and enhanced.
Secondly, the Security Council should increasingly
draw on existing judicial institutions of international
law, such as the International Court of Justice, and
make greater use of the Court as a source of advisory
opinions for the interpretation of the relevant norms of
international law and on controversial issues.
Thirdly, the international community must do
more to ensure accountability for international crimes,
including genocide, war crimes and crimes against
humanity, through the use of commissions of inquiry
and referrals to the International Criminal Court in an
effort to end impunity, bring perpetrators to justice and
serve as a deterrent.
Fourthly, there should be continuing close
collaboration between the Security Council and the
relevant organs and agencies of the United Nations
system to ensure the sustainability of rule-of-law
measures, especially in peacebuilding in postconflict situations.
Fifthly, we advocate strengthening the relationship
and cooperation between the United Nations and
regional arrangements or agencies in the peaceful
settlement of disputes. That cannot be overemphasized.
Ghana’s working paper on how to bridge gaps in

S/PV. 8262

regional arrangements is currently under consideration
by the Sixth Committee. We look forward to working
with all Member States to fine-tune those proposals.
Lastly, we urge renewed commitment to collective
security, which rests on full respect for international
law and the equality of all Member States and on our
resolve to avoid unilateral actions in addressing threats
to peace.
In conclusion, I want to take this opportunity to
reaffirm Ghana’s commitment to promoting respect
for international law and to playing its role in global
and regional efforts in the maintenance of international
peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Armenia.
Mr. Margaryan (Armenia): Armenia expresses
its appreciation to the Polish presidency of the
Security Council for initiating today’s debate and
providing us with an interesting and targeted concept
note (S/2018/417/Rev.1, annex). The presence of His
Excellency Mr. Andrzej Duda, President of the Republic
of Poland, and his presiding over the Council’s debate
earlier today underscore the high importance of the
agenda item under discussion. We also thank the Chef
de Cabinet of the Secretary-General and the Judges of
the International Court of Justice and the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals for their
comprehensive briefings.
Today’s meeting is also an invitation to discuss how
to advance the peaceful settlement of conflicts based
on the tenets of international law, while addressing
complex challenges resulting from violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
Armenia believes that the norms and principles of
international law should be upheld in their entirety
and that they remain relevant and crucial for the
preservation of international peace and security. The
essence, root causes and principles of resolution of
each conflict and crisis are unique. Attempts to create
one-size-fits-all approaches ignore the specificities of
particular conflicts and are counterproductive.
Equal rights and self-determination for peoples are
fundamental principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations. The right to self-determination by freely
determining one’s political status and freely pursuing
one’s economic, social and cultural development
belongs to all peoples and is also embedded in both

18-1518087/97

S/PV.8262

Maintenance of international peace and security

the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights and the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights. Adherence to international
humanitarian law and human rights law should be
consistently promoted in the context of the prevention
of conflict and massive and serious violations that
result in war crimes, crimes against humanity or the
heinous crime of genocide.
Prevention requires both early warning and early
action. The denial of past crimes, including the crime of
genocide, impunity, discrimination against particularly
vulnerable groups and the prevalence and expression of
hate speech are among the precipitating factors that lead
to massive crimes and conflict and represent explicit
and detectable early warning signs. The international
community should be sufficiently equipped to detect
and address such early warning signs.
We are well aware that crimes that go unpunished
are prone to recurrence. It is therefore imperative that
the international community vigorously pursue the
fight against impunity and denialism. Within the United
Nations, Armenia has been leading the campaign to
reinforce the implementation of the Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide.
This year marks the seventieth anniversary of the
Genocide Convention, which is yet another milestone
that reaffirms our collective determination to fight
impunity for the crime of genocide, war crimes and
crimes against humanity and to recommit to cooperation
among nations, thereby contributing to the promotion
of international peace and security. The International
Day of Commemoration and Dignity of the Victims of
the Crime of Genocide and of the Prevention of this
Crime, on 9 December, continues to be an important
platform for supporting such deliberations and taking
the conversation forward.
As a supporter of the concept of regional
engagement, Armenia has consistently promoted the
efficiency and role of regional mechanisms, including
for the maintenance of peace and security. We resolutely
reject various deflecting attempts at forum shopping
and arbitrary interpretations of international law. We
emphasize that there can be no hierarchy in international
law, and the very right to self-determination may not be
restricted, suspended or turned into an issue of territorial
dispute. The principle of the right of peoples to selfdetermination is a binding and universally recognized
fundamental norm of international law for all States,
88/97

17/05/2018

with no exceptions, and its implementation derives
from international obligations assumed by States.
Armenia greatly appreciates the continued support
of the United Nations system and the Secretary-General
for the internationally agreed format of negotiations
for the peaceful resolution of the Nagorno Karabakh
conflict, under the auspices of the Minsk Group of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) co-Chairs. The approach of the international
community vis-à-vis the Nagorno Karabakh conflict
is well reflected in the statements and proposals of
the OSCE Minsk Group co-Chair countries. A failure
to commit to a peaceful resolution of the conflict, on
the basis of the norms and principles of international
law and within internationally agreed mandates,
represents a deliberate attempt to obstruct and derail
the peace process. Armenia will continue to deliver on
its commitment to uphold the norms and principles of
international law and, together with the Minsk Group
co-Chairs, will continue working for the peaceful
resolution of the Nagorno Karabakh conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Rwanda.
Ms. Bakuramutsa (Rwanda): Allow me to express
Rwanda’s appreciation to the Polish presidency for
convening today’s open debate on the state of respect
for international law in the context of the maintenance
of international peace and security.
It is evident from today’s briefings that upholding
international law is fundamental to the maintenance
of international peace and security and to preventing,
managing and resolving crises. We all agree that
international law directly contributes to world peace.
We also agree that this is not something new, as the
concept of international law predates even the United
Nations, which was founded in 1945. Today’s discussion
therefore stresses the need to uphold the principles of
international law in the maintenance of international
peace and the need to support the role of the Security
Council and the international judicial system in
fostering a culture of the rule of law that promotes
international peace and security.
Peace and security are strengthened if there are
no exceptions or double standards in the application of
international law. The Security Council should promote
the rule of law through greater use of the means for
pacific settlement of disputes and, more frequently,
by recourse to the International Court of Justice. We
18-15180

17/05/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

believe that the starting point is to look at the Charter of
the United Nations, by which we are all bound.
Today we see a world that is hardly at peace. Human
rights abuses remain rampant and humanitarian law is
flouted in open violation of the Charter’s principles.
The Charter does not just collectively bind us to efforts
aimed at saving succeeding generations from the
scourge of war; it also confers a shared commitment
to creating a world order that is based on the rule
of international law. Let me reiterate my country’s
continued commitment to translating our trust in the
Charter into practice.
On the maintenance of international peace and
security by upholding international law, allow me
to begin with a simple fact: we, as Member States,
solemnly entered into this covenant, the United Nations
Charter, trusting that its principles were immutable.
However, what we see is that certain nations show
contempt for those principles, pursuing narrow
national or group interests, which can have devastating
consequences. We have yet to see a world order emerge
that is based on justice and respect for the obligations
arising from treaties and other sources of international
law and, most critically, the purposes and principles of
the Charter itself. In that context, I would like to focus
on the following four points.
First, the United Nations must fulfil its purpose of
developing friendly relations among nations, predicated
on the principle of equal rights.
Secondly, there should be a renewed focus on using
peaceful means for addressing breaches of international
peace and the settlement of international disputes, with
a wider and more effective use of the provisions of the
Charter. We appreciate Judge Owada echoing that point.
Thirdly, the management of international peace and
security must be based on a genuine consensus that is
forged on the basis of the principles of international law.
Fourthly, as the primary organ responsible for
maintenance of international peace and security, the
Security Council also needs to make wider and more
effective use of the procedures and framework for the
pacific settlement of disputes, particularly Articles 33
to 38 of the Charter.
African countries have put in place a Peace and
Security Architecture through regional and subregional
organizations that possess built-in mechanisms for
conflict prevention and mediation. Bodies such as

S/PV. 8262

the Peace and Security Council and the Panel of the
Wise give this architecture greater strength. Africa
has wisely resorted to the wide spectrum of modalities
envisaged in Chapter VI and other relevant provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations in the desire to
prevent disputes between parties and stop existing
disputes escalating into conflict.
It is worth pointing out that we are having
this debate on the seventieth anniversaries of the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide and the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights. Those important instruments
are being threatened by numerous instances of
backtracking on our pledges. Accountability has been
threatened by Member States’ lack of cooperation in
complying with arrest warrants issued by international
mechanisms, supporting investigations concerning
fugitives and prosecuting suspected individuals within
their jurisdiction. We believe that there should be no
impunity for egregious crimes against humanity and
mass atrocities. Accountability for those responsible for
heinous crimes is integral to maintaining international
peace and security. The Council must stress that peace
and justice go hand in hand, and that its members,
particularly its permanent members, must serve as
models when it comes to upholding accountability by
not harbouring fugitives implicated in genocide.
The Security Council has tribunals and mechanisms
in place that were established to fight impunity and
contribute to international peace and security. Debates
such as today’s present us with an opportunity to
be introspective and consider whether those legal
institutions and mechanisms have met our expectations.
Are they actually ensuring accountability? Among
other things, the establishment of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and, later, of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals was aimed at ending impunity and contributing
to the process of national reconciliation and restoring
and maintaining peace. Rwanda is concerned that it is
not living up to that goal. Our concerns are based on
the ICTR’s recent early releases of some masterminds
of genocide who have shown no remorse for the crimes
they committed. To be exact, 14 of them have been set
free and three more are currently in the process of early
release. In some instances, such as that of Mr. Ferdinand
Nahimana, those early releases have enabled various
publications to continue propagating the ideology of
genocide.

18-1518089/97

S/PV.8262

Maintenance of international peace and security

Furthermore, their early release, accomplished
without consultation with the Government of Rwanda
and at the discretion of one single individual,
seriously erodes the ICTR’s achievements in holding
accountable those responsible for the meticulous
planning and execution of the genocide against the
Tutsi. It also conveys the extremely dangerous message
that international justice is lenient when crimes are
committed in certain parts of the world and thereby
trivializes the crime of genocide.
In conclusion, Rwanda calls on the Security Council
to consider the challenges that threaten the primacy of
international law in sustaining international peace and
security. Restoring the rule of law is not just the true
means of achieving sustainable international peace and
security, it is the only one.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovenia.
Ms. Bavdaž Kuret (Slovenia): I would like to
begin by thanking the Polish presidency for organizing
today’s debate and for the concept note (S/2018/417/
Rev.1, annex). Of course, Slovenia fully endorses
the statement delivered earlier by the observer of the
European Union, but I would like to add some elements
in my national capacity.
When it comes to the peaceful settlement of
disputes, Chapter VI of the Charter of the United
Nations offers good guidance and should be used
more often. We also want to encourage the Council to
explore ways of identifying crises and risks related to
international peace and security as early as possible in
order to address them and, if necessary, take collective
action. We encourage the Secretary-General to make
use of Article 99 of the Charter.
The Security Council should act to prevent
violence, which, unfortunately, it has recently failed
to do on numerous occasions. As a member of the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group, we
stress once again that members of the Security Council
should not veto resolutions that seek to prevent or end
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes.
Respect
for
international
law,
including
international humanitarian law and human rights,
always rests primarily with States. They must ensure
that governance is rooted in the rule of law, the
protection of human rights and respect for international
law. It is precisely the lack of protection of human rights
90/97

17/05/2018

for all without discrimination that is often at the root of
armed conflict or other forms of violence.
The Security Council should emphasize the rule
of law and justice when drafting missions’ various
mandates, and should cooperate closely with the
Peacebuilding Commission on this. Peace and justice
are not mutually exclusive but rather reinforce each
other.
We also see big potential in regional and
subregional organizations. They are essential and
uniquely equipped to address risks and conflict or
post-conflict situations. Europe has a long tradition of
such institutions, embodied not only in the European
Union but also in the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and the Council of Europe,
which have also proved excellent instruments for the
maintenance of peace by promoting cooperation and
respect for human rights and the rule of law. There are
a lot of good practices that we can share.
When it comes to responding to flagrant violations
of international law, the States that are members of the
Security Council have a particular responsibility to
react — if not preventively, then with collective action
that may include targeted sanctions. Here we would like
to echo the call of the European Union regarding the
Ombudsperson.
Accountability, in our view, would be best assured
by strengthening the system of international courts
and tribunals or by forming other accountability
mechanisms such as the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of those Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011. Preventing
impunity for perpetrators of such abhorrent crimes is
not only an instrument of punishment but also reduces
the chance of their recurring in the future.
Slovenia continues to resolutely support the
International Criminal Court (ICC) and international
instruments
regarding
individual
criminal
responsibility. With the powers vested in it, including the
ability to refer situations to the International Criminal
Court, the Security Council is a particularly important
partner of the ICC. In that context, we welcome the
consensus decision by the Assembly of State Parties to
the Rome Statute to activate the jurisdiction of the ICC
over the crime of aggression as of 17 July.
18-15180

17/05/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

In conclusion, international law in general
offers many ways to settle disputes peacefully, from
the exercise of good offices to the decisions of the
International Court of Justice. States should always use
them when unable to reach a settlement themselves.
It goes without saying that all judgments and awards
of the international courts and tribunals must be
fully respected and implemented. That is a very basic
foundation of international relations based on the rule
of law.
Respect for international humanitarian law is of
utmost importance. Even in war there must be certain
rules that bind every side. We especially call for the
protection of civilians, for no price is higher than that
of human life.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Haiti.
Mr. Régis (Haiti) (spoke in French): At the outset,
on behalf of the Government of Haiti, I would like to
commend His Excellency Mr. Andrzej Duda, President
of the Republic of Poland, for his presence here earlier
today and for the initiative taken by his Government
to convene this debate on upholding international law
within the context of the maintenance of international
peace and security, a goal that is fundamental for us all.
No one can dispute the relevance of this debate
in a world in constant flux, where some question the
effectiveness of international law and its ability to provide
solutions to conflict situations and current challenges
to peace. Born of the desire of international society to
cease to accept war as a means of settling conflicts, the
United Nations established the safeguarding of peace
and protecting and respecting human rights as building
blocks for the binding standards of international law.
Peace and international law are intimately linked.
There is no doubt that progress and innovation have
occurred in the field of international peace law, as the
rise of international criminal jurisdictions in recent
decades has shown. However, despite our shared belief
that the moral force of the law can only promote the
establishment of lasting international peace, we must
admit that the supremacy of law, and particularly that
of the international law on peace, is still a long way
off. Nevertheless, the various United Nations organs,
including the Security Council, have continued to make
sustained efforts to promote, in the words of Pope John
Paul II,

S/PV. 8262

“respect for human dignity, the freedom of
peoples and the requirements of development, thus
preparing the cultural and institutional soil for the
building of peace”.
This debate offers us the opportunity to take a critical
look not only at the state of international law and
peace, but also at United Nations action in the context
of peacekeeping operations — their shortcomings,
imperfections and failures, as well as the ways most
likely to increase their effectiveness.
International law struggles to offer solutions for the
issues and challenges of the world, for many reasons.
Some stress the intrinsic weaknesses of international
diplomatic instruments, especially those of the United
Nations, which, in the words of a prominent lawyer,
at the very least render the scope of those texts
uncertain and, in reality, limited. Others attribute
the lack of effectiveness of the legal mechanisms for
peacekeeping, dispute resolution and the protection
of rights to institutional inefficiencies. We know how
much the Security Council’s paralysis and inertia on
certain sensitive issues has helped to fuel criticisms of
international law for its unequal application in different
States. The central issue in all of this — given that
we all accept the fundamental value of peace in the
international order — is that of better ensuring respect
for the rules of international law generally and for the
decisions and relevant resolutions of the Council aimed
at preserving international peace in particular.
In that regard, we believe it is important to examine
several points closely, five of which we consider
essential. First, we must strengthen international peace
law and ensure that it can adapt to the challenges
of a changing world; secondly, we must guarantee
compliance with international obligations to punish
acts that could endanger international peace and
security or seriously undermine the rights and dignity
of humankind; thirdly, we must make the provisions
of international peace law, international human rights
law and humanitarian law more effective by promoting
their incorporation into the domestic laws of States;
fourthly, we must enhance the credibility of the United
Nations and its principal organs, including the Security
Council, by putting an end to its often-criticized
asymmetry in its response to crises and conflicts; and
fifthly, there must be a renewed determination on the
part of Member States to ensure that the law is applied
equally to all, large and small.

18-1518091/97

S/PV.8262

Maintenance of international peace and security

Restoring normal living conditions after periods of
turbulence is an essential dimension of peacekeeping
operations. Unfortunately, once stabilization is
achieved, the fight to overcome the root causes of
conflict, including the issue of extreme poverty,
tends to fade away and does not receive the attention
it should. It is therefore imperative to pay special
attention to the deeper problems facing post-conflict
countries and to help them to restore the conditions
necessary for relaunching growth and development.
Haiti’s experience over the past 14 years has shown that
the factors determining the success of a peacekeeping
operation do not necessarily depend on its duration, but
rather on the momentum it launches for strengthening
the capacity-building essential to the economic and
social modernization of the host country on every front,
without, however, neglecting the consolidation of the
institutions that uphold the rule of law, which goes hand
in hand with development.
The key issue facing the international community
is that of guaranteeing the supremacy of international
law in a society that is sadly too often dominated by
a logic of force and confrontation. The Republic of
Haiti endorses a vision of international law and peace
that attaches great importance to the responsibility
of protecting and ensuring respect for fundamental
human rights, as well as protecting all communities
against abuses and violations of all kinds, including
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity.
International law is an essential tool in our collective
quest for a more just and peaceful international order.
The Republic of Haiti believes that to be effective,
international action for peace must be rooted in
the universal values on which our Organization is
founded, draw its legitimacy from international
law and support national legislation that enables its
effective application. We hope that today’s debate
can open avenues for reflection on the importance of
strengthening the corpus of international legal rules,
which must be upheld by all international actors if they
are to be effective. Let us work to make international
law a more effective tool for building peace that is
based on freedom, justice, solidarity, development and
respect for the equal dignity of all people.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Serbia.
92/97

17/05/2018

Mr. Milanović (Serbia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today’s open debate on this crucial topic.
We share the opinion expressed by many delegations
today that the world is facing increasing challenges.
That is why it is vital to observe the fundamental
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and, in
particular, to respect international law and the rulesbased international order.
One of the basic commitments of my country’s policy
is to full respect for the peaceful solution of disputes in
international relations, in accordance with the general
principles of international law and the Charter. The use
of peaceful means in resolving disputes has universal
value because it is closely connected to the maintenance
of international peace and security.
In addition to their retributive purpose, the basic
functions of the international justice and criminal
tribunals provided for by the international system
of criminal law and derived from the Charter of the
United Nations include combating impunity; punishing
perpetrators who have been established as individually
criminally responsible for the commission of war crimes
and other internationally recognized crimes; deterring
the commission of future crimes; rehabilitating the
convicted; protecting society and the victims of crimes
and reconciling warring peoples.
The shared goals of the States Members of the
United Nations relative to the implementation of the
principles of international and humanitarian law,
particularly combating impunity for the most grievous
criminal offences, are achieved through criminal
prosecution by international criminal institutions,
special tribunals and courts and national judicial
mechanisms. Member States’ efforts aimed primarily
at fighting impunity at international and national levels
do not always correspond with the set goals. On the
other hand, the efforts that some of them make in that
regard are not always fully appreciated.
The International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia was established by the Security Council
with the aim of fighting impunity and ensuring that all
responsible for the commission of the most grievous
crimes — including individuals in Government and
military positions at the highest level — are held
accountable, thereby contributing to the establishment
and maintenance of peace. Regrettably, Serbia’s
experience with the work of the Tribunal has led us to
believe that while it has completed its mandate, it has
18-15180

17/05/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

failed to implement the goals established in the relevant
Security Council resolutions. That is particularly true
with regard to the average length of proceedings, the
failure to honour procedural guarantees, the structure
of the indictments and, in that regard, the decisions
and judgments made. Serbia fully cooperated with
the Tribunal, but its decisions will be remembered in
my country for their inconsistency with regard to the
crimes committed against Serbian victims by members
of the other peoples of the former Yugoslavia. Against
the backdrop of such an imbalance in the Tribunal’s
decisions, it is hardly possible to say that in its pursuit of
transitional justice in the region the Tribunal achieved
one of its main objectives, that of regional reconciliation.
Nevertheless, my country remains committed
to respect for international law and its international
obligations. Furthermore, we are constantly improving
conditions within our national justice system and are
also putting special emphasis on promoting judicial
cooperation with other countries of the region. Together
we are working on the promotion of basic values and
common understanding, aimed at building regional
stability and reconciliation.
For Serbia, the ongoing process of making sure
that justice is done did not end this past December
with the Tribunal’s completion of its tasks. We are
well aware of the challenges encountered by the
Specialist Chambers established to try war crimes in
Kosovo and Metohija, but we expect that they will be
overcome and that this judicial institution will finally
commence its work. Serbia welcomes the efforts that
the international community has made so far to ensure
the necessary conditions for the unencumbered work
of the Chambers. We believe that the international
community will persevere in demonstrating the clear
political will needed to bring all perpetrators of war
crimes to justice, regardless of their nationality, and
to use its influence to prevent any attempt to obstruct
the work of the Chambers. Serbia believes that the
prosecution of war crimes will significantly contribute
to regional stability and the restoration of trust among
Serbian and other non-Albanian communities in the
institutions of the international community and, by
extension, to reconciliation in Kosovo and Metohija.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Myanmar.
Mr. Suan (Myanmar): My delegation aligns itself
with the statement delivered earlier by the representative

S/PV. 8262

of Venezuela on behalf of the members of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries.
With trust and faith in the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations, Myanmar joined
the Organization soon after its independence in April
1948. As a responsible member of the United Nations
and a party to many international conventions,
including human rights instruments, we have always
been in full compliance with international law and
fulfilled its obligations. We strongly believe in the rule
of law. The strengthening of international law and the
primacy of justice are key to maintaining international
peace and security. The Charter has entrusted the
Security Council and the International Court of Justice
with primary responsibility for upholding justice and
international law, in order to keep the world safe and
secure so that we can all live in peace and prosperity.
We firmly believe that in discharging its
responsibility to maintain international peace and
security by safeguarding international law, the Council
should be guided by the principles of universality,
objectivity and non-discrimination. However, we have
recently been deeply alarmed by the growing signs
that some Western Powers and other groups are using
international law and international humanitarian law as
a tool to serve their political purposes. A total disregard
for sovereignty and territorial integrity, and contempt
for a nation’s dignity, will not serve the United Nations
in its noble objective of maintaining global peace and
security. In recent months and days we have witnessed
many incidents where international norms have been
threatened. Some of the countries advocating for the
protection of human rights and calling for punitive
action against alleged perpetrators of human rights
violations are those that have been committing far
worse human rights abuses under the protection of their
powerful patrons. Such hypocrisy, double standards
and politicization of humanitarian crises should be
avoided in our pursuit of justice and the rule of law.
The issue of Rakhine state has been framed and
orchestrated in a way designed to escalate it into an
international issue in order to justify severe action by
the Security Council. However, that scenario could
not be further from the truth. Rather than promoting
provocative one-sided narratives, advocating retribution
and creating misunderstanding and mistrust among
different communities, we should rather be promoting
understanding, peace and reconciliation. We should
work together immediately to alleviate the plight of all

18-1518093/97

S/PV.8262

Maintenance of international peace and security

the people affected by the violence in Rakhine state.
The Security Council should encourage Bangladesh to
cooperate immediately and fully with Myanmar in order
to implement bilateral arrangements for beginning the
repatriation process as soon as possible.
All States Members of the United Nations,
regardless of their size or power, are equally obliged
to abide fully by the principles and purposes of the
Charter in letter and spirit. Only then will we be able
to enjoy peace, security, human rights and social and
economic development, as envisioned by the founding
fathers of our Organization.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): We thank the Polish
presidency of the Council for organizing this high-level
open debate and appreciate the information and insights
shared by our briefers. We acknowledge the depth of
the statements delivered today and generally align
ourselves with most of the recurring themes that other
delegations have dwelled on. The importance of our
deliberations has been brought home once again by the
violence recently committed in the State of Palestine
and in other conflict situations around the world.
As a responsible, committed and contributing State
Member of the United Nations, Bangladesh underscores
the values and principles embedded in multilateralism
and international law in the promotion and maintenance
of international peace and security. In his address to
the General Assembly in 1974, the father of our nation,
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, said, “Peace
is an imperative for the survival of mankind.... Peace
to endure must, however, be peace based upon justice”
(A/PV.2243, para. 15).
Echoing his words, our Prime Minister, Sheikh
Hasina, speaking in 2012 at the high-level meeting of
the General Assembly on the rule of law at the national
and international levels, recognized
“the need to reaffirm humankind’s faith in the just,
equitable and fair application of the rule of law, the
Charter of the United Nations and its principles
of justice and international law and the Statute of
the International Court of Justice for the peaceful
settlement of disputes.” (A/67/PV.3, p.32)
She then reiterated a fundamental premise of our
advocacy for a rules-based multilateral system.
94/97

17/05/2018

“To have a just world order based on the rule of law,
powerful nations must respect international legal
systems and multilateral treaties and support the
fair and just application of customary international
law in the multilateral decision-making process.
A greater voice and representation for developing
countries in ... major global institutions ... are vital
to ensuring the principle of equity.” (ibid., p.33)
In keeping with our leadership’s commitment to the
promotion of international law, we have consistently
had recourse to international legal and dispute
settlement mechanisms to resolve outstanding political
or trade-related issues with our neighbours and other
countries. Our initiative to settle our long-standing
maritime boundary delimitation issue with India and
Myanmar through legal, peaceful means is a particular
case in point.
It has been generally acknowledged that in
fulfilling its primary mandate for the maintenance of
international peace and security, the Security Council
has a mixed record of using the tools available to it under
the Charter of the United Nations and international law
for promoting the peaceful settlement of disputes. The
Council has set a number of useful precedents during
its long history, but it has failed to replicate those in
other, comparable situations owing to a number of
factors. We have reason to believe that while there is
indeed scope for innovative approaches, the Council
may find it useful to take a closer look into its own
annals in order to examine the context and efficacy of
its use of the various tools and resources at its disposal
in specific circumstances.
Bangladesh is currently dealing with the
overwhelming Rohingya humanitarian crisis, which
Council members recently had the occasion to witness
first-hand. The forcibly displaced Rohingya had a
coherent and consistent narrative to share about the
atrocity crimes they were subjected to at the hands
of Myanmar’s security forces and local extremist
elements. They made a strong plea for justice and
accountability to Council members. Since the renewed
eruption of violence against the Rohingya last year,
nearly eight months on, a culture of impunity seems
to be taking hold in Myanmar yet again. Beyond some
lip service about bringing the perpetrators of violence
to justice, the Myanmar authorities have conducted
no credible independent investigation or prosecution.
On the contrary, any incidence of large-scale violence
18-15180

17/05/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8262

or persecution has been repeatedly denied by the
responsible quarters.

I give the floor to the observer of the Observer
State of Palestine.

It is now widely recognized that the question of
justice and accountability for the crimes committed
against the Rohingya, including what the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights has termed a
textbook case of ethnic cleansing, is inextricably linked
to the issue of creating a situation that is conducive to
their safe, dignified and voluntary return to Rakhine
state. Probably in order to deny that fundamental reality,
the Myanmar authorities have resorted to one of their
long-standing methods, which is shifting the onus onto
Bangladesh, this time for our alleged non-cooperation
in the resumption of repatriation. We urge all Council
members to also seriously consider the Rohingya crisis
in the context of accountability and justice. For the first
time, the Secretary-General’s report on conflict-related
sexual violence (S/2018/250) cited the Myanmar Armed
Forces for the alleged crimes documented by his Special
Representative. The Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court has requested a ruling by the Court on
its jurisdiction with regard to the forced deportation of
the Rohingya to Bangladesh, which is a State party to
the Rome Statute.

Mr. Bamya (Palestine): At the outset, I would like
to express our appreciation to the Polish presidency for
organizing today’s important debate on a critical matter
at a critical time, and to thank the briefers for their
important contribution.

Regrettably, the Human Rights Council’s factfinding mission continues to be denied access to
Myanmar, including Rakhine state. In line with the
Human Rights Council, many Member States, including
some Security Council members, are interested in
exploring the possibility of setting up an international,
impartial and independent mechanism for investigating
and documenting the crimes committed against the
Rohingya. Against that backdrop, we want to once again
remind the Council about the range of tools and options
available to it for effectively pursuing the question
of accountability with the Myanmar authorities. The
inhumane suffering of the Rohingya should ensure
that no Member State considers a culture of impunity
acceptable in the absence of effective, demonstrable
action by the Council in response to gross violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
The President: I now propose that the Council
invite the observer of the Observer State of Palestine
to the United Nations to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with its provisional rules of procedure and
previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

International law governs our international
relations. Its rules have been formulated collectively
and are binding for all. The major developments of
international law have occurred as a reaction to horrific
tragedies in an attempt to prevent their recurrence and
preserve future generations. After the horrors of the
Second World War, including the Holocaust, humankind
established the United Nations, adopted the Charter of
the United Nations and the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, formulated the Geneva Conventions
and formed its first and still imperfect international
criminal courts. At that time, in 1948, while humankind
was enacting that set of rules to preserve lives and
rights, the Palestinian people were enduring the Nakba,
the dispossession and forced displacement of our nation
and denial of our rights that continues to this day.
Despite being the victims of double standards
that have allowed Israel’s impunity to continue and
enabled the widespread and systematic crimes against
our people to recur, the Palestinian people have
continued to place their faith in international law and
have reaffirmed time and again their commitment to
international law and to peaceful, legal and diplomatic
means for achieving their inalienable rights. The State
of Palestine has joined international human rights law
instruments without reservations. It has joined the
Geneva Conventions and their Additional Protocols and
declared its commitment to abiding by the International
Court of Justice’s decisions and opinions. It has joined
the International Criminal Court and granted it
broad jurisdiction.
The occupying Power’s intentional direction of
attacks at our civilian population; its transfer of parts of
its own civilian population into the territory it occupies;
its deportation or transfer of the population of the
occupied territory within or outside that territory; and
its persecution of any identifiable group or collective,
including a national group, all constitute war crimes
under the Rome Statute and, in certain circumstances,
crimes against humanity. There can be no doubt that
Israel is committing such actions in broad daylight,

18-1518095/97

S/PV.8262

Maintenance of international peace and security

intentionally and without shame or fear of being held
accountable. I say without shame because Israel is now
trying to make us responsible for its occupation of our
land and the oppression of our people, and it is claiming
a right to security for itself, the occupying Power,
while denying a right to security and protection for the
occupied people.
International law is the law for all of us, and it must
be applicable to all. All Security Council resolutions
are binding and should be upheld. Impunity and double
standards undermine international law and, as such,
threaten international peace and security. Individual
States and United Nations bodies must fulfil their
responsibilities by respecting and ensuring respect for
international law. When it comes to Gaza, all we are
asking is that the law be implemented. Let us just restate
the facts. Israeli snipers, implementing orders received
from the highest levels of Israel’s political and military
bodies, have opened fire on people, including children,
protesting from the other side of the border, using live
ammunition, including ammunition that causes serious
and irreversible injury, and often shooting people in
the back, head or chest while they stood hundreds of
metres away. They have killed 100 people and wounded
thousands. Israel has not challenged those facts,
and should it do so, we have called for an impartial,
independent and transparent investigation. If they are
so confident that they are right, let them accept it.
Are there laws that we are unaware of that justify
such actions? For Israel to yell “security” or “terrorism”
is not sufficient grounds for international law to yield or
surrender. Those who shield Israel from accountability
for such actions, as well as those who blur the lines
between legal actions that can be undertaken by States
to ensure security and self-defence and what constitutes
a war crime or crime against humanity, embolden Israel
in pursuing its crimes. There can be no justification for
colonization, forcible displacement, the use of unlawful
force or arbitrary detention, and yet today there are
650,000 Israeli settlers in the Palestinian territory that
has been occupied since 1967. Innocent civilians are
targeted and killed in indiscriminate attacks. More
than 800,000 Palestinians, the equivalent of 40 per
cent of our male population in the occupied territory,
have been imprisoned or detained since 1967, including
parliamentarians, children, women, journalists,
academics and artists.
The Israeli representative spoke so proudly of
Israeli courts today, and yet those courts are complicit in
96/97

17/05/2018

the commission of these crimes. B’Tselem, explaining
its decision to cease cooperating with the military lawenforcement system, including Israeli military courts,
stated that there is no longer any point in pursuing
justice and defending human rights by working with a
system whose real function is measured by its ability
to continue to successfully cover up unlawful acts and
protect perpetrators. How can we explain that reality?
By the number of Israeli leaders and senior military
officials who have been held accountable for these
actions — none. In 70 years, none. No sanctions have
even been discussed here, at any point in time, when
it comes to Israel. No measures of accountability have
ever been undertaken. We are the victims of Israeli
colonialism and oppression but we are also the victims
of impunity, without which these crimes would have
ended a long time ago. Without them, we would have
achieved our freedom and fulfilled our inalienable
rights and peace would have prevailed in our region.
Accountability is the path to peace. There is indeed
a bias when it comes to Israel in the United Nations
and beyond. It is that bias that is shielding it from
accountability. Despite the clarity of the law — as
reaffirmed in countless United Nations resolutions and
by the International Court of Justice, treaty bodies,
special procedures, virtually every single body on
Earth and every State — Palestine remains the most
important test of the credibility of international law and
of the international system, especially at a time when
the laws and system are more at risk than ever. This is
a test that the international community cannot afford
to fail.
The President: Two delegations have asked for the
floor to make further statements.
I now give the floor to the representative of Cyprus.
Ms. Krasa (Cyprus): I regret having to take the
floor to make some additional remarks in response to
the comments by Turkey. I will be brief.
No country can lawfully intervene in another
country unless it does so in accordance with explicit
provisions in the Charter of the United Nations. What
Turkey did in 1974 was an act of aggression in execution
of a plan devised much earlier, an invasion that turned
into an occupation that continues to this day. It is for
that reason that since then the United Nations has, in
several resolutions, demanded respect for the island’s
independence and territorial integrity, as well as
18-15180

17/05/2018

Maintenance of international peace and security

the withdrawal of foreign troops from it. Turkey has
consistently ignored all of those resolutions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.

S/PV. 8262

Mrs.
Zeytinoğlu
Özkan
(Turkey):
The
representative who has just spoken does not represent
the entire island of Cyprus. The necessary reply to that
statement will therefore be given by the representative
of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus.
The meeting rose at 7.45 p.m.

18-1518097/97
