A /73/PV.46

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-third session

46th plenary meeting

Thursday, 6 December 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Espinosa Garcés . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ecuador)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Gertze
(Namibia), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 40
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General (A/73/374))
Draft resolution (A/73/L.44)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany to introduce draft resolution
A/73/L.44.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): It is my pleasure to
introduce draft resolution A/73/L.44, entitled “The
situation in Afghanistan”. As members of the Assembly
know, this text was first introduced in 1980 and has
been reintroduced every year since then. Since 2002,
Germany has served as the facilitator of the draft
resolution. It has never been easy but, in the end,
we have always been able to reach consensus, which
we believe is extremely important because it shows
the international community’s consensus view of
Afghanistan and its population, which is suffering
under the conflict taking place there. That suffering is
the reason that it is very important for the international
community to be united.
The substance of draft resolution A/73/L.44
reflects the dynamics in Afghanistan over the years,
the changes on the ground and international support.
The most important events to take place this year were

the parliamentary elections in October and the Geneva
Ministerial Conference in November, which was
successful. The text of the draft resolution reflects the
positions of Member States as they were communicated
to us, and we did everything possible to accommodate
all of them. Of course, attaining 100 per cent is never
possible; compromise is necessary, and we strove to
achieve it. Of course, in the end, the text must reflect
the facts on the ground.
The draft resolution’s main purpose is to express
support for Afghanistan and its people. I would
therefore like to thank all delegations that have showed
flexibility in upholding the draft’s show of support for
the people of Afghanistan.
Turning to the substance of the draft resolution, our
most important concern remains the fragile security
situation. We are all aware of the number of highprofile attacks, the most recent being the attack on
20 November that targeted religious scholars and left
55 people dead. We call on all people in Afghanistan to
stand together.
We also wish pay tribute to the members of Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces for their patriotism
and sacrifices. Together with its international partners,
Germany will continue to be present in Afghanistan
security-wise, through the NATO-led Resolute Support
Mission in support of the Afghan security forces. Our
aim is to bring peace and stability to Afghanistan. There
can be no improvement in the situation in Afghanistan
without support for the security sector, but that support
is viable only if by improving the security sector there

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-41573 (E)

*1841573*

A/73/PV.46

is also support for social development, the stabilization
of society and the building of functioning institutions
in the country.
With regard to the peace process, it is very important
that it be inclusive, Afghan-led and Afghan-owned, and
involve both the Government of Afghanistan and the
Taliban. That is the only pathway towards a sustainable
resolution. We saw some very positive signs in the
Eid al-Fitr ceasefire this summer. We also saw new
initiatives being launched at the Geneva Conference.
The draft resolution before us reiterates the call on the
parties to the conflict to recognize their responsibilities
in achieving peace and to enter into direct talks without
preconditions. That aspect is directed at the Taliban.
All countries of the regions have to exert their best
efforts in support the peace process.

06/12/2018

draft resolution reflects the important developments
that took place during the course of the past year,
covering the security situation, developments in the
area of peace and reconciliation, the recent Geneva
Ministerial Conference on Afghanistan and, above all,
the enduring partnership between Afghanistan and the
international community on common goals that are
imperative to us all.

Although Afghanistan has come a long way,
numerous challenges remain, including the fight
against corruption and the fight for good governance
and institution-building. Each is of crucial importance.
I also wish to highlight the importance of women’s
empowerment in the country, including their
participation in Government and their education,
specifically their ability to attend school and university.
I would encourage the Government of Afghanistan to
continue to make efforts in those areas and implement
the announced political and economic reforms.

As we take stock of the situation in Afghanistan,
a glimpse at the past will benefit our course of action
on the way forward towards consolidating gains and
guaranteeing stability and security in the country.
Afghanistan’s geostrategic location in the heart of Asia
has led to vested interests trying to meddle and interfere
in ways that serve no benefit to anyone. The ensuing
violence has brought with it untold suffering and
devastation for our people, resulting in a humanitarian
crisis and leading to instability in the wider region.
In the process, our people have resisted and risen up
in defence of the dignity and territorial integrity of
their country. Following the end of the former Soviet
occupation and the collapse of the communist regime,
we witnessed a new era of meddling, which involved the
use of proxy groups for strategic gains. The challenges
that we faced then remain evident even today, requiring
a new approach designed to change the calculus for
the benefit of security, not only in Afghanistan but the
wider region.

Germany remains committed to supporting
Afghanistan and the people of Afghanistan, and to
trying to build an international consensus that the
Afghan population can see. We continue to work
closely with the Government of Afghanistan and our
international partners.

Looking at where we stand, despite all the prevailing
challenges, Afghanistan has crossed a threshold and
turned the corner in achieving our goals for security and
self-reliance. This year’s draft resolution exemplifies
the international community’s commitment to that
imperative, for which we are grateful.

In conclusion, Germany aligns itself with the
statement to be delivered on behalf of the European
Union later in today’s debate.

In the area of security, our national forces are
valiantly defending our dignity and freedom and, in
the broader context, fighting to defend global security.
They have engaged the Taliban and other elements of
the transnational terrorist network, while adopting an
offensive posture and inflicting heavy losses on those
elements in the battlefield. Despite repeated attempts,
the Taliban have failed to capture a single province
or city, or to otherwise assert control anywhere in the
country. That progress also relates to efforts aimed at
countering such foreign terrorist fighters as Da’esh,
whose presence and capacity have been reduced,
including in the northern provinces. The Taliban and
other affiliated groups have shifted their focus to
attacking population centres and other soft targets,

Mr. Saikal (Afghanistan): I would like to thank
the President for convening today’s meeting on the
situation in Afghanistan as we adopt this year’s draft
resolution on our country (A/73/L.44).
To begin, let me convey my gratitude to
Mr. Christoph Heusgen, Mr. Friedrich Schröder and
the rest of the team at the German Mission for ably
facilitating negotiations on the draft resolution. We also
convey our thanks to all delegations for their proactive
engagement and flexibility during the course of the
deliberations. As a result of their efforts, this year’s
2/23

18-41573

06/12/2018

including religious sites and gatherings, with a view to
stoking internal tensions.
The latest such attack was against a group of
religious scholars last month, where more than 55 were
killed and over 80 wounded, some severely. Let me
state once again that such attacks can never undermine
our unity or commitment to a peaceful and democratic
Afghanistan. The sheer number of Afghans who, in
defiance of terror, came out in waves to stand in lines
for hours to cast their vote in the recent parliamentary
elections is proof of that.
We thank all international partners, including
those in the NATO-led Resolute Support Mission,
and other partner nations providing support to further
strengthen the operational capabilities of our national
security forces. Those investments are for the security
of Afghanistan, the region and beyond.
The past few months have seen developments in
our peace efforts, which have given a glimmer of hope
for the course of action we will undertake in future.
Following Afghanistan’s submission of a peace plan
with unconditional talks with the Taliban, in February,
and the Ulema Conferences for Peace and Security in
Afghanistan, held in Kabul and Jakarta, a three-day
ceasefire was observed in June. Further progress
was seen in July, when the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation hosted an International Ulema Conference
in Saudi Arabia that denounced the war in Afghanistan,
thereby leaving no grounds for a religious justification
for the war. Nevertheless, the Taliban have continued
their violence and terror.
Domestically, a national consultative process has
been undertaken to ensure that peace efforts have the
full support across the spectrum of society — political
parties, civil society, tribal elders, religious figures,
and women and youth groups. Less than two weeks
ago in Geneva, our road map for achieving peace was
presented. The document aims for a peace agreement
that will uphold the constitutional rights of all citizens,
especially women. Moreover, no armed groups with
ties to transnational terrorist networks or criminal
organizations and no State or non-State actors seeking
influence in Afghanistan will be allowed to join the
process. In addition, to make progress on the peace
agenda, an authoritative negotiating team will conduct
direct negotiations with the Taliban, and we expect
the same from the Taliban, so that we have a united
negotiating team.

A/73/PV.46

Regional consensus is imperative for the success of
that process. We have long asserted that peace is most
achievable when neighbours in the region are on board
and engaged constructively in support of an Afghan-led
and Afghan-owned peace process. While we continue
to lead peace efforts, we also welcome the current
efforts of the United States Special Representative for
Afghanistan Reconciliation, Ambassador Khalilzad,
aimed at reaching out to regional players to strengthen
consensus and facilitate direct peace talks with the
Taliban. We welcome those mechanisms as well
as other initiatives that conform, with and help to
reinforce, our Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace
efforts in line with the Kabul Process for Peace and
Security Cooperation.
Moreover, in the context of Afghanistan-Pakistan
relations, this year’s draft resolution highlights the
signing in April of the Afghanistan-Pakistan Action
Plan for Peace and Solidarity. That mechanism is aimed
at improving cooperation in addressing outstanding
concerns related to combating terrorism and outlining
clear measures to advance peace efforts. The effective
implementation of commitments under the Action
Plan is a crucial imperative. No country can benefit
more from a peaceful and stable Afghanistan than
Pakistan itself.
Last week in Geneva, the international community
and Afghanistan came together to assess our joint
progress on a wide spectrum of issues that are pivotal for
my country’s stability. For our part, we spoke about the
progress we have made in meeting benchmarks set forth
in the national priority programmes of the Self-Reliance
through Mutual Accountability Framework. We have
focused on security-sector, civil-service and fiscal
reform and improved governance and anti-corruption.
Those measures aim to strengthen governance and the
rule of law, subjects at the core of our reform agenda. To
that end, we have implemented new judicial measures
so as to ensure a society where all individuals — both
in and outside of Government — operate in accordance
with the laws of the land.
In the coming years we will remain closely
engaged with international partners to meet reciprocal
commitments under the Geneva Mutual Accountability
Framework. Mutual progress on those commitments
will be reviewed through the annual meeting of the Joint
Coordination and Monitoring Board in 2019, which is
made up of senior officials, and our next ministerial
meeting, to be held in 2020. As Afghanistan remains

18-415733/23

A/73/PV.46

fully engaged in fulfilling its share of commitments,
we will strive to maintain continued focus in the
alignment, efficiency and coordination of development
aid from international partners.
This year’s draft resolution highlights once again
the direct link between regional economic cooperation
and peace, security and stability in Afghanistan and the
region. In the past year we witnessed ongoing efforts
aimed at strengthening connectivity through various
megaprojects designed to bring transformative change
to the region by linking peoples, cultures, products and,
above all, our economies, with the aim of achieving
shared prosperity. Our commitment to that endeavour
is manifested by the Afghan-led Regional Economic
Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan process, under
which progress continues be made on such initiatives as
the Central Asia South Asia Electricity Transmission
and Trade Project, the Turkmenistan-AfghanistanPakistan-India Pipeline, the Lapis Lazuli corridor,
the Turkmenistan-Uzbekistan-Tajikistan-AfghanistanPakistan power project, the Turkmenistan-AfghanistanPakistan 500 kilovolts Line, the Chabahar Port and the
Five Nations Railway Corridor. Among the notable
achievements made this year was the operationalization
of air corridors with the addition of a number of
countries since last year, leading to increased trade in
goods and services.
More broadly, we look forward to working with other
regional and international partners to advance regional
cooperation in the areas of security and social and
economic development under other regional initiatives,
such as the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, the
Economic Cooperation Organization, the South Asian
Association for Regional Cooperation, the Central
Asia Regional Economic Cooperation Programme, the
Conference on Interaction and Confidence-Building
Measures in Asia and others.
Afghanistan is a unique example whereby many
countries from distinct regions and political blocs
converged in 2001 to attain a common objective: to
defeat international terrorism and promote a more
secure and stable international landscape for all. That
mission began with a strong consensus that cooperation
and collaboration would serve everyone’s interests.
Experience has shown that progress is most tangible
when countries of the region and beyond display
effective cooperation in the context of international
engagement in our country. At this critical stage, it is
imperative to regenerate and solidify that consensus
4/23

06/12/2018

for the achievement of the goals at hand. In that
respect, this year’s draft resolution calls for a closer
and more coordinated approach among regional and
international stakeholders in advancing peace, security
and prosperity in Afghanistan.
In conclusion, I urge everyone present here — our
allies and partners at the United Nations — to believe
in the promise and potential of Afghanistan. Together
we have travelled a long road full of challenges
and sacrifices, yet we have witnessed gains on an
unimaginable scale. As we advance along the road to
sustainable peace, it is time to build on those gains.
I thank our partners for their support for the draft
resolution to be adopted today, as well as for their
continued support for Afghanistan.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the European Union.
Mr. Vale de Almeida (European Union): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union
(EU) and its 28 member States. The candidate countries
Turkey, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Montenegro, Serbia and Albania, the country of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as Georgia,
Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova, align themselves
with this statement.
Allow me to begin by praising the delegation of
Germany and Ambassador Heusgen for their very good
work in preparing and presenting this important draft
resolution (A/73/L.44).
The European Union would like to commend the
United Nations for the organization and outcome of the
Geneva Ministerial Conference on Afghanistan held
on 27 and 28 November. Two years after the Brussels
Conference, the international community once again
reaffirmed its support to promoting peace, stability
and prosperity in Afghanistan. The European Union
welcomes the focus at the Conference on the peace
dimension, an area in which the EU is particularly
interested and willing to play a role and assume
responsibilities. At the same time, it was important that
participants took stock of the state of implementation
of the Afghan reforms and agreed on concrete
implementation benchmarks for reform to be met in the
coming years.
Since the beginning of this year, we have witnessed
important developments in Afghanistan that are
18-41573

06/12/2018

conducive to the start of a peace process. President
Ghani’s unprecedented peace offer at the Kabul Process
meeting in February, the three-day successful ceasefire
in June and the recent plan for peace presented during
the Geneva Ministerial Conference are key moments
that illustrate that positive momentum. The European
Union recognizes the Afghan authorities’ efforts and
the steps taken towards a lasting political settlement and
inclusive peace agreement based on national consensus.
With the growing consensus among Afghan, regional
and international stakeholders on the parameters of a
potential peace process, it is now time to build on those
positive elements and start a peace dialogue.
High
Representative
Federica
Mogherini
confirmed at the Geneva Conference the European
Union’s readiness to play a role in supporting peace
talks, and she put forward several concrete offers
in that regard. She also emphasized the fact that
the European Union will always stand strong on
the protection of fundamental rights, particularly
women’s full and equal enjoyment of such rights and
the rights of children and minorities, which should not
be sacrificed for the sake of rapid progress on peace,
including on constitutional reforms. The European
Union appreciates the fact that those elements were also
emphasized in many other statements, including those
of the Afghan representatives.
Afghanistan is at a crossroads, and many challenges
still exist within the country. The security situation
remains fragile, and Afghan civilians — innocent
citizens — continue to be victims of terrorist attacks.
There have been internal reforms in many areas, but
more needs to be done so that they are translated into
visible progress and made to contribute to building a
solid, democratic and peaceful society where human
rights and the rule of law are respected, and to make
them conducive to economic development that offers
increased opportunities for the Afghan people, in
particular the younger generation.
For the European Union’s part, in 2017 we approved
the EU Strategy on Afghanistan. More recently, in
November, the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of our
member States adopted conclusions on Afghanistan,
thereby expressing their firm intention to continue
and enhance the work on the four strands of the EU
Strategy, namely, promoting peace, stability and
regional security; reinforcing democracy, the rule of
law and human rights and promoting good governance
and women’s empowerment; supporting economic and

A/73/PV.46

human development; and addressing challenges related
to migration and forced displacement. We are continuing
our dialogue with our Afghan partners in each of those
four areas. In coordination with the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, the European Union and its
member States will continue to support strengthening
Afghan and regional efforts aimed at comprehensively
fighting organized crime and reducing drug production,
trafficking and demand.
The European Union continues to emphasize the
importance of protecting human rights and promoting
good governance, where the implementation of relevant
legislation remains key, with a particular focus on
such areas as eliminating violence against women,
implementing the national action plan pursuant to
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), protecting
children and preventing torture and ill treatment.
We are pleased that discussions at the Geneva
Ministerial Conference underlined the need for women
to have a greater role in society. Although there has
been progress, shortfalls in human rights and equal
opportunity remain. The number of women participating
in national institutions remains limited, and the
implementation of the agenda set out in resolution
1325 (2000) should not be confined to the Afghan
Government; it should also involve civil society. We
salute the work being undertaken to achieve a national
consensus by Afghan women on peace, while stressing
the crucial role women and girls can play in conflict
resolution and peace.
Increased efforts aimed at implementing reforms
must continue, especially those related to, the fight
against corruption, where there is a strong demand from
the Afghan population. It will have a positive impact
on the economy and the development of the private
sector. Foreign investment and economic development
are heavily dependent on both peace and the continued
implementation of reforms.
In support of Afghan reforms, at the margins of
the Geneva Ministerial Conference, the European
Union signed a €474 million support package for
Afghanistan, including more than €300 million for the
State-Building and Resilience Contract for Afghanistan
2018-2021. That key initiative affirmed the engagement
and reliability of the European Union as a partner
of Afghanistan. A stable, peaceful and democratic
Afghanistan that respects human dignity is in the
interest of the European Union.

18-415735/23

A/73/PV.46

The holding of parliamentary elections on 20 and
21 October was also a positive signal, despite serious
technical and logistical difficulties and security
threats. Many Afghans, including women and young
people, exercised their democratic right to vote. It is
important to now start working on the lessons learned
from these elections, in view of next year’s presidential
elections, which are expected to take place according
to schedule. The coming months are essential, as strong
and swift measures that will ensure and preserve the
safety, transparency, accountability and credibility of
the ballot need to be taken.
The European Union will continue to work
alongside the United Nations and the international
community in support of the Afghan electoral process.
We have committed more than €15 million to assisting
the presidential elections, with the coordination of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan,
and continue to implement the EU-funded Instrument
contributing to Stability and Peace, which will help
to reduce vulnerabilities in the electoral process,
encourage internal monitoring by civil society
organizations, inclusiveness among the political parties
and women’s participation in the process.
With regard to migration, in the framework of
the EU-Afghanistan Joint Way Forward and through
bilateral memorandums of understanding with other
Member States, the European Union and Afghanistan
continued their comprehensive dialogue, including on
the regional dimension of migration. Very recently,
in Brussels, we discussed cooperation in terms of the
Joint Way Forward framework. At the same time, we
are actively engaged in finding lasting solutions for the
Afghan displacement and migration situation, taking
into consideration, of course, the regional dimension
as well. The latest trends showing decreases in returns
from Pakistan are encouraging, as they will allow the
proper reintegration of returnees into Afghanistan. At
the Geneva Ministerial Conference side event on people
on the move, which we co-organized, we also had an
opportunity to discuss and raise awareness about the
displacement and migration of Afghan nationals. We
will continue to support the Afghan Government’s
actions and efforts aimed at reintegrating returned
Afghan nationals, not only from Europe but also from
neighbouring countries.
We remain deeply concerned about the high number
of civilian casualties and the increasing number of
displaced people, and we call on all parties to protect
6/23

06/12/2018

the civilian population, especially women and children.
Conflict-related violence must not be allowed to destroy
another generation’s livelihood, homes and property,
displacing families and limiting access to education,
health care and other services. We need to continue to
protect the vital role that humanitarian agencies play and
respect their impartiality and the humanitarian space in
which the most urgent needs of the most vulnerable are
addressed. Improving security remains a precondition
for stability and development in Afghanistan.
In conclusion, much has been achieved, and the
Afghanistan that we see today is different in so many
ways from what it was several years ago. The European
Union recognizes the progress and reforms made
so far. We strongly support the Afghan authorities
in their pursuit of long-term stability. Afghanistan
needs to build on the current positive momentum,
start peace talks and end the conflict that is harming
many innocent people. The European Union recognizes
the important work of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan, and we will continue to work
together with the United Nations, as well as regional
and international partners, to support the people and
the authorities of Afghanistan in their efforts to achieve
lasting peace and stability.
Ms. Brink (Australia): Australia is pleased to
co-sponsor draft resolution A/73/L.44 today. We
thank colleagues, particularly those from Germany
and Afghanistan, for the leadership they showed in
developing this year’s draft resolution, which represents
a resounding demonstration of continued international
support for Afghanistan and its people as they seek
to achieve peace and development. Together with its
international partners, Australia remains committed
to Afghanistan’s security and development as it
works towards self-reliance. We reaffirm Australia’s
commitment to NATO’s Resolute Support Mission,
which is building the capacity of the Afghan security
forces to protect Afghanistan’s future.
The Australian Government strongly condemns
violence in Afghanistan, which has continued unabated
in 2018. This year’s increasing toll on civilians is a stark
reminder of the suffering of the Afghan people. We
offer our condolences for those tragic events, including
the recent conflict in Ghazni and the shocking attacks
in Kabul, which previous speakers have touched
upon. We also honour the sacrifices of members of
the Afghan security forces, as well as those of NATO
and partner forces who -lost their lives in support of
18-41573

06/12/2018

their Afghan colleagues. Australia supports the Afghan
Government’s determined pursuit of peace in 2018,
from its February offer to the Taliban of negotiations
without preconditions, to its announcement in
November of the formation of a negotiating team
together with the drafting of negotiating principles. We
also welcome the outcomes from the November Geneva
Ministerial Conference on Afghanistan, in which the
Afghan Government renewed its commitment to reform
and which enhanced momentum for an Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned peace process.
We call on the Taliban to commit to a ceasefire and
join their fellow Afghans, especially the Government
of Afghanistan, at the negotiating table. We reaffirm
Australia’s support for the Kabul Process and encourage
all parties to use that mechanism to focus their efforts
on achieving an inclusive and durable political
settlement. Durable peace will mean finding ways to
preserve progress, protect rights, provide economic
opportunities and include all of Afghanistan’s people in
its future. Afghanistan’s neighbours have an especially
important role to play.
We welcome the positive steps taken by
Afghanistan and its neighbours through the Regional
Economic Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan
and the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process to facilitate
regional cooperation and encourage sustainable trade
and investment. We encourage enhanced engagement
between Afghanistan and Pakistan and urge that priority
be given to strengthening this bilateral relationship so
as to ensure regional stability. As partners in peace,
the international community continues to support
Afghanistan’s efforts to establish the conditions that
can sustain a negotiated settlement. We look forward
to Afghans’ further expressing their commitment
to democracy in the 2019 presidential elections, as
Afghanistan progresses towards self-reliance.
Australia has provided approximately $1.4 billion
in development assistance since 2001, including a
$5 million contribution for emergency assistance to the
more than 1 million Afghans who are on the verge of
acute famine. We are meeting our Brussels Ministerial
Conference commitments to providing $320 million
from 2016 to 2020 and will continue to invest in a
secure and stable Afghanistan beyond 2020. Together
with its international partners, Australia stands with
Afghanistan as it charts a course towards a more secure
and prosperous future. We encourage all Member States
to do the same and support the draft resolution.

A/73/PV.46

Ms. Gambhir (India): I thank the President of the
General Assembly for organizing today’s debate. We
would also like to thank the delegation of Germany
for facilitating the very important draft resolution
contained in document A/73/L.44. My delegation
attaches great importance to the consensual adoption
of the General Assembly’s annual draft resolution
on Afghanistan, as it is an important opportunity for
the international community as a whole to express its
solidarity for peace and stability in Afghanistan.
Many Member States attended the recently
concluded Geneva Ministerial Conference on
Afghanistan last month, thereby reaffirming the
international community’s commitment — as well as
that of the United Nations — to Afghanistan. As stated
by President Ghani at the Geneva Conference, this
year reflects how Afghanistan is gaining control of its
destiny and how Afghans are taking ownership of their
own problems and demonstrating leadership in finding
solutions. Despite mounting challenges involving
security, peace and development, there was also
considerable progress in the past 17 years, especially
in promoting education and health care, protecting
the rights of women, children and the marginalized,
safeguarding lives, improving governance and reforms,
generating livelihood and moving Afghanistan towards
self-reliance. Democracy in Afghanistan is taking
deeper roots.
The enthusiastic participation of the people of
Afghanistan in the parliamentary elections held last
month, despite terrorist violence, reflects their desire
for, and faith in, democratic governance and the
rejection of forces that foment and spread terror and
violence. The presidential elections scheduled for next
year should further strengthen democratic institutions.
Those gains, achieved in the face extreme adversity
and violence, demonstrate the indomitable courage and
determination of our Afghan friends.
While the people of Afghanistan strive for better
lives and a peaceful future, the challenges they face
only increased in the recent past. According to the
latest statistics from the Global Terrorism Index, which
were released this week, Afghanistan is now the world’s
deadliest country when it comes to terrorism. Sadly, one
quarter of terrorism-related deaths throughout the world
in 2017 occurred in Afghanistan. It is indeed sad that
we, as the international community, saw it coming. The
relevant reports of the Secretary-General — year after
year, month after month — have demonstrated that the

18-415737/23

A/73/PV.46

violence and terror in Afghanistan have shown no signs
of abating. We have witnessed the increased frequency
of attacks in places where they were never imagined
to be possible before. Even the sick and wounded in
hospitals, young boys and girls in schools, praying
devotees in mosques and mourners at funerals have not
been spared from the forces of terror and violence.
It is clear that terrorists and those who plan such
attacks are not interested in peace. The goalposts for
them have changed. Terrorists and their supporters
have now created among themselves industries
involving narcotics and illegal mining in the territories
that they control, and are stealing the resources of the
Afghan people to fund more violence and terrorism.
Despite those challenges, however, the United Nations
has not demonstrated the necessary resolve to deal
with the source of the problem. The Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988
(2011), which refuses to designate new leaders of the
Taliban or freeze the assets of its slain leader, is falling
short of what is expected of it by Afghans and the
international community. From lessons learned in the
past, we who are situated in New York have become
aware that peace in Afghanistan is linked with the
peace and security situation of the entire world.
While all of us advocate that there is no military
solution to the issue, the Taliban — aided by its
supporters — continues to pursue military operations,
perpetrating violence and destruction, such as the
recent attack in Kabul and similar ones across other
parts of Afghanistan. Those offensives were planned
and launched by those who have been harboured in
safe havens in Afghanistan’s neighbourhood. Those
sanctuaries have for years provided safety for the dark
agendas of ideologically and operationally fused terror
networks, such as the Taliban, the Haqqani Network,
Da’esh and Al-Qaida, and its proscribed affiliates such
as the Lashkar-e-Tayyiba and Jaish-e-Mohammed.
We support an inclusive Afghan-led, Afghanowned and Afghan-controlled peace and reconciliation
process that promotes and protects the unity,
sovereignty, democracy, inclusiveness and prosperity
of Afghanistan. Any meaningful progress towards
sustainable peace requires a cessation of terrorist
violence, the renunciation of links with international
terrorism and respect for the rights of common Afghan
people, especially women, children and minorities.
8/23

06/12/2018

India has always stood shoulder to shoulder with
our Afghan friends, and it will continue to do so in
this transformation decade by providing the assistance
that Afghanistan needs and seeks. Building reliable
connectivity for landlocked Afghanistan is a key
component of our regional partnership. In undertaking
those endeavours, we are mindful of how important
it is that all such projects respect State sovereignty
and territorial integrity and be based on universally
recognized international norms, transparency and the
principles of financial responsibility, ecological and
environmental protection and preservation standards.
It is in that spirit that we are engaged in various
connectivity projects in the region, including the
Chabahar Port project and the direct India-Afghanistan
air-freight corridor, which were successfully made
operational in the recent past, and we will continue
to build on the gains achieved. We will continue to
work with all those who share in the spirit of helping
Afghanistan without conditions.
From a young age, Indians are familiar with the tales
of Afghan courage, resilience and determination, which
have long been a source admiration and inspiration in
our region. We only hope that the courage of Afghans
can be matched by that of the international community
in doing, for its part, what needs to be done to bring
peace to this war-torn country.
Ms. Zahir (Maldives): The Maldives is encouraged
to see the positive steps that Afghanistan is taking
towards peace and development, despite terrorist
attacks and the continued threat of such attacks. The
Government and the people of Maldives support and
share the vision of a prosperous Afghanistan that is
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned.
The people of Afghanistan have shown extraordinary
resilience and determination in rebuilding their country.
President Ashraf Ghani has shown extraordinary
leadership and courage in promoting democratic values
in the country. The general election held in October
was one of the most important steps taken in this,
Afghanistan’s transformation decade. Through the
ballot box, the people of Afghanistan have consistently
chosen the path of peace, of tolerance over extremism
and of cooperation over confrontation. We especially
welcome the continued implementation of overlapping
ceasefires between the Afghan Government and the
Taliban, which also helps to maintain the peace process
in the country. It is further encouraging to note that
the process is supported by the increasingly active
18-41573

06/12/2018

engagement of civil society and religious leaders. Such
engagement of civil society is evidence of signs of
flexibility among the main parties to the conflict.
The Maldives Government congratulates President
Ghani on his announcement of a unilateral cessation
of hostilities with the Taliban, which was followed
by the Taliban issuing its own ceasefire declaration.
Those positive developments require the support of the
international community. Accordingly, the Maldives
reiterates its call on the United Nations and its Member
States to support Afghanistan in rebuilding the country,
consolidating the authority of its State and institutions
and helping the Government maintain law and order.
The progress Afghanistan is making in promoting
human rights values in the country, especially for
women and girls, is quite remarkable. With an increased
focus on reducing sexual and gender-based violence, the
people of Afghanistan can achieve an even more stable,
secure and equal society. The relatively high level of
participation by women in the October general election
was an encouraging sign. We would like to see that
upward trajectory continue. We would also like to see
a greater participation by women in peace negotiations,
peacebuilding and conflict prevention so as to better
sustain peace in the country.
As we approach the fifth year of the Afghanistan
transformation decade, the Maldives recognizes
the progress being made thanks to the successful
implementation of some of the key components of the
action plan and hopes that the country continues to
tackle the significant and complex challenges related
to insecurity, poverty and corruption. With greater
economic integration in the region, Afghanistan will
be able to ensure safety and welfare for its people.
That requires the full commitment of all partners in
the region, including the South Asian Association for
Regional Cooperation. The Maldives acknowledges
the important steps taken by Afghanistan towards
enhancing regional cooperation.

A/73/PV.46

suffering caused by war, internecine conflicts and
foreign interventions in their country. Violence and
turmoil in Afghanistan have not only undermined peace
and security and development in the country and the
region; they also pose a continuing threat to international
peace and security. Through Afghanistan’s travails and
tragedy, the global community has remained steadfast
in its support for the Afghan people.
Apart from Afghanistan itself, it is Pakistan that
has endured the greatest suffering and damage from the
strife, violence and instability in Afghanistan and in
our neighbourhood. Despite the many burdens that the
situation has imposed on my country, our support for our
Afghan brothers and sisters has remained consistent and
resolute. We opened our hearts and homes to millions
of Afghan refugees and have sustained them for almost
four decades, with less than adequate support from
the international community. Even today, Pakistan
continues to host more than 2 million Afghans — the
largest protracted presence of refugees anywhere in
the world.
Pakistan has a vital interest in a peaceful, stable,
united and prosperous Afghanistan. We are working
to strengthen bilateral relations through the recently
agreed Afghanistan-Pakistan Action Plan for Peace and
Solidarity, which aims at establishing closer engagement
on political, economic, military, intelligence and refugee
issues. We have undertaken a number of initiatives to
support Afghanistan’s economic development. Over the
past decade, Pakistan has extended financial assistance
for various infrastructure and development projects
in Afghanistan. Last year’s waiver of regulatory duties
resulted in a significant increase in the country’s
exports to Pakistan, which remains Afghanistan’s
largest market.

A stable, safe, peaceful and prosperous Afghanistan
will not only benefit the hard-working people of
Afghanistan, but is also of interest to the entire region,
its economic partners and the international community
as a whole. We therefore once again issue a call: let us
strengthen our efforts to support Afghanistan and make
it the place it deserves to be.

We have also taken steps to improve the transit of
Afghan trade through our ports. We look forward to
the day when transit trade from Central Asia can flow
through Afghanistan and Pakistan, the shortest route
to the Arabian Sea. My country is also committed to
several regional projects, including TurkmenistanAfghanistan-Pakistan-India energy and natural-gas
initiatives and the Central Asia South Asia Electricity
Transmission and Trade Project, which will contribute
to the economic integration of the entire region and
promote South-South cooperation.

Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): For the past several decades,
the people of Afghanistan have experienced epic

The level of violence has escalated sharply in
Afghanistan over the past several months. According

18-415739/23

A/73/PV.46

to independent reports, the areas under Taliban
control or influence have become further enlarged.
Civilian and military casualties have mounted owing
to insurgent attacks and coalition air strikes. The
conflict in Afghanistan is clearly expanding, but it has
also reached a stalemate. It is evident that neither the
coalition nor the Taliban will be able to impose its will
on the other. A negotiated political settlement is the
only way to end the violence and bloodshed and realize
peace in Afghanistan.
Despite the bleak picture, there are several positive
developments, the most important of which is the nowclear international consensus that durable peace can be
achieved only through a political settlement. For over
two decades, Pakistan’s Prime Minister, Imran Ahmad
Khan Niazi, has repeatedly declared that the war in
Afghanistan can be brought to an end only through a
negotiated political settlement. We are gratified that is
now the universal position.
The second positive development is the willingness
expressed by President Ashraf Ghani and the
Government of National Unity to pursue a negotiated
settlement in any available modality or format.
We welcome the nomination of the Government’s
negotiating team.
The third positive development is the decision of
the United States to play an active role in promoting a
political settlement and engaging in direct talks with
the Taliban. A third round of talks about talks is being
conducted by the United States Special Envoy through
direct dialogue with the Taliban’s representatives in
Doha. In response to President Trump’s request, my
country’s Prime Minister has promised to do all we can
to support the process.
The efforts being made by Russia, China and
other States of the region to promote engagement and
dialogue with and among the Afghan parties represent
a fourth positive development. Sustainable peace will
require the endorsement of every State in the region.
The Moscow-format dialogue last month brought
representatives of the Taliban, the Afghanistan High
Peace Council, the United States and key countries of
the region around the same table to discuss the path
to peace and reconciliation in Afghanistan. Taliban
representatives outlined their known position there.
We hope that, in subsequent talks in various formats,
the positions of the principal parties will move closer
to convergence.
10/23

06/12/2018

It is obvious that the people of Afghanistan
desperately desire peace and an end to this long war. The
brief ceasefire observed over the Eid al-Fitr holidays,
the peace marches and the recent parliamentary
elections in Afghanistan are all signs that embody the
people’s yearning for peace. Peace will be realized by
building on that palpable desire for peace and putting
an end to the nightmare of war.
But the challenge ahead lies is translating that
sentiment and the recent positive developments into
a serious, sustained and structured peace process.
A diplomatic surge is needed to seize this unique
opportunity. While the onus for seizing this opportunity
rests on the parties directly involved in the Afghan
conflict, Pakistan, for its part, will do whatever it can to
support all efforts to launch a sustained peace process.
Finally, let me say that Afghanistan and our region
are at a crucial, critical juncture. The path to peace in
Afghanistan is onerous, but it appears to be achievable.
It is now for the parties concerned to commit themselves
to working seriously towards a negotiated solution to
the conflict. That approach offers the best chance to end
the suffering of the Afghan people and restore peace to
Afghanistan, and stability to the region as a whole.
Mr. Hattrem (Norway): I commend the SecretaryGeneral for his report on the situation in Afghanistan
(A/73/374). The United Nations and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan have a vital role to
play in the efforts to promote peace and development.
We welcome this opportunity to discuss the way ahead
for Afghanistan.
There is broad international agreement that the
conflict in Afghanistan can be resolved only by political
means. We commend President Ghani’s brave offer to
the Taliban of peace negotiations without preconditions,
in February. We were encouraged by the fact that
during the Eid al-Fitr celebrations in June the two
Afghan parties declared unilateral, partly overlapping
ceasefires. The ceasefires reduced the suffering of the
Afghan people and were largely welcomed by them.
We have noted with great interest the efforts by the
United States to engage the Taliban in exploratory talks
about a peaceful solution to the Afghan conflict. We
have also noted the efforts by partners in the region to
support a negotiated solution. Countries in the region
have a vital role to play in securing long-term stability
and development.
18-41573

06/12/2018

Norway will continue its efforts to bring the
different parties and other relevant actors together
to find a political solution. However, nothing will
succeed unless the Afghan parties dedicate themselves
wholeheartedly to reaching a peaceful settlement. We
urge the Taliban to engage the Afghan Government
in negotiations. If a settlement is achieved, the
international community must be ready to offer the
necessary assistance, financially and otherwise, to
support its implementation.
Women play a vital role in efforts to reach a peaceful
solution. We trust that the protection of women’s rights
will be a priority in any settlement. Women must be
included in all efforts to achieve a negotiated settlement
and in its eventual implementation. We note with
satisfaction the activism for peace among an increasing
number of Afghan women, from the grass-roots level
all the way up to First Lady Rula Ghani.
At present the security situation remains precarious.
The Taliban has gained ground. The recent drought has
brought about great hardship, misery and displacement.
We condemn in the strongest terms the terrorist attacks
that have caused the loss of so many civilian lives,
in Kabul and elsewhere. International military and
civilian assistance remains essential to provide stability
and prevent the spread of violent extremism, which also
poses a threat to international security.
The Geneva Ministerial Conference last week
recognized that some important progress has been
made in terms of good governance, the fight against
corruption, women’s rights and other important areas.
The Conference also brought attention to the vast
challenges that remain and noted room for progress.
Norway commends the brave people who went to
the polling stations during the recent parliamentary
elections, as well as the Afghan National Defence
and Security Forces, which worked hard to provide
security. However, we cannot disregard the fact that
there were significant shortcomings. The large number
of complaints and the recent news that the Electoral
Complaints Commission had invalidated the election
results for the city of Kabul are disturbing. Significant
improvements must be made before the presidential
elections in April 2019.
Our focus should be on securing a sovereign,
independent Afghanistan, as enshrined in the Afghan
Constitution. Afghanistan must be able to take care
of its own security and defend itself with its own

A/73/PV.46

defence forces, without the need for a continued foreign
military presence.
The Afghan people deserve to live in peace. Let us
all contribute towards that goal.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): Turkey is pleased
to co-sponsor the draft resolution before us today
(A/73/L.44). We look forward to its adoption
by consensus.
We deem this comprehensive draft resolution to be
very important, as it highlights the achievements and
responsibilities of both Afghanistan and the international
community. It constitutes a solid manifestation of our
joint support for the people and the Government of
Afghanistan in addressing ongoing challenges.
Afghanistan is continuing its journey of political
and economic transformation. The achievements over
the past decade, including in the areas of security,
democracy, governance and economic development, are
praiseworthy. The holding of parliamentary elections
on 20 October was an important step forward.
Afghanistan’s security and stability remain a key
priority. Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace and
reconciliation efforts are crucial to lasting peace and
security in Afghanistan. Long-term strategies and
consolidated reforms are essential both for maintaining
progress and addressing challenges in areas such as
education, health and displacement.
The region has demonstrated, on various occasions,
its readiness to resolve its own problems and transform
common problems into areas of mutual benefit. We
fully support the regional connectivity projects that
centre around Afghanistan, such as the Lapis Lazuli
Transit, Trade and Transport Route Agreement as well
as the development of air corridors.
We value bilateral and multilateral dialogue
and cooperation efforts. We welcome the increased
momentum that has been achieved through the Istanbul
Process, which is an effective cooperation model capable
of bringing practical solutions to current challenges
in the Heart of Asia region. We will soon host the
annual Ministerial Conference of the Istanbul Process.
Besides our efforts aimed at consolidating regional
ownership, we will also continue to lend our support to
Afghanistan’s security as a NATO Framework Nation
and through NATO’s Resolute Support Mission, among
other efforts.

18-4157311/23

A/73/PV.46

Turkey will continue its support for the Afghan
Government in its endeavours towards peace, stability
and development. Our programme of assistance to the
Afghan people is the most comprehensive development
aid we have directed to a single country in our history.
As of September 2018, 1,056 development projects had
been completed. Turkish development assistance to
Afghanistan amounts to approximately $1.1 billion.
The continued support of the international
community will strengthen the hopes of the Afghan
people for a bright future. We will always stand by
our Afghan brothers and sisters as long as our help
is needed.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): Peace
and stability in Afghanistan not only concern the
immediate interests of the Afghan people but also affect
regional security, stability, development and prosperity.
At present, the security situation in Afghanistan
provides no grounds for optimism, and the humanitarian
situation presents multiple challenges. The National
Unity Government is committed to promoting
socioeconomic development and maintaining peace
and stability. The international community should
continue to provide support and assistance to
Afghanistan.
First, based on its commitments to promoting
political dialogue and the reconciliation process, the
international community should support an inclusive
political process that is Afghan-led and Afghanowned, support the efforts of the Afghan Government
in promoting peace talks, urge the Taliban to return to
the negotiation table without delay, and help to achieve
continuous progress in the reconciliation process.
International mechanisms, including the Quadrilateral
Coordination Group — made up of Afghanistan,
Pakistan, China and the United States of America — the
Kabul process, the Moscow format consultations and the
Istanbul Process, should continue to play their respective
roles, with international support, in order to facilitate
the peace and reconciliation process in Afghanistan
and create a favourable international environment.
A second focus is to improve the security
environment and maintain peace and stability in
Afghanistan. Conflicts continued unabated in the
country in the first half of this year, and drug-related
crime remained a serious problem. The Afghan National
Defence and Security Forces (ANDSF) bear the primary
responsibility for maintaining the country’s peace,
12/23

06/12/2018

security and stability. The international community
should enhance coordination and cooperation and
continue to support the ANDSF in building its capacity
to respond effectively to such threats as terrorism,
transnational crimes and drug-trafficking.
Thirdly, priority must be given to achieving
independent development and improving the lives of
the Afghan people. The successful Geneva Ministerial
Conference on Afghanistan held in late November
adopted a series of outcome documents that will
contribute to the prompt achievement of independent
development in Afghanistan. The international
community should sustain its attention directed at
improving lives in the country, provide development
assistance to the Government and the people of
Afghanistan, respect the people’s independent choice
of a political system and development path and offer
targeted assistance to the Government of Afghanistan
so as to improve governance and development capacity
based on the country’s development strategy and
specific needs.
Fourthly, we must provide the badly needed aid
supplies and alleviate the humanitarian situation. The
recent drought has affected the livelihoods of millions
of Afghan people, exacerbating the already precarious
humanitarian situation. The international community
should provide the Afghan people with emergency
humanitarian assistance in terms of production, water,
food and medical supplies in order to mitigate the
suffering of the drought-affected population.
Afghanistan and its neighbours need to address
the issue of the return of 5 million refugees. The
international community should continue to provide
humanitarian support to Afghan refugees as well as
their host countries.
China enjoys long-standing good-neighbourly
relations with Afghanistan and has consistently
supported
the
country’s
political
process,
reconstruction and development. China has provided
bilateral assistance to help build Afghan capacity to
fight terrorism and supported its national counterterrorism efforts through multilateral mechanisms such
as the China-Afghanistan-Pakistan trilateral initiative
and the Quadrilateral Cooperation and Coordination
Mechanism
involving
those
three
countries
and Tajikistan.
The eighteenth Summit of the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization (SCO), held in June in Qingdao, China,
18-41573

06/12/2018

adopted the Qingdao Declaration, reaffirming SCO
support for Afghanistan in such areas as security,
economic development and the fight against terrorism,
extremism, drugs and crime. China has also provided
¥60 million for Afghan drought-relief efforts and an
additional $1 million to the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the World Food
Programme to help the Afghan people get through this
difficult period.
China and Afghanistan continue to actively promote
the development of the Belt and Road Initiative. Our two
countries are now connected by regular direct flights
and freight trains. Afghanistan actively participated
in the inaugural China International Import Expo,
held last month in Shanghai. Chinese companies have
engaged in the construction of highways and power-grid
projects in Afghanistan. China will continue to work
with Afghanistan to earnestly implemente our bilateral
memorandum of understanding on the Belt and Road
Initiative and further boost Afghanistan’s trade with
regional partners, as well as the country’s infrastructure,
interconnectivity and socioeconomic development.
Afghanistan boasts geographical and resource
advantages and broad prospects for regional economic
cooperation. We hope that all relevant countries
will demonstrate a spirit of participation in broad
consultations, conscious of joint contributions and
shared benefits, and scale up regional economic
cooperation and interconnectivity to help Afghanistan
benefit from regional development and build a
community for the common future of humankind.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank
the President for having convened this important
meeting on the situation in Afghanistan. I would also
like to thank Germany for its efforts in facilitating
consultations on draft resolution A/73/L.44, which
stresses the importance of continued peace and stability
in Afghanistan.
The United Arab Emirates strongly believes
that conflict resolution depends on peaceful means,
especially dialogue. We therefore fully support the
political reconciliation led by the Government of
Afghanistan and commend the efforts of President
Ashraf Ghani to ensure the success of the process and
launch peace talks. The United Arab Emirates believes
that the positive participation of all strata of Afghan

A/73/PV.46

society, particularly the Taliban, is essential for the
success of those efforts.
The United Arab Emirates delegation is concerned
by the deterioration in the security situation in
Afghanistan over the past few years, especially in
the light of the presence of Al-Qaida and Da’esh and
the continued activities of other criminal and armed
groups, which have affected the United Arab Emirates.
Indeed, I recall the terrorist attack on a delegation of
Emirati diplomats in Kandahar participating in Emirati
philanthropic projects for the benefit of the Afghan
people, which claimed the lives of six Emirati diplomat
martyrs. That only strengthened our determination
and commitment to fighting terrorism wherever it
occurs. In that regard, we express our solidarity with
the Government of Afghanistan in its efforts to fight
that scourge.
Ms. Shikongo (Namibia), Vice-President, took
the Chair.
Within the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process on
Regional Security and Cooperation for a Secure
and Stable Afghanistan, the United Arab Emirates,
in its capacity as co-chair for counterterrorism
confidence-building measures, hosted in Abu Dhabi
recently the seventh Regional Technical Group Meeting
on Counter-terrorism Confidence-building Measures
for the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process, which sought
to enhance regional security cooperation in order to
address terrorist threats in the context of a security
and counter-terrorism cooperative approach that
contributes to developing an integrated strategy and
implementation plan related to confidence-building
measures in the area of counter-terrorism.
The United Arab Emirates is eager to help the Afghan
people to achieve their vision of peace, stability and
prosperity. We are therefore committed to supporting
the Government of Afghanistan and its efforts to pursue
large-scale economic, social and political reforms,
especially by enhancing the role of women and youth
in Afghanistan to achieve development and strengthen
Afghan society’s capacity to undertake those reforms.
The efforts of the United Arab Emirates to achieve
development and stability in Afghanistan take the form
of humanitarian and development initiatives. Emirati
assistance between 2012 and 2017 totalled $433 million.
That assistance was used mainly for education, health
care and women’s empowerment. In the presence of the
Afghan President, a housing project was also launched

18-4157313/23

A/73/PV.46

in Kabul early this year at a cost of 710 million Emirati
dirham. The United Arab Emirates has consistently
provided financial assistance for the rebuilding of
schools, medical facilities and roads, and for ensuring
relief aid for those affected by disasters.
Based on our policy of respect for the nationals of
countries afflicted by wars or disasters, my country’s
Government decided in June to grant the nationals of
such countries one-year renewable residency while
they are unable to return home. That demonstrates
our solidarity with those people. We also support their
living conditions so that they will eventually be able to
go back to their countries. The United Arab Emirates
continues to urge neighbouring countries hosting
Afghan nationals not to exploit them in regional issues
and conflicts that have nothing to do with them.
In conclusion, The United Arab Emirates enjoys
strong relations with the people of Afghanistan, bound
by history, traditions and common culture. We will
continue to provide the necessary assistance to the
Afghan people out of our human and Islamic duty
through bilateral or multilateral cooperation.
Mr. Cooreman (Belgium): Like others, I would
like to thank all delegations that participated in the
consultations on draft resolution A/73/L.44, in particular
my Afghan and German colleagues for having so ably
facilitated the negotiations. We are proud to co-sponsor
the draft resolution and look forward to its adoption.
Belgium associates itself fully with the statement
of the European Union.
Afghanistan has made considerable political,
security, economic and development progress over the
past decade. The draft resolution before us highlights
many of those advances, for which the Government
of Afghanistan and the Afghan people deserve much
credit. But the gains made are fragile and major
challenges remain. I would like to stress three points.
First, Afghanistan has had a momentous year,
and an even more momentous year lies ahead of
us. Belgium congratulates the Afghan authorities
on the parliamentary elections held on 20 October,
which marked another important step towards the
consolidation of democracy in the country. At the
same time, it is important to draw lessons from these
elections. The Afghan Government and institutions
owe it to the brave and courageous Afghan citizens
to hold orderly, inclusive and credible presidential
14/23

06/12/2018

elections in 2019. The election commissioners must
retain their independence and carry out their crucial
mandate autonomously, building on the experience
they have acquired. Together with the serious security
threat, logistical and technical difficulties must also
be addressed.
The heinous attacks against schools and medical
facilities during the run-up to the elections further
reminded us of the importance of fully respecting
international humanitarian law. In that regard, Belgium
remains deeply concerned about the high number of
civilian casualties and calls on all parties to protect the
civilian population, especially women and children.
The momentous year ahead also applies to my
second point, concerning the peace process. The draft
resolution justly stresses the importance of an Afghanled and Afghan-owned peace process. The international
community must be united in supporting those national
efforts. There are different processes aiming to build
peace in Afghanistan, but it remains essential for the
international community to ensure that all efforts
reinforce each other in a streamlined process. Only
the Kabul Process can act as a central framework in
that respect. Belgium calls on the Taliban leadership
to respond to President Ghani’s unprecedented peace
offer and engage in direct peace talks. The impatience
of the Afghan people for peace is ever clearer. The
international community must heed its call and support
the process by acting in unison. That will also require
continued support from donors.
Thirdly, I want to add Belgium’s voice to the
choir of global support for Afghanistan. I believe that
today is about coming together and uniting behind
our support for progress, sustainable peace and
development. That is the fundamental value of the draft
resolution we will adopt today, and it was also visible
at the Geneva Ministerial Conference last week, where
we had an open and constructive dialogue with the
Afghan Government and the international community
confirmed its continuing support to the necessary
reform and modernization of Afghanistan, including
the strengthening of the rule of law.
Belgium is a steadfast ally of Afghanistan through
our membership of the European Union and NATO.
Both entities have longstanding cooperation agreements
with Afghanistan, to which Belgium fully subscribes.
Earlier this week, the Belgian Government decided to
substantially increase its contribution to the NATO
18-41573

06/12/2018

A/73/PV.46

Resolute Support Mission and to help train the Afghan
national army. We are also supporting the humanitarian
response to the drought through our contributions to
the United Nations Central Emergency Response
Fund. Belgium will substantially increase its support
to the Fund over the next two years, in line with our
commitment to humanitarian principles.
Mr. Gertze
the Chair.

(Namibia),

Vice-President,

took

I am also proud to share a new Belgian contribution
to the Afghanistan country office of UN-Women in
support of its programme to help with the implementation
of the national action plan on women and peace and
security. Belgium attaches great importance to women’s
rights and women’s empowerment. We welcome the
strong emphasis the draft resolution places on those
themes. We encourage the Government of Afghanistan
to redouble efforts towards greater participation by
women in public institutions.
I also want to express my appreciation for the
important work of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan. Belgium will continue to work
with the United Nations and regional and international
partners to support the efforts of the Afghan authorities
and people to achieve peace and prosperity.
Let me conclude by paying my respects to the
victims of the violence in Afghanistan and paying
tribute to the resilience of the Afghan people and the
Afghan National Defence and Security Forces. The year
2018 holds the terrible record of being the most deadly
year for civilians to date. Ten thousand lives have
been lost sinc 2001, including those of many children.
Having served in Afghanistan myself, that suffering is
close to my heart. But peace is possible in Afghanistan,
and Belgium will maintain its support not only for an
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace settlement but
also for the journey after such a settlement. That is why
we are here today.
Ms. Boucher (Canada): I would like to sincerely
thank Germany for the continuing engagement and
leadership it has demonstrated in preparing this
year’s draft resolution on the situation in Afghanistan
(A/73/L.44). I would also like to express my appreciation
to the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan to the
United Nations for his thoughtful statement outlining
not only the important challenges facing his country
but also its real potential.

As he has shown, now more than ever the
international community must stand side-by-side
with Afghanistan as it pursues its efforts to create a
sustainable future and a country that is well-governed,
respects human rights and is in control of its own
destiny. In that regard, I want to highlight the important
role of Afghanistan’s neighbours in supporting peace
efforts and improving interconnectivity and promoting
economic development opportunities with Afghanistan.
The draft resolution before us today demonstrates
the importance of international commitment and
collaboration. It also emphasizes the leadership role
of the Government of Afghanistan and its people in
building a brighter future. That is why we are proud to
co-sponsor this draft resolution, the precursors of which
the Assembly has traditionally adopted by consensus.
The recent Geneva Ministerial Conference on
Afghanistan provided further testament of the world’s
continuing support. It successfully highlighted
the solidarity of the international community with
the Afghan people and the Afghan Government in
their efforts to bring peace and prosperity to their
country. We were also pleased to learn of the Afghan
Government’s renewed commitment to ensuring
progress on development and reform, which are crucial
building blocks to enable stability and prosperity for
the country.
(spoke in French)
Canada is proud of its longstanding security
commitment to Afghanistan. We are proud of our support
for the Afghan peace and reconciliation process. We are
also proud of the significant efforts we have made for
Afghan women and girls. That sense of pride is rooted
in our belief that, by helping Afghanistan build a more
stable, secure and democratic country that respects
human rights, especially those of Afghan women and
girls, not only are we contributing to the development
of the Afghan people, but also helping to create a safer
and more prosperous world.
(spoke in English)
Afghanistan recently went through an important
democratic process with the October 2018 parliamentary
elections. I commend the bravery of the Afghan people
who, defying intimidation and threats of violence, went
to the polls to cast their votes. I also want to recognize
the courage of the Afghan electoral officials and
security-sector personnel supporting the elections. We

18-4157315/23

A/73/PV.46

now look forward to free and fair presidential elections
in Afghanistan in 2019. That will be another major
milestone for the country.
We hope that the lessons learned from the
October 2018 parliamentary elections can be applied
in 2019. In particular, Canada will continue to work
together with its Afghan and international partners to
ensure the meaningful participation of all Afghans,
particularly Afghan women, in the electoral process.
Canada supports an inclusive Afghan-led and Afghanowned peace process in which Afghan women play a
meaningful leadership role. We know that sustainable
peace and security cannot be achieved without the
active and substantive participation of all members of
society, including women and girls.
Canada supports this draft resolution, and we stand
with the Afghan people as they strive for a more secure,
prosperous and peaceful future.
Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): To recover
from decades of insecurity and instability, Afghanistan
needs strong and sustained international support.
In that context, we underline the importance of the
recent Geneva Ministerial Conference on Afghanistan.
It demonstrated the international community’s
unwavering support for, and strong solidarity with,
the people and the Government of Afghanistan in their
endeavour to achieve peace, stability and prosperity.
We have witnessed a number of promising
developments in Afghanistan this year. The holding
of the parliamentary elections, despite all security
threats and plots, was a positive development. Indeed, it
further consolidates the foundations of democracy and
the rule of law in the country. We express our sincere
congratulations to the people and the Government
of Afghanistan for that achievement. It must be
complemented by the upcoming presidential elections
in April 2019. The Islamic Republic of Iran stands
ready to extend all possible assistance to the brotherly
country of Afghanistan to hold that election in a free
and fair manner.
Recent developments in Afghanistan include the
renewed efforts for peace and reconciliation. As it stands,
there is a strong national, regional and global consensus
that there is no military solution in the country. The
time is therefore ripe for national reconciliation and
an inclusive political solution in Afghanistan. That
should be owned and led by the Afghan Government
and people. The complementary Kabul, Tashkent and
16/23

06/12/2018

Moscow formats attest to that momentum, which must
be seized.
The international community should facilitate
intra-Afghan dialogue by helping to bring the Taliban
to the negotiating table for inclusive and comprehensive
talks with the Government. Genuine and strong
international support as well as domestic and regional
inclusion will be key to success.
Moreover, if they are to lead to a durable solution,
such efforts must be inclusive and based on existing
political foundations, such as the Constitution. More
important, they should take into account the underlying
causes of instability and insecurity in the country
over the past four decades. One of those causes has
been the presence of foreign forces, which have never
brought stability to Afghanistan or our region; rather,
historically, they have provided a recruiting ground for
extremists. That is why we have never believed that such
forces contribute to Afghanistan’s peace and stability.
Our support to the annual General Assembly
resolution on the situation in Afghanistan reflects our
genuine and general support for a neighbouring country
and should not be misinterpreted as according any sort
of acknowledgement to, or support for, the continued
presence or activities of foreign forces in that country.
On the contrary, in our view, the best contribution
that foreign forces could make towards peace and
stability in Afghanistan would be to withdraw. We
therefore continue to call strongly for a time-bound
and responsible withdrawal of all foreign forces from
Afghanistan, regardless of their mandate or structure.
Instead of deploying foreign forces, every
effort should be made to support and strengthen
Afghanistan’s military and security forces. That is one
of the main requirements for the long-term stability
of Afghanistan, and should therefore be pursued as a
high priority. It is essential in particular for combating
terrorist groups, such as Da’esh, whose introduction into
Afghanistan has led to more bloodshed and dangerous
sectarian tendencies.
We have stated time and again that no one has
gained from introducing and supporting Da’esh and
other terrorists in Syria and Iraq. No one will gain from
introducing them in Afghanistan and Central Asia.
This alarming and horrific trend needs to be stopped
before it reaches catastrophic proportions. One of the
main factors in that regard should be a two-pronged
strategy to fight both drug-trafficking and terrorism
18-41573

06/12/2018

simultaneously. That is crucial, since terrorism and
drug trafficking have historically always been mutually
reinforcing in Afghanistan.
At the same time, to fight the drug menace, we
need a comprehensive strategy, which must include the
economic development of Afghanistan’s rich resources.
To that end, the international community should
continue to support the ongoing efforts of the people
and the Government of Afghanistan to make optimal
use of its existing economic opportunities.
As a brotherly country, Iran has offered
unprecedented support to the Afghan people over the
past 40 years, including by hosting almost 4 million
Afghan refugees. We are ready to continue to help our
Afghan brothers and sisters in their quest for peace and
cooperation with all, based on our shared objectives.
To support the sustainable socioeconomic
development of Afghanistan, efforts are under way in
my country to ensure that contributions are provided in
a sustained and institutionalized manner. Connectivity
is a vital element in that regard, and Iran’s sea and
rail links, including Chabahar, are essential for
Afghanistan’s development. Taking into account the
unlawful unilateral sanctions against Iran, we would
like to stress that any attempt to disrupt this vital
project will only play into the hands of those who do
not want peace and progress for Afghanistan.
We support the efforts of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and underline
the need for a strong partnership between United
Nations agencies and that country. We highlight the
importance of the adoption of the annual General
Assembly resolution on the situation in Afghanistan.
As it represents the international community’s strong
support for Afghanistan, the resolution should be
balanced, reflect the current situation on the ground
and include the concerns of all. That is vital to ensuring
that its content enjoys the unambiguous support of all
Member States.
I would like to conclude by reaffirming the resolve of
the people and the Government of the Islamic Republic
of Iran to continue their support to the fraternal people
and the Government of Afghanistan.
Mr. Islam (Bangladesh): The delegation of
Bangladesh wishes to thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive report on Afghanistan (A/73/374).

A/73/PV.46

Bangladesh
remains
encouraged
by
the
international community’s commitment of constant
support for sustained peace and stability in Afghanistan.
The Security Council’s visit to the country from
13 to 15 January was an affirmation of the international
community’s continued support for a peaceful, secure,
stable and prosperous Afghanistan.
We followed with interest the Geneva Ministerial
Conference on Afghanistan held on 27 and
28 November, at which the Government of Afghanistan
reaffirmed its commitment to reform, democratic
processes and development for the Afghan people.
Bangladesh welcomes the joint communiqué and the
Geneva Mutual Accountability Framework agreed in
Geneva. We underscore the primacy of an Afghan-led
and Afghan-owned process, supported by enhanced
regional and international cooperation, for lasting
peace and stability in the country.
Bangladesh welcomes the achievements of the
National Unity Government in the political, governance,
economic and social spheres. We commend initiatives
to promote the enhanced participation of women
and young people in addressing peace, security and
development issues.
We congratulate the Afghan Government and
people on the parliamentary elections held in October,
in defiance of terrorist threats and attacks in various
parts of the country. We, along with the international
community, look forward to the holding of the
presidential elections scheduled for April 2019.
Bangladesh attaches importance to demonstrable
efforts by the United Nations to promote peace and
security, development and human rights in Afghanistan.
We express our support for the sustained engagement of
the Secretary-General and his Special Representative
for Afghanistan. We appreciate the work of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
pursuant to Security Council resolution 2405 (2018).
Bangladesh wishes to see the safe, voluntary and
dignified return of Afghan refugees and encourages the
continued implementation of the resolution, taking into
consideration the realities on the ground.
Bangladesh unequivocally condemns all terrorist
attacks in Afghanistan and expresses its steadfast
solidarity with its Government and people. We share
concerns at the presence of terrorist groups aiming
to spread and consolidate their network across the
region and beyond. We remain particularly alert to the

18-4157317/23

A/73/PV.46

06/12/2018

reported presence of foreign terrorist fighters and the
involvement of terrorist groups in narcotics cultivation
and trafficking. Bangladesh acknowledges the valiant
role played by the Afghan National Defence and
Security Forces in the face of such risks and urges the
international community to maintain support for their
capacity-building efforts. We stand ready to cooperate
with the relevant Afghan authorities to share information
and experience, including under relevant regional
arrangements. As a matter of principle, Bangladesh
remains committed not to allow its territory to be use
for terrorist or otherwise hostile activities against any
country, including those in our region.

In 2002, Building Resources Across Communities,
the largest non-governmental organization in
Bangladesh, began its first international operation in
Afghanistan. It has since continued to play a significant
role by providing secondary, higher secondary,
technical and vocational education and community
health services, working with local authorities to
build rural infrastructure and helping to implement
social-development projects in many provinces and
hard-to-reach communities. That development approach
improves participation, raises awareness of gender
equality and child rights and encourages ownership by
the community.

Under the leadership of Honourable Prime
Minister Sheikh Hasina, Bangladesh continues to
attach the highest priority to further strengthening and
consolidating bilateral relations with its neighbours in
South Asia. Considering that development in education,
health and agriculture is vital in realizing peace, we
are willing to share our development experiences
with Afghanistan in various areas, namely, women’s
empowerment, non-formal education, community
health care, water and sanitation, human resources
development, judicial system reform and social
and humanitarian programmes. We have offered to
provide training to help Afghan professionals and
officials develop the necessary skills in areas such
as the financial, judicial and administrative sectors,
disaster management, agricultural extension and
youth development.

We stress the importance of maintaining the unity
of purpose of Member States in contributing to lasting
peace and sustainable development in Afghanistan.
The legitimate aspirations of the Afghan people must
take precedence over external considerations. The
draft resolution before us should reflect our collective
commitment to that effect, and we thank the German
delegation for facilitating its preparation.

Bangladesh and Afghanistan are currently working
to further their existing bilateral relations through
institutional frameworks such as foreign office
consultations, trade agreements, cultural exchanges,
visa waivers for Government officials and air services
agreements. Bangladesh also offers scholarships to
students from Afghanistan to study medicine and other
higher degree subjects.
Since we believe in the potential of regional
connectivity as the key for ensuring growth and
eliminating poverty, we feel encouraged by various
initiatives of countries in the region to unlock the
trade and transit potential that Afghanistan offers as
a connectivity hub. Drawing on Bangladesh’s recent
initiatives at fostering subregional connectivity, we
look forward to broadening this template to enter into
beneficial regional connectivity arrangements with
other South and Central Asian countries.
18/23

Mr. Camp (United States of America): The
United States welcomes draft resolution A/73/L.44,
on Afghanistan, which we were happy to co-sponsor.
My country seeks an inclusive peace that will benefit
all Afghan men and women. We seek a peace in which
Afghanistan plays its rightful and obligatory role,
contributing to international security and ensuring that
its territory is no longer exploited by terrorists. And
we seek a peace that accelerates economic growth and
prosperity for Afghanistan and its neighbours.
There are encouraging signs: the National Unity
Government’s invitation to the Taliban to enter
peace talks without preconditions; the Government’s
establishment of an action plan and road map and
appointment of an inclusive negotiating team; and the
Eid al-Fitr ceasefire, the first of its kind in 17 years,
although followed by the Taliban’s disappointing
failure to accept a second ceasefire during Eid al-Adha.
A Taliban commitment to a peaceful outcome is long
overdue. We call on the Taliban to commit to a ceasefire
and appoint an authoritative negotiating team.
For our part, the United States continues its support
for an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned process. Peace
in Afghanistan is possible, and we must all seize this
opportunity. Today we reaffirm our commitment to the
Afghan people and welcome the progress that has been
made and will be made in the future.
18-41573

06/12/2018

A/73/PV.46

Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): The United Kingdom
urges the General Assembly to provide its full support
to the Government of Afghanistan and to the draft
resolution before us (A/73/L.44). We commend the
efforts of our German colleagues as penholders on the
draft resolution, which we believe should command
broad agreement and consensus as in previous years.
The United Kingdom remains committed in our
support for the Government of Afghanistan along
with the international community, as demonstrated at
the Geneva Ministerial Conference on Afghanistan
last week.

references to the protection and empowerment of
women and girls in the draft resolution. In particular,
we welcome the inclusion of paragraph 35, which
commends the Government of Afghanistan on its work
towards ensuring the full and equal participation of
women in all spheres of life in Afghanistan. That vital
work ranges from the implementation of Afghanistan’s
2015 national action plan on women and peace and
security to the representation of women on the High
Peace Council and, most recently, to the inclusion of
women on President Ghani’s proposed negotiating team
for peace talks.

The draft resolution recognizes the importance of
an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned political process, for
the benefit of the people of Afghanistan. We agree with
the Government of Afghanistan that that is the only
way to deliver a just and lasting peace, and believe that
all present today should give it their full support.

In conclusion, we urge that the Assembly give its
full support to the draft resolution and its endorsement
of the importance of respect for human rights and of a
political settlement to end the violence in Afghanistan.

The bravery and determination of the Afghan
people in participating in the parliamentary elections in
October confirm the demand for a political environment
in which all citizens have an equal opportunity to have
their say on the future of their country. The elections
also demonstrated yet again the resilience, tenacity and
courage of the people of Afghanistan. We welcome the
inclusion in the draft resolution of language that pays
tribute to those who defied threats and intimidation to
exercise their democratic rights.
Nevertheless, a number of technical and logistical
problems arose in the elections that are of concern. It is
vital that Afghanistan’s electoral management bodies
learn from the experience and implement reforms ahead
of next year’s presidential elections to ensure that such
problems do not reoccur.
As Afghanistan continues to develop its
institutions, we welcome the importance placed by
the draft resolution on the successful efforts of the
Government of Afghanistan to deliver on its reform
agenda. As the international community discussed in
Geneva, there have been notable successes, including
on fiscal sustainability, improved budgeting and the
progress this year against the ease-of-doing-business
indicators. That will all help lead Afghanistan towards a
collective vision of self-reliance. However, it is vital for
the pace of reform to accelerate and continue through
the upcoming election period.
For peace to be sustainable, it must be inclusive.
As such, we are extremely encouraged by the multiple

The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item. We shall now proceed
to consider draft resolution A/73/L.44.
Before giving the floor to delegations that wish to
speak in explanation of vote before the voting, I would
like to remind delegations that explanations are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Russian Federation.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation attaches particular
importance to the situation in Afghanistan and to the
adoption by the General Assembly of draft resolution
A/73/L.44, whose text must be based on a thorough
analysis, take into account the current realities and
reflect collective approaches by the international
community to find effective and lasting solutions to the
situation in Afghanistan.
Instead of that, for the first time in some years, the
consultations on the draft text ignored not just regional
dynamics but also a number of principled Russian
concerns that it would have been no trouble to consider.
Given the lack of consensus, we propose that the draft
resolution be put to a vote, since we cannot support
it. The text has a great deal to say about the progress
that has been made in normalizing the situation in the
Islamic Republic of Afghanistan, when the real situation
in the country is actually quite different, as the Security
Council mission to Kabul in particular confirmed. We
have seen the situation deteriorate year after year,

18-4157319/23

A/73/PV.46

and frankly we have a host of questions about who is
responsible for the current situation in Afghanistan.
We still have not received any objective reports on the
concrete outcomes of the international coalition’s 17year battle against terrorism and drug trafficking. It is
regrettable that during the work on the draft resolution
a number of delegations simply ignored the objective
reality of the growing threat that the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) poses to security not just
in Afghanistan but its neighbours, including States in
Central Asia, despite the fact that the presence of ISIL’s
fighters is a harsh reality that must not be downplayed
or merely ignored.
We were disappointed by a number of delegations’
unwillingness to take objective account of the role
and outcomes of the Moscow format consultations,
which have become an important platform for
launching focused negotiations to advance the
national reconciliation process. Among other things,
on 9 November an important meeting took place in
Moscow between representatives of Kabul and the
Taliban. In our view, that represents an unwillingness
to genuinely help shift the efforts to mobilize the
intra-Afghan dialogue to a practical level. We firmly
believe that our common task, in agreeing on the kind of
texts dealing with regional crises such as the conflict in
Afghanistan, should first and foremost be to avoid gaps
between United Nations decisions and the realities of
a region. This unwillingness to reflect the real picture
will lead to a dead end that will not only not promote
a settlement but will undermine confidence in the
General Assembly’s decisions. For future consultations
on draft resolutions, we would like to once again ask
penholders to take objective account of the principled
comments and concerns of all delegations, not just
specific countries.
In conclusion, we should emphasize that the
Russian delegation has actively and consistently
supported the Afghan people’s desire for lasting peace
in their country. Russia and Afghanistan are bound
by time-tested friendly relations that correspond to
our countries’ national interests and promote stable,
multifaceted development in the whole region and the
world in general.
We greatly appreciate the heroism and courage of
Afghanistan’s armed forces and pay due tribute to all
who have died fighting terrorist threats. However, it
will be impossible to stabilize Afghanistan and resolve
its problems without a comprehensive approach on
20/23

06/12/2018

the part of the international community. We are ready
to continue to work to improve the coordination of
all States’ action in the interests of ensuring peace
in Afghanistan.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of vote before the voting.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Afghanistan on a point of order.
Mr. Saikal (Afghanistan): I take the floor to
explain our position on the proposal of the Russian
delegation. Our delegation would like to express its
deep regret at the Russian delegation’s request for a
vote on this year’s draft resolution (A/73/L.44) on the
situation in Afghanistan.
The resolution on the situation in Afghanistan
has been adopted by consensus every year since its
inclusion on the agenda of the General Assembly. In
the past few years it has continued to garner strong
consensus support in the General Assembly, reflecting
the international community’s commitment to assisting
our people in overcoming decades of conflict and
achieving a durable peace and stability.
As always, the negotiations on this year’s draft
resolution were inclusive and ably led by the delegation
of Germany as facilitator. During the course of
negotiations, delegations presented views and proposals
that were carefully considered and deliberated on.
The various stakeholders, particularly Afghanistan,
demonstrated a great degree of flexibility in order
to achieve consensus on related issues that conform
to the needs and priorities of Afghanistan.As late as
last night we did our best to reach out to our Russian
colleagues. The main objective of the process was to
maintain the essence of last year’s resolution 72/10
while incorporating the many important developments
that have transpired over the past year in Afghanistan.
This year’s draft resolution reflects those
developments, while reaffirming the international
community’s continued support. The Russian
delegation expressed concern about three points. The
first was the reference in the draft resolution to the
Moscow format consultations, the second was about
the threat posed by Da’esh and similar terrorist groups,
and the third was the reference to NATO’s continued
support role in Afghanistan in helping to enhance the
capacity of the Afghan National Defence and Security
Forces through commitments made at the Brussels and
18-41573

06/12/2018

A/73/PV.46

Warsaw conferences. I will touch briefly on each of
those three points.

additional changes would therefore not be acceptable
to Afghanistan and our relevant international partners.

First, Afghanistan has been clear in welcoming all
regional and international processes in support of our
Afghan-owned and -led peace efforts. However, we
have taken the clear position that all such initiatives
should serve to reinforce the centrality of Afghan
ownership and leadership of our peace efforts aimed at
bringing an end to the current conflict.

The representative of the Russian Federation
reminded us of the Security Council’s visit to Kabul
in January, about 11 months ago, where I was present
when the Russian delegation, seated at a dining table
with our President, pledged to improve coordination
and consensus among the members of the Security
Council, with a focus on improving security and
development in Afghanistan. We had been looking
forward to seeing further cooperation with the Russian
Federation reflected in the draft resolution.

This year’s draft resolution includes a reference
to the Moscow format consultations, based on agreed
language in the Geneva communiqué endorsed a
little less than two weeks ago in the presence of all
delegations, including that of the Russian Federation.
Along with a large group of countries, we were therefore
not able to agree with language modifications on the
Moscow format that deviated from the language agreed
on in Geneva. Moreover, while the Moscow meeting
represented a development, it took place in a way that
contradicted the principle of transparency, since four of
the five Taliban members who travelled to Moscow did
so without a travel-ban exemption from the Committee
pusuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015), concerning ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings
and entities.
Secondly, the Afghan National Defence and Security
Forces are on the front line of the fight against various
terrorist groups that have come from abroad, including
Da’esh and its affiliates. The progress that our forces
have made in combating such groups, particularly
Da’esh, has reached new levels, and those groups have
suffered heavy setbacks on the battlefield, resulting in
a substantially diminished presence in various parts of
the country, including the north. We therefore opted to
retain agreed language from last year’s resolution that
reflected the threat of Da’esh without exaggerating the
reality of the situation on the ground.
Thirdly, Afghanistan is engaged with various
international partners for security and stability,
including NATO, which provides a significant portion
of security support and training for the Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces. In that regard,
various paragraphs of the draft resolution were
streamlined to produce a more focused text, including
some references to NATO, at the proposal of a number
of delegations, including the Russian Federation. Any

We once again express our regret at the Russian
Federation’s request for a vote, which suggests an
intention to play a non-constructive role with respect to
the international community’s consensus and support
for Afghanistan. We therefore call on all Member States
to vote in favour of the draft resolution, in keeping with
the long-standing support of the General Assembly and
the international community for a peaceful, stable and
prosperous Afghanistan.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany on a point of order.
Mr. Licharz (Germany): Germany fully aligns
itself with the statement on a point of order made by the
representative of Afghanistan, who very ably described
the process of preparing draft resolution A/73/L.44,
which is before us today, and the substantive points
that were incorporated during that long and inclusive
process. Without repeating his points, I want only
to reiterate Germany’s regret about the Russian
Federation’s request that the draft resolution be put to a
vote. We call on all Member States not only to support
the draft resolution but in doing that to support the
Afghan people and Government.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Russian Federation on a point
of order.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I just briefly want to ascertain the point of
order on which the delegations of Afghanistan and
Germany have just spoken. The Russian delegation
made a statement explaining our vote before the
voting and requesting a decision on that vote. There
was no violation of the order of the meeting, which is
why I assume that the delegations of Afghanistan and
Germany were speaking in explanation of vote before

18-4157321/23

A/73/PV.46

06/12/2018

the voting and not on a point of order. Would you please
clarify that, Sir?
The Acting President: In response to the question
from the delegation of the Russian Federation, I refer
the Assembly to rule 88 of its rules of procedure, which
states that the President shall not permit the proposer of
a proposal to explain his vote on his own proposal. The
delegations of Afghanistan and Germany utilized that
rule in making their statements.
The Assembly will now take a decision on
draft resolution A/73/L.44, entitled “The situation
in Afghanistan”.
I give the floor to the representative of the Russian
Federation on a point of order.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): You, Sir, referred to rule 88 of the General
Assembly’s rules of procedure, which states that after
the President has announced the beginning of voting,
no representative shall interrupt the voting except
on a point of order. As I understand it, you had not
announced the beginning of the voting, and we made
our statement explaining our vote before the voting
and asking for draft resolution A/73/L.44 to be put to a
vote. It is therefore incorrect to say that the delegations
of Afghanistan and Germany were speaking on a
point of order in accordance with rule 88 of the rules
of procedure. Those delegations were speaking in
explanation of vote before the voting, because the vote
had not yet been announced.
The Acting President: The statement of the
Russian Federation is noted and will be included in the
record of the meeting.
The Assembly will now proceed to take action
on draft resolution A/73/L.44, entitled “The situation
in Afghanistan”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to those delegations listed in document
A/73/L.44, the following countries have become
sponsors of the draft resolution: Albania, Andorra,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Finland,
Georgia, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
22/23

Ireland, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Nepal, New Zealand, Norway,
Pakistan, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Korea,
Romania, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkmenistan, Ukraine and
United Arab Emirates.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/73/L.44. A recorded
vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belgium, Bhutan,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Cambodia, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malawi, Maldives, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen
Against:
None
18-41573

06/12/2018

Abstaining:
Libya, Russian Federation, Zimbabwe
Draft resolution A/73/L.44 was adopted by 124
votes to none, with 3 abstentions (resolution 73/88).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in explanation of vote on the resolution just
adopted, may I remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
I now give the floor to the representative of China.
Mr. Lie Cheng (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
adoption of resolution 73/88, on the situation in
Afghanistan, contributes to demonstrating the support
of the international community for the people and the
Government of Afghanistan and will help to encourage
the National Unity Government to make continued
efforts to promote socioeconomic development and
national reconciliation. It will also contribute to
enhancing economic cooperation and interconnectivity

A/73/PV.46

in the region and helping Afghanistan to participate in
the regional economic integration process.
China is not fully satisfied with parts of the text
of the resolution just adopted, which, on a number
of important issues, failed to maintain the consensus
among Member States that had been reached in the
past. During consultations on the draft resolution, the
important concerns of a number of Member States
were not accommodated and, as a result, a recorded
vote was requested. China would like to express its
disappointment in that regard. Nevertheless, on the
basis of its support for the early achievement of peace,
stability and development in Afghanistan, China voted
in favour of the resolution.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 40?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.

18-4157323/23
