United Nations

A/RES/69/268

General Assembly

Distr.: General
7 April 2015

Sixty-ninth session
Agenda item 13

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 5 March 2015
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/69/L.54 and Add.1)]

69/268. Education for democracy
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the Charter of the United Nations, including the principles and
purposes contained therein, and recognizing that human rights, the rule of law and
democracy are interlinked and mutually reinforcing and that they belong to the
universal and indivisible core values and principles of the United Nations,
Reaffirming also the right of everyone to education, which is enshrined in the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1 the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, 2 the Convention on the Rights of the Child, 3 the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, 4 the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities 5 and in other relevant
instruments,
Recalling its resolution 67/18 of 28 November 2012 and the results of the plan
of action for the second phase (2010–2014) of the World Programme for Human
Rights Education, 6 and welcoming the plan of action for the third phase (2015–2019)
of the World Programme, 7
Taking note of section VII, entitled “Supporting the global citizenship agenda
through education for democracy”, of resolution 1 adopted on 20 November 2013 by
the General Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization at its thirty-seventh session, 8

_______________
1

Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
3
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
4
Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
5
Ibid., vol. 2515, No. 44910.
6
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/65/53/Add.1),
chap. II, resolution 15/11.
7
Ibid., Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 53A and corrigenda (A/69/53/Add.1 and Corr.1 and 2),
chap. IV, sect. A, resolution 27/12.
8
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Records of the General Conference,
Thirty-seventh session, Paris, 5–20 November 2013, vol. 1 and corrigendum, Resolutions, sect. IV.
2

15-03515 (E)

*1503515*

Please recycle

A/RES/69/268

Education for democracy

Stressing the complementarity of human rights education, training and learning
and education for democracy,
Reaffirming that democracy is a universal value based on the freely expressed
will of people to determine their own political, economic, social and cultural
systems and their full participation in all aspects of their lives, 9
Recalling the United Nations Millennium Declaration 10 wherein the Member
States committed themselves to sparing no effort to promote and strengthen
democracy, good governance and the rule of law at national and international levels,
as well as respect for all internationally recognized human rights and fundamental
freedoms, including the right to development, and resolved to respect fully and
uphold the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, to strive for the full protection
and promotion in all countries of civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights
for all and to strengthen the capacity of all countries to implement the principles and
practices of democracy and respect for human rights, including minority rights,
Recognizing that, while democracies share common features, there is no single
model of democracy and that democracy does not belong to any country or region,
Mindful of the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action of the World
Conference on Human Rights, 11 the World Plan of Action on Education for Human
Rights and Democracy adopted by the International Congress on Education for Human
Rights and Democracy, 12 the World Programme for Human Rights Education
proclaimed by the General Assembly in its resolution 59/113 A of 10 December 2004
and the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Education and Training,13
Recalling with appreciation the establishment of the United Nations Democracy
Fund and the efforts of the Fund to advance the United Nations democracy agenda, as
well as the operational activities in support of democratization processes carried out
by the United Nations system, including by the Department of Political Affairs of
the Secretariat, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights and the United Nations Development Programme,
Acknowledging the role of international, regional and other intergovernmental
organizations in support of democracy,
Recognizing that education contributes to the strengthening of democracy, the
realization of human rights and the achievement of all internationally agreed
development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals, the development
of human potential, poverty alleviation and the fostering of greater understanding
among peoples,
Recalling its resolution 68/309 of 10 September 2014, in which it welcomed
the report of the Open Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals 14 and
decided that the proposal of the Open Working Group contained in the report shall
be the main basis for integrating sustainable development goals into the post-2015
development agenda, while recognizing that other inputs will also be considered, in
the intergovernmental negotiation process at the sixty-ninth session of the General
Assembly,
_______________
9

Resolution 60/1, para. 135.
Resolution 55/2.
11
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
12
A/CONF.157/PC/42/Add.6.
13
Resolution 66/137, annex.
14
A/68/970 and Corr.1.
10

2/3

Education for democracy

A/RES/69/268

1.
Reaffirms the fundamental link between democratic governance, peace,
development and the promotion and protection of all human rights and fundamental
freedoms, which are interdependent and mutually reinforcing;
2.
Recalls the Global Education First initiative launched by the SecretaryGeneral on 26 September 2012, in particular its third priority area on fostering
global citizenship;
3.
Encourages the Secretary-General, United Nations agencies such as the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the United
Nations Children’s Fund, the United Nations Population Fund, the United Nations
Development Programme and the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), and other relevant stakeholders to
strengthen their efforts to promote the values of peace, human rights, democracy,
respect for religious and cultural diversity and justice through education;
4.
Strongly encourages Member States to integrate education for democracy,
along with civic education and human rights education, into their education
standards and to develop and strengthen programmes, curricula and curricular and
extracurricular educational activities aimed at the promotion and consolidation of
democratic values and democratic governance and human rights, taking into account
innovative approaches and best practices in the field, in order to facilitate citizens’
empowerment and participation in political life and policymaking at all levels;
5.
Invites United Nations agencies, funds and programmes, including the
United Nations Democracy Fund, the United Nations Development Programme, the
United Nations Children’s Fund, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization, to provide appropriate expertise and resources for the
development of relevant educational programmes and materials for democracy;
6.
Encourages international, regional and other intergovernmental
organizations, within their respective mandates, to share their best practices and
experiences in the field of education for democracy, including but not limited to
civic education, with each other and with the United Nations system, as appropriate;
7.
Decides to continue its consideration of the issue of education for
democracy at its seventy-first session, under the agenda item entitled “Integrated
and coordinated implementation of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the economic, social and related fields”;
8.
Invites Governments, the agencies and organizations of the United Nations
system and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to intensify their
efforts to promote education for democracy, requests the Secretary-General, in
cooperation with the Director-General of the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization, within existing reporting obligations, to report to the
General Assembly at its seventy-first session on the implementation of the present
resolution, and invites the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the
right to education, within his existing mandate, to contribute to the report of the
Secretary-General.
81st plenary meeting
5 March 2015

3/3
