S/2019/637

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
7 August 2019
Original: English

Letter dated 30 July 2019 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to write to you with regard to the financing of the Residual
Special Court for Sierra Leone.
Pursuant to article 3 of the Agreement between the United Nations and the
Government of Sierra Leone on the establishment of a Residual Special Court for
Sierra Leone, the expenses of the Court shall be borne by voluntary contributions
from the international community, and the parties and the Oversight Committee may
explore alternative means of financing the Court. The Oversight Committee has
informed me that the Court will run out of funding at the end of 2019 and that, while
fundraising efforts will continue, it is not expected that there will be sufficient
voluntary contributions for the operations of the Court beyond 2019.
The Residual Special Court was established pursuant to a mandate from the
Security Council and has been carrying out residual functions of the Special Court
for Sierra Leone since 1 January 2014. Those functions include supervising the
enforcement of sentences of the persons who were convicted by the Special Court;
providing for witness and victim protection and support; preserving and managing
the archives of the Special Court; responding to requests for access to evidence by
national prosecution authorities; responding to requests from national authorities with
respect to claims for compensation; reviewing convictions and acquittals; conducting
contempt of court proceedings; providing defence counsel and legal aid for the
conduct of proceedings before the Residual Special Court; and preventing double
jeopardy.
The Residual Special Court is a lean institution with a small number of staff.
The Registrar is the only senior full-time official, and the judges, the Prosecutor and
the Principal Defender are remunerated on a pro rata basis for work actually
performed. In order to minimize costs further, the office of the Residual Special Court
in The Hague is co-located with and receives administrative support, on a cost reimbursable basis, from the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals. In this regard, the General Assembly has requested me to ensure that the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals will continue to provide
logistical and administrative support to the Residual Special Court, on a costreimbursable basis, as appropriate, and without prejudice to the mandate of each of
the entities.
The senior officials of the Court have been fundraising since January 2019 and
have adopted more innovative fundraising approaches with a view to broadening the
Court’s donor base. Furthermore, in May 2019, I wrote to all Member States to appeal

19-13574 (E)

090819

*1913574*

S/2019/637

for voluntary contributions for the Court. To date, two Member States have
contributed a total of US$ 61,200 in 2019, for which I am gra teful. No contributions
or pledges have been made towards the Court’s budget for fiscal year 2020.
The Residual Special Court is helping to consolidate the rule of law and the
contribution of the Special Court towards achieving peace and security in Sier ra
Leone and the region. If it does not secure sufficient funding, the Residual Special
Court will not be able to fulfil its important mandate. The failure of the Residual
Special Court would diminish the legacy of the Special Court for Sierra Leone and
severely undermine the achievements made in pursuit of accountability for the serious
international crimes committed in Sierra Leone.
In the light of the foregoing, I intend to propose to the General Assembly that
the costs of the Residual Special Court for 2020 should be provided through a
subvention under the assessed programme budget.
A subvention would be a temporary measure to address the current financial
situation. The General Assembly requested in resolution 73/279 A of 22 December
2018 that I further analyse the options concerning the long-term arrangements for the
Residual Special Court. I will continue to consult with the Government of Sierra
Leone, the Oversight Committee of the Residual Special Court and relevant
stakeholders on potential alternative financing arrangements. I will also continue
consultations to ensure that the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals continues to provide logistical and administrative support to t he Residual
Special Court, on a cost-reimbursable basis, as appropriate, without prejudice to the
mandate of the two institutions.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

2/2

19-13574
