A /75/PV.33

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fifth session

33rd plenary meeting

Tuesday, 1 December 2020, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bozkir  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Turkey)

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Agenda item 137 (continued)
Seventy-fifth anniversary of the end of the Second
World War
Special solemn meeting in commemoration of
all victims of the Second World War
The President: The General Assembly will now
hold a special solemn meeting in commemoration of all
victims of the Second World War, in accordance with
paragraph 2 of resolution 75/5, of 5 November 2020.
In keeping with Assembly decision 75/501,
of 18 September 2020, regarding the format of
commemorative meetings, Member States are
encouraged to deliver regional group statements.
I shall now make a statement.
This year, we mark the seventy-fifth anniversary of
the end of the Second World War. In six years of war,
approximately 75 million people lost their lives, the
majority of whom were civilians. Today, as requested by
the General Assembly in its resolution 75/5, we honour
and remember all victims of war, those who sacrificed
their lives and all the innocent lives that suffered.
The Second World War was one of the most
catastrophic events in human history. Almost all States
were affected. The Holocaust shocked the world. The
aftermath was devastating. Across the globe, parents
lost their children, and a generation grew up without
their parents; poverty was rampant, and millions were

left destitute and starving. Economies were in tatters.
The world witnessed the devastation of the atomic
bomb. The brutality was incomprehensible.
That untold sorrow established the conditions for
a strong multilateral platform, the United Nations, “to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war”.
The deadliest conflict in history demonstrated the clear
need for a forum that could be a centre for harmonizing
the actions of nations.
As Secretary-General Dag Hammarskjöld said
in 1954, “The United Nations was not created to take
mankind to heaven, but to save humanity from hell”.
While we are certainly not in heaven, neither are
we in hell. As a collective community, we have made
tremendous progress since the end of the Second
World War in all aspects of human development. We
have established many organizations to facilitate
international and regional cooperation. The multilateral
system is based on the promotion of democratic values,
human rights and fundamental freedoms, and the
United Nations is at the heart of all those efforts.
But while much progress has been made, we can
certainly do better and do more. Our founders recognized
that the three pillars of the United Nations — peace and
security, development and human rights — are equally
important, interrelated and interdependent. One cannot
advance without the other.
Peace, security, freedom and development are
linked inextricably to the international promotion and
protection of rights and freedoms. Failure to respect

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-33724 (E)

*2033724*

A/75/PV.33

individual and collective human rights as well as
discrimination and stigmatization are not only against
the very principles of law and the international legal
system; they also impede development and lead
to insecurity.
Development goals have not been met, including
the Millennium Development Goals. Similarly, we are
not on track to meet the Sustainable Development Goals
by 2030. We are not doing enough to tackle climate
change and biodiversity loss. We were not prepared
for the pandemic and its consequences. Conflicts,
unfortunately, continue to exist all around the world.
So long as human rights and development challenges
exist, conflicts will continue, and the continuation of
conflicts will prevent millions from enjoying their
rights and from living a dignified and prosperous life.
So today, as we commemorate all victims of war,
we do so knowing that we still have much to do in order
to deliver peaceful, just and developed societies, equal
opportunities and qualified services in fundamental
sectors such as education, health and infrastructure
to all.
Many survivors of the Second World War are no
longer with us. They cannot tell us their stories in
person. Yet we must ensure that we do not forget their
experiences or the lessons they have taught us. The
horror of their experience drove us to put aside our
differences and put humankind and the people first.
As we fight one of the principal challenges of our
times, the coronavirus disease pandemic, and look to
the next 75 years, let us remember the victims of the
Second World War and let their fortitude inspire us to
come together and strengthen the multilateral system
to provide solutions to the greatest challenges facing
us today.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General.
The Secretary-General: This year we marked the
seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations with
tributes to the Organization’s achievements and calls
to strengthen multilateralism to meet long-standing and
new challenges. But our observance of this milestone
would not be complete without a recognition of the
losses of the Second World War, which led to the
formation of the United Nations itself: the millions who
fell on the battlefield; the millions murdered by the
Nazis in the Holocaust; the millions who were victims
of genocide, mass starvation, disease, massacres
2/28

01/12/2020

and aerial bombardment. It is our collective duty to
remember them and to bear witness to their lives and
deaths as we vow: never again.
That was the burning ambition that powered world
leaders and their peoples to join together around the
values of the Charter of the United Nations and its
pledge “to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war”.
It was inconceivable to our founders that the world
should allow such unspeakable suffering ever again.
The Charter dared to imagine a world in which we
practice tolerance and live together in peace, where
we unite our strength to maintain international peace
and security. It placed prevention and the peaceful
resolution of disputes at the heart of its vision.
The tools set out in Chapter VI of the Charter, from
negotiation, enquiry and mediation to conciliation,
arbitration and judicial settlement, have been effective
in preventing another catastrophic global war. For the
first time in history, 75 years have passed without a
military confrontation between major Powers.
United Nations peacemaking and peacekeeping
have helped end conflicts and supported reconciliation
in countries across the world. The global community
has built on the Charter with treaties and conventions
addressing disarmament, the laws of war, political,
civil, cultural, economic and social rights, and more.
But despite that progress, we continue to fall short
in achieving the promise of the Charter. The climate
crisis is creating dramatic new threats to peace and
security. Inequalities are growing, and democratic
space is shrinking. Human rights are under assault.
Digital technology, including the exponential spread of
disinformation, is dividing us further.
From Lake Chad to the Sahel, to Afghanistan and
Yemen, wars persist, causing immeasurable loss. Our
capacities to manage crises and resolve conflicts are
at a breaking point. And this year, the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic has demonstrated the
serious limitations of global preparedness, cooperation
and solidarity.
The long-term effects of the pandemic are still
unfolding, but it has already caused deep social and
economic upheaval. Global poverty is increasing for
the first time since 1998. The World Food Programme
has warned that the pandemic could push 130 million
more people to the brink of starvation. Gender equality
20-33724

01/12/2020

A/75/PV.33

has been set back by decades. Women have been
severely affected by the loss of jobs and livelihoods
and by additional unpaid care work. Lockdowns and
quarantines have trapped millions of women at home
with their abusers, contributing to skyrocketing reports
of domestic violence.

Now is the time for global leaders to meet the global
crisis of the COVID-19 pandemic and move forward
with unity of purpose. We count on all Members to
support the United Nations in our vital work to prevent
and resolve conflict and build peaceful, resilient
communities and societies.

COVID-19 is highlighting the fragilities and
unsustainable inequalities of our world. Unless we
act now, it could lead to even greater instability and
division, undermining our ability to fight the disease
itself and reversing decades of progress towards peace
and prosperity.

The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.

In March, I called for a global ceasefire to stop
the violence, open space for diplomacy, facilitate the
delivery of humanitarian aid and enable a shared focus
on battling the virus. I reiterated that call in my address
to the General Assembly in September (see A/75/PV.4)
and urged greater efforts to reach a global ceasefire by
the end of the year.

Mr. Doualeh (Djibouti): It is with profound respect
that I speak today on behalf of the Group of African
States at this special solemn meeting of the General
Assembly in commemoration of all victims of the
Second World War.

I am encouraged by the support that my call
received from all quarters, including some 180 Member
States and regional organizations, more than 20 armed
movements and other groups, and more than 800 civilsociety organizations.
I also called for peace in the home and an end to
violence against women and girls. Almost 150 countries
expressed their support, but only a minority have
followed through with policies and funding. As we
mark the 16 Days of Activism against Gender-Based
Violence, I appeal again for concrete commitments.
All efforts towards peace require the full, equal and
meaningful participation of women. There can be no
sustainable peace when half the population is excluded.
Partnerships with regional organizations are an
essential element of United Nations peacemaking and
peacekeeping, together with the active engagement
of all stakeholders, including civil society, religious
authorities and the private sector.
Millions of people around the world look to the
United Nations to bring unity and coherence to global
efforts for peace and human rights and to deliver on
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the
Sustainable Development Goals. We cannot let them
down. Nor can we forget those who died in the Second
World War. We owe it to them to learn the lessons of
history. All our efforts must be aimed at consigning
such mindless bloodletting to the past.

I now give the floor to the representative of
Djibouti, who will speak on behalf of the Group of
African States.

This year marks the seventy-fifth anniversary of
the end of the Second World war, a conflict that brought
untold sorrow to humankind. This anniversary also has
remarkable importance for the United Nations, whose
founding took place on the ashes of that brutal war,
which claimed millions of lives.
The Second World war was a time of unspeakable
atrocities, of lost faith and a devastated humankind.
Today we honour the countless victims who lost their
lives. This special meeting is also an opportunity to
recall the General Assembly’s strong desire to make
every possible effort to prevent and mitigate the human
suffering that results from war.
It was the world’s collective recoil from the horrors
perpetrated during those darkest of times and its resolve
that they must never be repeated that was the principal
motivation for the post-war reconstruction of the United
Nations system and of the international legal order
founded on respect for human rights. Having survived
the catastrophe of the Second World war, humankind
sought to embrace new means to prevent the recurrence
of such horrific events. To that end, the United Nations
was established to ensure unity, harmony, tolerance and
mutual accommodation among Member States.
As articulated in the Charter of the United Nations,
the Organization was founded to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war. Over the past
75 years, war has not only shaped the United Nations
mission, but its lessons continue to guide and inspire
our work around the globe.

20-337243/28

A/75/PV.33

Let us not forget the many Africans enlisted or
conscripted to fight the Axis countries in the Second
World War. They were instrumental in bringing an end
to the war, which was fought across Africa, Europe
and the East. More than a million African served as
combatants as well as war workers and carriers in the
Second World War for the colonial Powers. We must
fittingly honour those who sacrificed and won victory
in Europe 75 years ago by continuing to build a freer,
more just, law-based and peaceful world.
Today more than ever, we stand in solidarity under
the guiding principles of the United Nations, which
include non-aggression, the peaceful settlement of
disputes and conflicts, and the need to protect and
promote human rights at all times.
Today we remember and honour those who lost
their lives in the brutal scourge of the Second World
war and pay tribute to those whose memory we must
never forget.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iraq, who will speak on behalf of the
Asia-Pacific Group.
Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq): At the outset, I would
like to express my sincere gratitude for the opportunity
to deliver this statement on behalf of the Asia-Pacific
Group. I am humbled to participate in the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the end of the Second World War and in
commemorating its victims. Today we pay tribute to the
millions who lost their lives and to those who suffered
the woes of the Second World war, and we remember
their sacrifices.
The Asia-Pacific Group believes that it is very
important to commemorate the foundation of the
current international framework, which was intended
to promote peace and security through cooperation and
solidarity and to reflect on the lessons learned from the
scourge of war.
Today is not only a day of mourning but also a day
to reaffirm our shared and collective responsibility for
preventing such horrendous events from ever occurring
again in future. However, at the present time we still
have not escaped the tragedy of war in several parts of
our world, where people are suffering on a daily basis
to get their basic needs met to survive through the day.
On the other hand, the persistent threats of terrorism
and of the continual proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction remain a great threat to peace and security.
4/28

01/12/2020

In resolution 75/5, the General Assembly recalled
that the Second World war brought untold sorrow
to humankind, particularly in Europe, Asia, Africa,
the Pacific and other parts of the world, stressing
that that historic event established the conditions for
the creation of the United Nations, designed to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war.
It underlined the progress made since the end of the
Second World war in overcoming its legacy and towards
reconciliation, international and regional cooperation
and the promotion of democratic values, human rights
and fundamental freedoms, in particular through the
United Nations, and the establishment of regional
organizations and other appropriate frameworks.
The lesson that humankind should learn from
the grave experiences of the Second World war is
that dialogue, cooperation, respect and responsible
behaviour must prevail over the act of war, conflict
and violence. Thus it is clear that we will benefit from
cooperation. Global challenges such as the coronavirus
disease pandemic do not discriminate on the basis of
people’s ethnic, religious or political affiliation. We
all share the same destiny, and we all hold the same
responsibility of ensuring a better future for present
and coming generations.
The Asia-Pacific Group believes that it is possible
to foster peace and stability throughout the world
in order to achieve progress and development. The
purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations should be honoured so that the mistakes
of the past can be avoided. For the sake of those noble
goals, States Members of the United Nations must
favour cooperation, embrace multilateralism and put
people at the centre.
In that regard, the Asia-Pacific Group commends
the Secretary-General’s inspiring leadership, supports
his forward-looking and future-oriented efforts and
underscores the principles of sovereign equality, respect
for territorial integrity, non-interference in internal
affairs and the resolution of international disputes by
peaceful means and in conformity with the principles
of justice and international law.
The Asia-Pacific Group adheres to the principles
of promoting international cooperation, reaffirms
its commitment to multilateralism and highlights the
nexus between sustainable development and peace. In
that regard, we find it important to shed light on two
main challenges, inter alia, that undermine collective
20-33724

01/12/2020

prosperity: terrorism and armed conflict. The Group
believes that the best way to overcome those challenges
is through effective United Nations mechanisms that
should be collective in nature and equitable at their
core. The Group therefore emphasizes the need to
reform and strengthen the organs of the United Nations
to make them more fit for the purpose for which they
were intended, and especially the need to reform the
Security Council.
In conclusion, the Asia-Pacific Group recognizes
the need to respond to the new and emerging challenges
of the future, while leading discussions on rules and
norms and through broader structured cooperation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Antigua and Barbuda, who will
speak on behalf of the Group of Latin American and
Caribbean States.
Mr. Webson (Antigua and Barbuda): I take the
floor on behalf of the States Members of the United
Nations members of the Group of Latin American and
Caribbean States (GRULAC).
GRULAC considers this moment to be very timely,
and this most solemn meeting to be very important.
As the General Assembly, we join in honouring the
victims of the Second World War and commemorate
the seventy-fifth anniversary of the end of such a
painful and bloody conflict that resulted in the defeat
of Nazism, the establishment of the United Nations and
the beginning of a new era of faith in a more peaceful,
dignified, safe and prosperous world.
However, today the world faces new challenges that
are as complex as they are multidimensional, such as
the current struggle to combat the coronavirus disease
pandemic, which has opened up new expectations
for global unity in the face of a new type of common
enemy that we are obliged to defeat. The Second World
War resulted in more than 50 million victims, countless
material losses and a legacy of pain whose wounds have
not yet fully healed. Because of the war’s global impact, it
is the responsibility of the international community as a
whole not to forget the lessons that this collective trauma
left us, as well as the terrible consequences derived
from racist, xenophobic, anti-Semitic, Islamophobic
and anti-Christian ideologies, and all those others
“isms” that may promote ethnic superiority or religious
or other forms of discrimination and intolerance, all of
which have generated an almost unstoppable escalation
of persecution and suffering from which even today we

A/75/PV.33

are still try to recover. We shall therefore never forget
the victims of the Second World War.
Many years and events have passed since the
conclusion of that conflict: three quarters of a century,
in fact — 75 years — and, although we remain only
too aware of how difficult the journey we have taken
has been, we also remain privileged to have new
arrangements to deal with conflicts to which we relate.
One of the greatest achievements following the end
of the Second World War, without any doubt, was the
establishment of the United Nations and the recognition
of multilateralism as a value for humankind. Today
we cherish and work to fulfil the hope and collective
commitment not to repeat such ignominy and exalt new
ways of living, including responding to new ways of
negotiating our way to peace.
The Latin American and Caribbean region was
not exempt from the scourge and the painful legacy
of the Second World War, as it also suffered from
the war’s economic, political, military and social
consequences. Within the context of the conflict, the
political and economic support of our region, despite
our pains, resulted in providing refuge for many of the
survivors. We represent a major moral reserve that,
in addition, once the war ended, opened its doors to
millions of migrants and refugees, survivors of the
war who actively contributed to the region’s economic
development and who regained their hope and zest for a
better life after the trauma they had experienced. This
heritage of values and cultural richness is a treasure
that our region will never fail to dignify, honour and, of
course, appreciate.
The Latin America and the Caribbean region
has committed to being a nuclear-weapon-free zone,
joining the global call for the full validity of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
as well as various other international initiatives to
promote regulations to control the manufacture and
trade of weapons as a measure to ensure effective
pathways towards peace. We reaffirm our conviction
that dialogue and international cooperation, as well
as sustained efforts to eradicate poverty in all its
forms and dimensions, constitute the most solid and
appropriate means to achieve a peaceful, prosperous
and safe world.
Moreover, GRULAC agrees that the promotion of
a culture of peace and interreligious and intercultural
dialogue, together with the inclusion of those

20-337245/28

A/75/PV.33

approaches in the public policies of our countries,
constitute an important step towards the consolidation
of a firm base of values oriented towards the realization
of the ideals of respect for sovereignty and peaceful
coexistence, which everyone around the worlds sees
as fundamental elements for achieving inclusive and
prosperous societies.
Our region has faced multiple challenges in the
last decades, including political and military traumas,
as well as social instability. But we have also always
been able to make progress in our efforts to find ways
to solve our problems. Those have all been difficult
challenges that, through knotty discussions and complex
agreements, have led us to find delicate ways and make
collective efforts to address our problems together.
Our region is made up of a deep diversity of
ethnicities and cultures that enrich life and add both
value and stability to our nations. We have been sustained
under a general environment of great tolerance and
exchange among people that, in turn, has kept us as a
zone of peace and a regional group of nations free from
nuclear war. In 2014, our leaders declared the intention
to keep our region nuclear-free. As an important part of
the lessons it learned from the Second World War, the
Latin American and the Caribbean region has ratified
its collective commitment to being a zone free of armed
conflicts between nations.
In conclusion, 75 years after the end of the Second
World War, which unified international efforts against
a common enemy, notwithstanding ideological and
political differences, it is our moral duty today to
remember the victims, renew our commitment to
the values of faith in humankind and the future that
inspired them and respect the courage of the women
and men who led the world to a new era of hope. In their
honour and for their sacrifice and for the courage they
exemplified in a determined struggle for peace, we say
“never again”.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malta, who will speak on behalf of
the Group of Western European and other States.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Group of Western European and
other States.
This year marks the seventy-fifth anniversary of
the end of the Second World War, a conflict that brought
about unspeakable misery and suffering and created an
6/28

01/12/2020

unprecedented number of victims all over the globe.
Countless people lost their lives. Countless others
were deported and displaced. We cannot, and should
not, forget their losses and sacrifices, including as a
warning to new generations. We express our gratitude
to all those who gave their lives in Asia, Africa, Europe
and elsewhere in the fight against the Nazi regime and
its allies in different parts of the world.
The end of the Second World War was a turning
point in history. The magnitude and the horrors of the
Holocaust in Europe, together with war crimes and
crimes against humanity committed during the war,
and the systematic and tragic persecution and murder
of countless Jews and other minority groups, were
revealed. That led to a significant international effort
to ensure accountability for perpetrators of the most
serious crimes.
That understanding resulted in the signing of
the Charter of the United Nations at San Francisco,
providing a linchpin for the international rules-based
order for the decades to come. The United Nations
was founded to “save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war”. Lessons from the Second World War
continue to inspire the guiding principles and human
rights in the dignity and worth of the human person
as we all collectively agreed in the Preamble to the
Charter of the United Nations.
At a time of rising racism, nationalism, populism
and xenophobia, today’s commemoration is also a stark
reminder of where ideologies of bigotry and hate can
lead. We must do everything in our power not to repeat
the mistakes of the past. We must stand up for truth,
for facts, for justice and human rights, everywhere and
for everyone.
Although not perfect, the United Nations has
delivered in many places around the world. Let us not
forget this at a time when the benefits of multilateralism
are being questioned. We have our principles and the
Charter. We have a road map: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. Alas, we also have common
challenges, notably the emergencies of climate
change and, now, dramatically, the global coronavirus
disease pandemic.
Once again, we have to come together to rise to
the challenge because only together will we succeed.
As we reflect on the seventy-fifth anniversary of the
end of the Second World War and the foundation of
the Organization, we must look towards the coming
20-33724

01/12/2020

75 years. We must redouble our efforts to advocate the
democratic values and fundamental human rights that
the United Nations was formed to protect. We owe it to
all those who suffered and died under tyranny and all
those who fought for our freedom 75 years ago.
The President: I now give the floor to Her
Excellency Ambassador Kelly Craft of the United
States, who will speak on behalf of the Host Country.
Mrs. Craft (United States of America): The
Second World War inflicted unspeakable pain and
suffering for tens of millions who fell victim to that
horrendous chapter of humankind. And 75 years later,
we still feel its impact. That is why the United States is
proud to join the global community in commemorating
the anniversary of the end of the War. The enormity
of the human toll of the war demands that we reflect
upon the lessons learned from the biggest tragedy of the
twentieth century and pay our respects to its victims.
As President Harry Truman stated at the conclusion
of the war,
“our thoughts go out to our gallant Allies in this
war, to those who resisted the invaders, to those
who were not strong enough to hold out, but who,
nevertheless, kept the fires of resistance alive
within the souls of their people, to those who stood
up against great odds and held the line, until the
United Nations together were able to supply the
arms and the men with which to overcome the
forces of evil. This is a victory of more than arms
alone. This is a victory of liberty over tyranny.”
The war left an estimated 60 million dead worldwide,
with civilians making up the majority of the countless
wounded, displaced and missing.
We remember the horror of the Holocaust of the
Jews, the genocide of the Roma and the persecution of
the other marginalized groups by the Nazis and their
sympathizers and collaborators. While we honour the
memory of those mercilessly killed and tortured, as
well as the trauma felt by generations, we must renew
our solemn vow to fight against modern-day atrocities.
We call upon the international community to
reflect upon and confront the lessons of that terrible
war and to carry forth the voices and experiences of
those who endured it, to teach the lessons of history
to future generations. This is also a time to embrace
our common humanity and affirm the sanctity of every
precious life.

A/75/PV.33

The vast death and destruction of the Second World
War made obvious the need for a convening body
dedicated to peace, security and human rights. Those
objectives were enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
and are the basis upon which we must work together
today to build a peaceful, prosperous and just world
for all.
Wherever those principles are violated, stability,
development and human lives are threatened. As we
mark the seventy-fifth anniversary of the end of the
Second World War, we hold its victims in our collective
hearts and memories. May we summon the political will
to end the tyrannies of our own time, aid the victims
of war and oppression and work for reconciliation and
peace among all nations.
Again in the words of President Dwight D. Eisenhower,
“let us solemnly remember the sacrifices of all
those who fought so valiantly, on the seas, in the
air, and on foreign shores, to preserve our heritage
of freedom, and let us reconsecrate ourselves to the
task of promoting and enduring peace so that their
efforts shall not have been in vain.”
Mr. Gonzato (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union and its member
States. The candidate countries Turkey, the Republic of
North Macedonia, Montenegro and Albania, as well as
Georgia, align themselves with this statement.
This year, we have commemorated the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the end of the Second World War, a tragic
chapter in the history of Europe and of the whole world,
in the midst of a pandemic. We welcome the fact that,
despite a difficult and not always transparent negotiation
process, we could reach consensus on resolution 75/5,
and we welcome that we could preserve the unity of the
international community on this important subject and
allow this postponed meeting, where we pay tribute to
the victims of the war, to be organized.
We must remember the horrors of the past and
the cruelty of war to prevent ourselves from repeating
them. We have the responsibility of ensuring that
such atrocities will never occur again. We also have
to remember the sacrifices made and mourn all the
people who lost their lives as victims of the war, of
occupations and of repression, in particular those
who were murdered in the Holocaust. We believe that

20-337247/28

A/75/PV.33

01/12/2020

historical awareness is a necessary step to preventing
similar crimes in future.

truth and remembrance while preserving the memory of
the victims of one of the darkest episodes in our history.

The United Nations was conceived to preserve
international peace and security. In its very Preamble,
the Charter of the United Nations reads,

Mr. Mahmadaminov (Tajikistan) (spoke in
Russian): First and foremost, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s special solemn
meeting of the General Assembly in commemoration of
all victims of the Second World War.

“We the peoples of the United Nations, determined
to save succeeding generations from the scourge of
war, which twice in our lifetime has brought untold
sorrow to mankind”.
This important introductory phrase should never
be forgotten.
We are acutely aware of the fact that it is not just
the two World Wars that brought untold sorrow to
humankind over the past century. Unfortunately, our
efforts to maintain peace have failed too often. The
European Union, which itself was born from the ashes of
conflict, together with its member States, has pledged to
work with all the States Members of the United Nations
to avoid those scourges and create a more peaceful, just
and prosperous world for future generations.
We note with regret that many crises remain
unresolved and that new ones are arising. This
anniversary year and the Secretary-General’s call for a
global ceasefire should lead us to redouble our efforts
to settle disputes by peaceful means.
We pay tribute to the historic role of the Allied
forces and their sacrifices in the defeat of Nazism during
the Second World War. However, we should likewise
remember that the Second World War brought about
painful divisions in Europe and that for many European
countries the end of the Second World War brought not
freedom but the commission of more crimes against
humanity against their peoples.
We need to overcome the legacies of the war and
build on the progress made since the end of the Second
World War in promoting democratic values, human
rights and fundamental freedoms. When it comes to
commemoration, we should pay tribute to the women
and men who fought for liberty and peace. They should
inspire us to look forward with hope and to redouble
our efforts for peace and dialogue. Today we, the States
Members of the United Nations, must play this crucial
role together.
The European Union and its member States believe
that mutual respect and an honest and thorough debate
on our history will facilitate reconciliation based on
8/28

In my capacity as the representative of the country
that currently chairs the Collective Security Treaty
Organization (CSTO), I have the honour to read out
the statement of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
the States members of the CSTO — the Republic of
Armenia, the Republic of Belarus, Kazakhstan, the
Kyrgyz Republic, the Russian Federation and the
Republic of Tajikistan — concerning the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the victory of the Second World War:
“This year marks the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the end of the bloodiest war in
the history of humankind, which affected vast
swaths of people all of the world. It is our solemn
duty to preserve the memory of the great victory
of our compatriots, who gave their lives and
suffered colossal deprivation, who vanquished
the enemy and liberated from Nazi enslavement
the peoples of Europe and other countries around
the world.
“The victory in 1945 was something of
common value for humankind, as is demonstrated
by the adoption, on 5 November 2020, of
resolution entitled “Seventy-fifth anniversary
of the end of the Second World War” (resolution
75/5), which the countries of the CSTO
co-sponsored. Victory in the Second World War
was key for the current system of international
relations. The decisions of the Nuremberg trials
enshrined into law the victory of a civilized
world over National Socialism.
“Unfortunately, we can see in recent years
that there has been an increase in the number
of attempts to distort history or make sure that
the lessons of the war are forgotten. We believe
that the international community must counter
any manifestations of neofascism, chauvinism
or forms of xenophobia, hate, racial or national
supremacy, and also of radical nationalism.
“We firmly condemn any efforts by some
political forces to rewrite history and distort the
20-33724

01/12/2020

outcomes of the Second World War. We express
our deep concern as to the glorification in any
form of the Nazi movement, neo-Nazism or
former members of the Waffen-SS organization,
including those that take the form of erecting
monuments and memorials and carrying out
public demonstrations in order to glorify the
Nazi past, the Nazi movement and neo-Nazism,
as well as through calling or attempting to call
members of those organizations, those who
fought against the anti-Hitler coalition and
those who collaborated with the Nazi movement
and committed war crimes and crimes against
humanity participants in a national liberation
movement, and renaming streets in their honour.
“We also believe it is unacceptable to wage
deliberate war on monuments and memorials
to the graves of our brothers who fought for
our freedom. Attempts to rewrite history
run the risk of letting the tragic errors of the
past be repeated. In that connection, we call
for support for the annual General Assembly
resolution on combating glorification of
Nazism, neo-Nazism and other practices that
contribute to fuelling contemporary forms of
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance.
“We underscore the need to step up efforts
to prohibit crimes against humanity; the
spread of ideologies of hatred and extremism;
discrimination on ethnic, racial or religious
grounds; and other inhumane acts. To the
generation of victors, we owe a solemn duty
to truthfully preserve, for present and future
generations, the history of the liberation of the
world from the misanthropic Nazi ideology and
to uphold traditions and a spirit of unity.”
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I have the honour to deliver this statement
of behalf of the Republic of Armenia, the Republic
of Azerbaijan, the Republic of Belarus, the People’s
Republic of China, the Republic of Kazakhstan,
the Kyrgyz Republic, the Republic of Tajikistan,
Turkmenistan, the Republic of Uzbekistan and my
own country, the Russian Federation, as co-sponsors
of the annual resolution on combating glorification of
Nazism, neo-Nazism and other practices that contribute
to fuelling contemporary forms of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance.

A/75/PV.33

Seventy-five years ago, we achieved a victory over
a common enemy and put an end to the most horrific
world war, which brought untold sorrow to humankind
in Europe, Asia, Africa, the Pacific and other parts
of the world. That victory is the common heritage of
humankind and a monument to the unity of peoples in
the face of unprecedented evil.
Let us forever cherish the memory of those who
sacrificed their lives in the name of victory; who fell
in battle; who died of injuries, exhaustion and hunger;
and who were tortured to death as prisoners of war in
concentration camps. Let us bow our heads in honour
of their memory.
We will never forget the great sacrifice of the
peoples of the Soviet Union. Twenty-seven million of
its citizens died in that war of extermination, two thirds
of them civilians. It has left a deep imprint on every
family’s history. Their suffering and the pain of loss are
still fresh in the memory of our nations.
We pay tribute to the tremendous sacrifice and
courage of the people of China, who lost more than
35 million soldiers and civilians and made indelible
historic contributions to the victory of the world
anti-Fascist war on the main battlefield in Asia.
We remember the fortitude and bravery of all
Europeans who resisted Nazism. We remember the
valour of the soldiers of the Allied coalition and the
brotherhood in arms and unprecedented cooperation of
the Allies. No one is forgotten; nothing is forgotten.
The purpose of the commemoration is not to perpetuate
hatred but to draw a lesson from history, look to the
future and jointly cherish and safeguard peace.
On 20 November, we marked the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the commencement of the Nuremberg
Tribunal, which also served as a template for the
International Military Tribunal for the Far East. War
crimes and crimes against humanity committed by the
Nazis, the Axis, the Fascists, the militarists and their
collaborators were established by both tribunals and
outlawed forever.
Unfortunately, nowadays we can see shameful
attempts to rewrite the history of the Second World War
and false narratives that deny the history of aggression
or even glorify aggressive war and colonial rule. We
witness attempts to erase the memory of heroic acts,
destroy war monuments and prohibit medals and
symbols of glory associated with the victory. There can

20-337249/28

A/75/PV.33

be no justification for that, no matter what political or
geopolitical reasoning may be behind it. Those who
commit such acts will never erase the incontestable
verdict of history.
The main responsibility to prevent and combat the
spread of neo-Nazism lies with States. At the same
time, the international community must remain alert
and united to root out any hint of Nazi ideology. We
must prevent the recurrence of the massacres of war.
We must do so for the memory of those who gave up
their lives in the Second World War.
With that in mind, our countries annually introduce
a draft resolution entitled “Combating glorification of
Nazism, neo-Nazism and other practices that contribute
to fuelling contemporary forms of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance”.
We are thankful to the international community for its
overwhelming support of that initiative.
Our Organization and the great victory are twins:
the founding of the United Nations is the result of that
victory, and the principles on which it was built remain
relevant to this day. We are committed to safeguarding
those principles and to continuing our endeavour of
saving future generations from the scourge of war.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): Ukraine belongs to the
region where the Second World War was unleashed.
Yet the date 1 September 1939 was far from being the
initial stage of the plan designed by Hitler, including
in collusion with Stalin. The Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact,
signed in Moscow on 23 August 1939, had delineated
the spheres of interest between the two dictatorships
and heralded further division in Europe for decades.
The Poles and the Ukrainians were among the first
victims of a part of the plan, when Nazi soldiers from
the West and Soviet soldiers from the East marched into
the territory of Poland and today’s western Ukraine and
later invaded the Baltic States.
The Soviets killed thousands of Ukrainians
during the occupation, and then killed even more
while retreating in 1941, destroying and setting fire
to important infrastructure in towns and cities in the
face of the advancing Nazi troops. Then, in 1944, the
pattern was reversed: the advancing Soviet troops did
the shelling while the retreating Nazi troops set fire to
all that remained.
The Ukrainians also sacrificed millions of lives
fighting enemies in that war. In just two battles at Kyiv,
10/28

01/12/2020

in 1941 and 1943, hundreds of thousands were killed.
The cruellest thing was that, in 1943, to liberate the
capital city of Kyiv from Nazi occupation on the eve of
the anniversary of the Communist putsch, the lives of
dozens of thousands of Soviet soldiers were not spared.
Yet today there is a country that demanded the
removal from the draft statement of the Group of
Eastern European States on today‘s occasion of the
acknowledgement of the responsibility of totalitarian
regimes and the horrors of the Holocaust and of the
need to address current security threats posed by the
ongoing conflicts in Europe. Without those things,
the following draft statement, if approved, would have
been incomplete. It reads:
“With this special meeting of the General
Assembly, we mark the seventy-fifth anniversary
of the end of the Second World War and pay
our earnest tributes to all the victims of the
war around the globe for the sacrifices made in
fighting Nazism and other totalitarian regimes.
“This year is also the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the United Nations — the
institution created to mark a new beginning
and assigned with stewardship to maintain
international peace and security and prevent
atrocities in the new world order.
“While the adoption of the Charter of
the United Nations demonstrated a united
commitment to multilateralism and reinvigorated
hope for international stability, democracy and
prosperity, the end of the Second World War
brought different consequences for different
States — and that is true in particular for our
region. The war and the horrors of the Holocaust
not only cost our countries millions of human
lives; they also left Europe deeply divided for
several decades and brought even more injustice
to some. While commemorating the end of the
Second World War, we have to remember the
victims of all crimes against humanity committed
during and after the Second World War.
“Our task in commemorating is to draw
the right lessons from history and reaffirm our
commitment to not repeating the mistakes of
the past. Only by ensuring accountability for
all crimes against humanity and war crimes can
we pave the way to ensuring long-lasting peace.
Upholding and strengthening multilateralism,
20-33724

01/12/2020

promoting respect for international law and
defending the universality of human rights are
key in addressing current security threats posed
by the ongoing conflicts in Europe and beyond.
“Peace in the modern world is still not
universal, and the legacy of the Second World War
should remind us of the need to act collectively
and in a timely manner against the re-emergence
of populism, nationalism, authoritarianism,
racism and xenophobia. Today many other
challenges, such as pandemics, climate change,
terrorism and cyberthreats, contribute to the list
of threats to international peace and security. All
those challenges call for stronger cooperation and
a renewed commitment to a credible rules-based
international order, with the United Nations at its
core. Global challenges require collective action,
and we owe it to the millions of lost lives that we
commemorate here today.”
Ms. Ivanovic (Serbia): This year we mark 75
years since the end of the Second World War, one of
the greatest tragedies that humankind has experienced
in its recent history, the lessons of which must never
be forgotten. The horrors of the war — brought about,
among other things, by the ineffective multilateral
order prevalent between the two World Wars — taught
us that we need a system that will limit the self-will and
arrogance of States.
The scope and magnitude of the war led
humankind to inaugurate mechanisms to prevent such
evil from occurring ever again. That in turn led to the
strengthening of international cooperation and the
creation of the United Nations, which has sought for
more than seven decades to establish and maintain a
stable and collective peace that is predicated on the
broadest possible consensus agreements reached by
all nations. The Allies’ victory in the Second World
War was the key step towards the establishment of the
largest world Organization based on principles that
remain valid today, the safeguarding and preservation
of which are among our highest callings.
This year we also marked 75 years since the
establishment of United Nations and the signing of the
Charter of the United Nations. The anniversary is an
opportunity for us to look at the problems and challenges
that we face today and join forces in promoting ever more
strongly our collective commitment to multilateralism
and the principles we have committed ourselves to

A/75/PV.33

upholding in order to create a better world in which the
horrors of war will never again be repeated.
This is also an opportunity for me to remind the
Assembly of the suffering and destruction that the
Second World War brought to then-Yugoslavia and the
attempts to systematically exterminate the members of
my Serbian people in the death camps of the independent
State of Croatia, in which Serbs, Jews and Roma were
tortured and killed in the most brutal way. Nonetheless,
epic heroism arose from that tragedy and the Serbian
people, standing ground with the Allies, defeated the
aggressor and inscribed Serbia’s name in the history
of humankind. In doing so, it made a solemn bequest
to generations of Serbs to cherish the memory of the
tragedy and the heroism, as well as the eventual victory.
Regrettably, we have witnessed attempts by some
recently to diminish the victory and relativize its
significance by peddling false interpretations and even
bringing war crimes into question. That is unacceptable
and offensive to the enormous sacrifices made by our
fathers. Serbia has therefore been at the forefront of
efforts to ensure that the sufferings of the bitter past
are not forgotten, while looking forward to the future
at the same time.
I speak as the representative of a country that
sustained immense suffering and underwent enormous
sacrifices in the fight against Fascism and Nazism
during the Second World War. In that capacity, I would
like to remind the Assembly that we all have a moral
obligation to cherish the memory of the suffering and
sacrifices and to learn the lessons left by the most
destructive conflict in humankind’s recent history, just
as we are duty-bound to confront and repel each and
every attempt to relativize the events of the Second
World War. Only in that way can we create the vision
of a brighter future based on the common values of
freedom, cooperation, understanding, tolerance and
respect for diversity and for human rights.
Mr. Sharma (India): We are grateful to you, Sir,
for convening this meeting to commemorate all victims
of the Second World War. We also thank the delegation
of the Russian Federation for having piloted resolution
75/5, which called for this meeting. We are thankful
to the Russian Federation for hosting the Victory Day
parade at Red Square on 24 June to commemorate the
seventy-fifth anniversary celebrations. Our Defence
Minister was present on that occasion, and a tri-service

20-3372411/28

A/75/PV.33

contingent of the Indian armed forces took part in
the parade.
There can be no real statistical measurement of
the human and material cost of the Second World War.
No figure can quantify the human loss, deprivation
and suffering, the dislocation of peoples and economic
life or the sheer physical destruction of property that
the world witnessed. We salute the valiant young men,
women and people of all the countries who fought to
save the world. Indian soldiers participated in the war
effort in their millions and suffered immense casualties.
It is disheartening to note that, despite the
contribution of thousands of volunteers from the
colonial world to the war efforts of the Allied forces,
the contribution of those brave men and women has not
been given its due recognition. Although the battle fronts
of Europe have been romanticized in novels, history
books and films, much of the war was fought in and
over colonies controlled by the colonial Powers, with
front lines springing up from North Africa to East Asia.
The Second World War remains the greatest military
engagement in the history of the Indian subcontinent.
Despite being under colonial occupation, India
contributed 2.5 million soldiers, who fought in every
theatre of the Second World War — from North Africa
to Europe and as far East as Hong Kong. The Indian
army was also the largest volunteer force ever raised
in history, of whom 87,000 died or went missing and
more than 100,000 suffered grave injuries. We also
cannot forget the sacrifices of our Asian, African and
other brothers and sisters who fought and died for the
freedom of the Allied Powers although they were under
the yoke of colonial rule.
The commemoration of the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the end of the Second World War provides
us with an opportunity to reaffirm our commitment
to the most fundamental principle and purpose of the
United Nations — to ensure that successive generations
are saved from the scourge of war.
Terrorism has emerged as one of the means of
waging war in the contemporary world. It threatens to
entangle the world in carnage similar to that witnessed
during the two World Wars. Terrorism is a global
phenomenon and can be defeated only by global action.
Let us rededicate ourselves to fight contemporary forms
of warfare and ensure a more peaceful and secure world.
12/28

01/12/2020

Ms. Ali (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic):
We are today commemorating an important historic
event that changed the face of the world as we know it:
the seventy-fifth anniversary of the end of the Second
World War, whose victims we recall.
The Second World War was unprecedented in its
cruelty and scope, representing a grave catastrophe
for all the peoples of the world, particularly those who
dared to confront Nazism. It changed the trajectory of
our world, the destiny of its people and the world map.
It also represented a major threat to the principles on
which humankind’s civilization had been built.
The international community faced a challenging
ordeal, as a result of which our Organization was
established. The Charter of the United Nations set
forth the international legal framework and the basic
principles upon which international relations were to
be built — respect for the sovereignty and sovereign
equality of all Member States, non-interference in the
domestic affairs of States and the prohibition of the
threat or use of force.
The Second World War concluded with victory
over Nazism and Fascism. The victorious countries,
including my own, pledged to work together to maintain
international peace and security and save humankind
from the scourge of war, which twice has brought
horrors greater than those of the plague that afflicted
Europe and the world in the Middle Ages. Their victory
allowed them to build those foundations, establish
international and regional cooperation and promote
democratic values and human rights.
The falsification of history is a dangerous matter
because it erodes the very pillars on which the
contemporary global order was developed after the end
of the war. It creates a bad environment that encourages
neo-Nazism and xenophobia. In that context, the
falsification of the facts of the Second World War by
certain States arouses our concern, denunciation and
condemnation. They seek to deny the contributions of
the former Soviet Union and its successor, the Russian
Federation, which sacrificed more than 27 million
victims in confronting Nazism.
My country’s delegation regrets the continuous war
waged in a number of States against the monuments
and memorial sites associated with those who fought
alongside the allies. States that deny such sacrifices
will not find it difficult to deny the sacrifices made
by the people, the army and the leadership of Syria in
20-33724

01/12/2020

facing the scourge of international terrorism, which
is multifaceted and goes by many different names.
We are very concerned about the declining collective
awareness of the dangers of war, hostility and conflict.
In conclusion, my country, Syria, highly appreciates
the sacrifices that people made to defeat the alliance of
Nazism and Fascism. My country reiterates its belief
in, and commitment to, the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations, which it signed
with the other founding members at San Francisco.
Syria calls on all Member States to unite their efforts
to confront the challenges and threats to international
peace and security in order to avoid the horrors that our
world experienced twice in one century. Let us recall
Ibn Khaldun, the famous Arab thinker, who said that
humankind cannot exist without cooperation.
Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to join previous speakers in emphasizing the
importance of this special solemn meeting of the
General Assembly. The Second World War brought
untold sorrow to humankind. Its scope and the loss
of human life and property were unprecedented. The
horrors of the war, the sacrifices made and the victims
should never be forgotten.
Today’s meeting gives us an opportunity to pay
tribute to those who fought for peace, freedom and
human dignity, commemorate the many millions of
victims of the Second World War and remember its
terrifying atrocities and destruction. The war touched
all continents and peoples, sparing no one from pain
and suffering. There is not a single family in my
country that was not affected in one way or another
by the Second World War. Even though the hostilities
occurred beyond the territory of Azerbaijan, our people
underwent and overcame a severe ordeal and made their
contribution to victory.
Azerbaijan mobilized for the army more than
600,000 of its sons and daughters, half of whom
sacrificed their lives. Many Azerbaijanis also fought as
members of the resistance in France, Italy, Poland, the
Netherlands and the former Yugoslavia.
Victory was achieved not only on the battlefield but
also at home. In a very short time frame, Azerbaijan
set up factories for the production of ammunition and
armaments and hosted industrial enterprises that had
been relocated from the war theatre.

A/75/PV.33

The true heroism was the selfless service and
dedication of the people of Azerbaijan, who worked
day and night in oil production. During the Second
World War, Baku — one of the major oil producers and
suppliers — secured almost 80 per cent of all the oil
extracted in the entire former Soviet Union, 90 per cent
of its naphtha and 96 per cent of its lubricants. Four
out of five Soviet aircraft, tanks and trucks used in the
course of the Second World War ran on fuel produced in
Baku refineries from oil extracted from Baku oilfields.
The lessons of the Second World War have remained
relevant for shaping our contemporary world and the
future of international relations. The desire to save
humankind from the scourge of war inspired countries
to create a mechanism to maintain international peace
and security: the United Nations, our Organization.
In the immediate post-war period, the successful
establishment of multinational judicial institutions for
the purpose of prosecuting and punishing crimes with
an international dimension and scope demonstrated
how effective international justice can be when there is
political will to support it.
This commemoration must serve as an opportunity
for us to reaffirm our commitment to the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and to
unite our efforts in addressing the threats and challenges
to international peace and security and strengthening
the tools for ending impunity.
Mr. Ibragimov (Uzbekistan): At the outset, I would
like to thank you, Sir, for convening this important
event in commemoration of all victims of the Second
World War.
Seventy-five years ago, the world was set free
from Fascism, racial superiority, humiliation and fear.
The republics of the former Soviet Union made major
sacrifices to achieve victory in that horrific war, which
was conducted with unprecedented, merciless and
unrelenting harshness. More than 75 million people
were killed, and millions were left crippled, not to
mention the great numbers of those who were widowed
or orphaned.
The people of the former Soviet Union, in the face
of pain, deadly threats and deprivation, fought bravely
on the front lines and in the rear for our dignity, freedom
and peace.
About 2 million people from Uzbekistan also
fought in that war. Of those, 538,000 perished on the

20-3372413/28

A/75/PV.33

battlefield, 60,000 became handicapped and more than
158,000 went missing during the war. A total of 120,000
Uzbek citizens were bestowed with various military
awards, including some from European countries.
During the war, more than 1.5 million people from other
republics of the former Soviet Union were evacuated to
Uzbekistan, including 200,000 children. Many families
took in orphans. One bright example of that compassion
was the family of a blacksmith, Mr. Shamakhmudov,
which adopted 15 orphans of various nationalities to
nurture and raise as their own.
The Second World War victory is a part of world
history and an integral part of the people of the former
Soviet Union. The whole world paid a high price for
the victory over fascism. We should therefore never
forget the scourge of the Second World War. We must
keep those memories alive to teach younger generations
and to help raise peace-loving descendants. We should
strengthen the United Nations and further its goals
by nurturing an atmosphere of trust and mutual
understanding among peoples and nations to promote
global peace and stability.
Mr. Margaryan (Armenia): The seventy-fifth
anniversary of the end of the Second World War is an
opportunity to remember and pay tribute to all those
who sacrificed their lives for the peaceful future of the
world. The Armenian people made a great contribution
to the victory in the Second World War. Almost 600,000
Armenians participated in the war and more than half
of them did not return from the battlefields.

01/12/2020

in the battlefields of the Second World War for the
freedom of humankind had to stand again to defend
their homes, their inalienable human rights and their
right to freely define their own future.
In the twenty-first century, we still witness State-led
policies of hatred, the encouragement of hate crimes
and atrocities aimed at the complete extermination of
ethnic and religious groups and erasing any trace of
their civilizational presence in their historic homeland.
We firmly believe that intolerance, the cultivation of
identity-based hate speech, warmongering and denial of
past crimes, in particular at the highest political level, if
not addressed properly, can lead to new mass atrocities.
The international community should respond
decisively to the use of force as a means for conflict
resolution. It is through commitment to the principles
of non-use of force or threat of force and the peaceful
resolution of disputes that the States Members of the
United Nations can focus on collectively addressing
the emerging threats to peace and security in our
modern times.
Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): We associate
ourselves with the statement delivered earlier by the
representative of Djibouti on behalf of the Group of
African States. We also thank the Russian Federation
for this initiative.

The victory paved the way for the establishment
of the United Nations as a common endeavour for
humankind to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war. The Charter of the United Nations
stands as the cornerstone of the new world order, resting
upon the objective of developing friendly relations
among nations based on respect for the principle of
equal rights and the self-determination of peoples. It
is thanks to that principle that the membership of the
United Nations family has significantly increased since
its founding.

South Africa has a shared, proud history with those
forces that gained victory over fascism in order to save
the world from the yoke of slavery and catastrophe
during the Second World War. A total of 334,000 South
Africans of all races and backgrounds volunteered
to fight in the various theatres where the war was
conducted. The victory had a significant impact and
influenced the end of the colonial system, leading to the
emergence of independence in Asia and Africa. That
victory would also pave the way for the intensification
of the struggle against apartheid in South Africa. The
independence of States that were under colonial rule,
such as ours, was also made possible by the unstinting
internationalism that triumphed over evil during the
Second World War.

Despite the major achievements of the United
Nations in promoting peace and security over the past
75 years, we continue to face armed conflicts, exported
violence and instability, the use of foreign terrorist
fighters and mercenaries, gross violations of human
rights and atrocities and war crimes, including in our
region. The successors of the Armenians who fought

The Commonwealth War Graves Commission
records 11,000 graves of known South Africans who
perished during the Second World War. We therefore
believe that it is important to continue to honour the
graves and memorials of those who perished in the
Second World War. Those memorials are important
because they act as historical touchstones; they link the

14/28

20-33724

01/12/2020

past to the present and enable all of us to remember
and respect the sacrifices of those who died, fought,
participated or were affected by the war.
The era following the Second World War saw the
emergence of global institutions of governance such as
the United Nations, which was established with clear
purposes and principles, as enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations — foremost of which is to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war. In our
view, the United Nations and its Member States and
partners should continue to protect and promote the
core system of multilateralism, which has proved its
value over the past 75 years.
South Africa therefore takes this opportunity to
reaffirm our unwavering belief in, and commitment
to, multilateralism and international law. We believe
that the advancement of the common goal of lasting
and sustained peace through diplomacy, including in
dealing with contemporary challenges, enjoins Member
States to work together in cooperation and partnership.
The coronavirus disease pandemic is the latest
global challenge that requires a robust multilateral
response by the international community in order
to address its multidimensional impacts on health,
development, peace, security and livelihoods in general.
We therefore need a united stand to oppose the
narrow nationalist and fascist positions held by some
who seek to weaken and defeat multilateralism and
promote unilateralism and isolationism. A weakening
of multilateralism and international law would diminish
the prospects for the attainment of international peace
and security and further exacerbate current challenges
and threats.
As we mark the seventy-fifth anniversary of the end
of the Second World War, it is a matter of concern that
the global system of governance and its key institutions
remain largely unreformed and not representative of
the world of today. We need to effect changes in the
system and hasten the reform of key organs, including
the Security Council. We believe that reform will make
those institutions more effective in the discharge of
their duties and will better capacitate them to deliver on
the maintenance of international peace and security and
the creation of a fair, just, equitable and representative
international order.
In conclusion, as we mark the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the end of the Second World War,

A/75/PV.33

let us imagine a new world, which, in the words of
Nelson Mandela:
“must be a world of democracy and respect for human
rights, a world freed from the horrors of poverty,
hunger, deprivation and ignorance; relieved of the
threat and the scourge of civil wars and external
aggression, and unburdened of the great tragedy of
millions forced to become refugees.”
Mr. Tozik (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): The
Republic of Belarus aligns itself with the statements
made in commemoration of the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the end of the Second World War by the
representative of the Russian Federation, on behalf of
the Member States and the co-sponsors of resolution
75/5, as well as by the representative of Tajikistan, on
behalf of the member States of the Collective Security
Treaty Organization.
The Republic of Belarus, alongside its brotherly
States, has made a valuable contribution to that
great victory. That historic event put an end to the
most bloody and destructive war in history. The war
led to millions of deaths and caused great suffering to
humankind as a whole. Victory allowed for the creation
of the United Nations in order to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war.
In recent times, we have more often heard sceptical
voices raising questions about how much today’s world
needs to remember the lessons of the Second World War.
They ask: “Isn’t it time to turn the page on this chapter
of history?” We answer: “No, it’s not.” It will never be
the time to do so, because the last day humanity will
remember this global disaster would be the first day of
the final world war.
Our memory of this event is the moral duty of
humankind to the tens of millions of victims of this
past war and all those who were brave enough to stave
off the pressure of Nazism. Our memory is our future;
those who forget the lessons of history are condemned
to repeat them.
While States seriously consider strategies based on
regional or global supremacy, while restraint, tolerance
and compassion are seen in international politics as
weakness, and threats of the use of force and sanctions
almost as virtue; while political and military strategies
contemplate seizing parts of other States and using
weapons of mass destruction and nuclear weapons — we

20-3372415/28

A/75/PV.33

do not believe that the lessons of the Second World War
have been duly learned.
Today we are facing another war — the
manipulation and distortion of history, the glorification
of Nazism with neo-Nazi parades, a war against the
memory of heroes who fought Nazism, thanks to
whom we are all here today. This is cynical, cowardly
and abominable. There is no dignity or bravery in it.
The fight against monuments that do not resist is easy
because it is not a victory on the battlefield. It is a
deliberate attempt to erase the legacy of real history.
Playing with history and manipulating the results of the
Second World War is extremely dangerous. We must all
bear responsibility before history, our peoples and the
international community.
Mrs. Furman (Israel): Following the darkest
years in its history seventy-five years ago, Europe has
emerged from under the grip of tyranny. We owe our
freedom to the courage and determination of the Allied
armies — the United States, Great Britain, the Soviet
Union, Canada, France and other countries — that
fought to restore freedom to the world. The nations that
joined together to defeat the Nazis and their allies did
not always agree but, despite their political differences,
they knew that evil had to be stopped. The losses were
immense. The Russians alone lost more than 20 million
people. The people of Israel will never forget the
bravery of the Russian people and their sacrifice.
Today we honour all those who made victory
possible. We also mourn the tens of millions of
victims of history’s darkest hours. For Israel and the
Jewish people, the Second World War is synonymous
with the Holocaust. Families were torn apart, vibrant
communities destroyed and one third of the Jewish
people, including 1.2 million children, were murdered.
The numbers tattooed on the arms of our parents and
grandparents are an enduring reminder of the horrors
they suffered, of a time when a person was a number
rather than someone’s father or brother or son.
The passage of time now threatens to cloud the
world’s memory. With every passing year, the number
of survivors, veterans and witnesses left to recount their
first-hand experience diminishes. The responsibility
therefore falls to us to preserve the memory of the past
and to ensure that the lessons of history are passed on
to future generations.
But freedom is once again under attack in Europe
and in many other places around the world. Time and
16/28

01/12/2020

again, in the heart of Europe, angry mobs can be heard
chanting calls against the Jews, and synagogues and
other religious institutions are attacked. Jews are afraid
to walk down the streets wearing religious symbols.
The pandemic provides fertile ground for old and new
anti-Semitic tropes to grow.
The writing is on the wall. Former Israeli Prime
Minister Menachem Begin once said, “If an enemy says
he seeks to destroy us, believe him; do not doubt him
for a moment.”
History has taught us that we must be able to
defend ourselves, now and forever. The State of Israel
is a fulfilment of that teaching. Never again will Jews
be rounded up like cattle and marched to their deaths.
Never again will the world think that Jews can be
targeted with impunity. We know the evil of which
humans are capable, and we know that some things
are worth fighting for. Freedom is worth fighting for;
equality is worth fighting for; democracy is worth
fighting for.
Seventy-five years ago, a generation of men and
women sacrificed their lives in war so that we could
inherit freedom, equality and democracy. We cannot
allow their sacrifice to be made in vain. With courage
and conviction, we must keep fighting for the ideals for
which they lived and died.
Mr. Warraich (Pakistan): The Second World
War was the most destructive war in human history.
Its fascist ideologies, based on atavistic notions of
racial superiority, sought to impose the totalitarian
outlook across the globe. Millions of lives were lost
to that insatiable ambition for hegemony and global
domination. From the verdant battlefields of East Asia
to the vast desert expanses of the Middle East and
Africa, the people of the subcontinent, including from
areas constituting Pakistan, although under the colonial
yoke, scripted a tale of unmatched heroism and valour
in their struggle. As we pay homage to the sacrifice of
all of those victims, we must also reflect on the lessons
of the Second World War.
First, grave atrocities and crimes against humanity
do not happen in a day. They germinate over time in
a toxic brew of bigotry, hatred and intolerance. Hate
speech is a precursor to atrocity crimes.
Secondly, the international community will ignore
the menace of fascist and supremacist ideologies at its
20-33724

01/12/2020

A/75/PV.33

own peril. The millions of lives lost across the world
serve as a stark reminder that inaction is not a choice.

the seventy-fifth session of the General Assembly, as
contained in document A/75/606.

Thirdly, a policy of appeasement does not work
with fascist ideologies, if at all. Rather, it emboldens
them. Concerted global actions are required to defeat
totalitarian ideologies.

Having considered the credentials of the
representatives to the seventy-fifth session at its meeting
on 23 November 2020, the Credentials Committee
adopted without a vote a draft resolution accepting
those credentials. The Committee also recommended to
the General Assembly the adoption of a draft resolution
concerning the credentials of representatives to the
seventy-fifth session, as contained in paragraph 13 of
the report of the Committee.

We are unfortunately witnessing a global resurgence
of fascist ideologies, hate speech, xenophobia,
Islamophobia, incitement to violence and acts of brute
violence. Those trends have been exacerbated by the
coronavirus disease pandemic, the most serious global
crisis since the founding of the United Nations.
Grave crimes against humanity is the tragic legacy
of the Second World War. We should not repeat the same
mistake by turning a blind eye to contemporary and
emergent threats. Only then can we fulfil the abiding
ideals of the Charter of the United Nations of saving
succeeding generations from the scourge of war and to
promote social progress and better standards of living
in larger freedom.
The President: We have heard the last speaker for
the special solemn meeting of the General Assembly in
commemoration of all victims of the Second World War.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 137?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 3 (continued)
Credentials of representatives to the seventy-fifth
session of the General Assembly
(b) Report of the Credentials Committee
Report of the Credentials Committee (A/75/606)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution entitled “Credentials of representatives to
the seventy-fifth session of the General Assembly”,
recommended by the Committee in paragraph 13 of
its report.
I now give the floor to the Chair of the Credentials
Committee, Mr. Kennedy Godfrey Gastorn of Tanzania.
Mr. Gastorn (United Republic of Tanzania): On
behalf of the Credentials Committee, I have the honour
to introduce report of the Credential’s Committee
concerning the credentials of the representatives to

I would like to note that, since the day of the
Committee’s meeting, formal credentials in the form
required by rule 27 of the rules of procedure were
received by the Committee’s Secretary regarding
Brazil, Cambodia and the United States of America.
The draft resolution approving the report of the
Credentials Committee is therefore before the General
Assembly for its adoption.
Ms. Kadare
the Chair.

(Albania),

Vice-President,

took

Finally, I would like to express my gratitude to the
members of the Committee and to the Secretariat for
facilitating our work.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
will now take a decision on the draft resolution entitled
“Credentials of representatives to the seventy-fifth
session of the General Assembly”, recommended by the
Credentials Committee in paragraph 13 of its report.
The Credentials Committee adopted the draft
resolution without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 75/19).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor
to speakers in explanation of position, may I remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Velásquez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I take the
floor today on behalf of the delegations of Lima Group
countries Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Guatemala, Honduras, Paraguay and Peru, as well as
the delegations of Australia, Ecuador, El Salvador,
the United States, Georgia, Haiti, Israel, the Marshall
Islands, the United Kingdom and the Republic of Korea,
with a view of stating on record that the approval of

20-3372417/28

A/75/PV.33

the report of the Credentials Committee (A/75/606)
regarding the seventy-fifth session of the General
Assembly should not be interpreted as those countries’
tacit recognition of Mr. Nicolás Maduro Moros’ regime
or of his designated representatives to the Assembly.
In addition to our countries, more than 50 States
do not recognize Mr. Maduro’s illegitimate regime in
Venezuela. Instead, they recognize Mr. Juan Guaidó as
Acting President of Venezuela.
Mr. Ghadirkhomi (Islamic Republic of Iran): The
delegation of the Islamic Republic of Iran welcomes the
work of the Credentials Committee and thanks its Chair,
the Ambassador of the United Republic of Tanzania, for
the Committee’s report (A/75/606).
My delegation joined consensus on resolution 75/19,
recommended by the Committee. However, I would like
to express my delegation’s reservations about the parts
of the report and the resolution that could be construed
as a recognition of the Israeli regime.
Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
(spoke in Spanish): We thank the General Assembly for
accepting the credentials of our delegation as the sole
legitimate representatives of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela. That decision is an acknowledgment of the
sovereign will of our people to elect their Government
in peace. It is an acknowledgment of our right to selfdetermination and our commitment to international law.
The use of the General Assembly to attack Member
States is an attack on the entire system of relations
among sovereign States, as enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations. Today we have seen the failure of an
illegal practice that would allow a group of countries to
designate the authorities and diplomatic representatives
of other countries, in rejection of the sovereign will of
their peoples.
The Government of the United States of America
has unleashed a campaign of colonial aggression
against my country. Last year, it carried out a false-flag
operation in order to justify a foreign invasion. It then
brought its Vice-President, Mike Pence, to the Security
Council (see S/PV.8506) to expel us from the United
Nations. A few days later, it promoted a coup d’état that
jeopardized peace in the region.
This year, the United States threatened to use
its military forces on our borders as it looked for
excuses to invade and organized a terrorist attack
with mercenaries close to our capital. It also stole our
18/28

01/12/2020

funds held by international banks, blocked us from
purchasing food and medicine and from selling our
oil, with the aim of destroying — through hunger and
sickness — our people’s desire for freedom. All of this
was done in the middle of the worst pandemic to strike
humankind in 100 years. This is twenty-first century
colonialism, carried out before the eyes of the world. It
is contempt for the political freedoms and human rights
of the peoples of the world.
But hatred poisons those who hate. We now see
that those who began with an attempted coup d’état
in Venezuela ended with an attempted coup in the
United States. President Trump does not recognize the
elections of Venezuela, but he also does not recognize
the will of the voters in his own country. That is why
he is rejected at the United Nations, just as he is in his
own country.
Next Sunday, on 6 December, there will be
elections in Venezuela in order to choose our
destiny in freedom and peace. We hope that the
minority — the countries that supported the American
colonial adventure — recognize their mistakes and join
the majority of the international community, which
here and now accepts the will of our people and the
legitimacy of our Government. Venezuela will always
be free and sovereign.
Mrs. Llano (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish):
Nicaragua welcome the work of the Credentials
Committee and endorses its recommendation to
the General Assembly, which, in our view, is very
committed to the rules of procedure and the Charter
of the United Nations as it relates to the credentials of
Member States.
Nicaragua bases its international relations on
respect for sovereignty, non-interference and the
peaceful settlement of disputes. The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela has one constitutional President
who was democratically elected by its people, President
Nicolás Maduro Moros. We convey to him our full
support and solidarity, as we always have done. The
situation in that brotherly country is an internal affair,
which is up to our Venezuelan brothers to resolve in
line with their Constitution and their laws.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position.
20-33724

01/12/2020

May I taken it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (b)
of agenda item 3 and agenda item 3 as a whole?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 15
Culture of peace
Report of the Secretary-General (A/75/233)
Draft resolution (A/75/L.28)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of Bangladesh to introduce draft
resolution A/75/L.28.
Ms. Fatima (Bangladesh): On behalf of 99
co-sponsors, I have the honour to introduce the draft
resolution entitled “Follow-up to the Declaration
and Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace”, as
contained in document A/75/L.28.
This year, considering the constraints posed by the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, we decided
on a technical rollover of resolution 74/21, adopted last
year. Draft resolution A/75/L.28 contains technical
updates to the fourth, fourteenth, twentieth and twentyfirst preambular paragraphs, as well as to paragraphs 20
and 21. The updates include references to the General
Assembly High-level Forum on the Culture of Peace,
which was convened virtually by the President of the
Assembly on 10 September on the theme “The culture
of peace: change our world for the better in the age of
COVID-19”, and the Chair’s summary of the meeting.
The High-level Forum recognized the relevance of the
culture of peace in responding to the unprecedented
crisis posed by the pandemic. We thank the sponsoring
delegations for their valuable suggestions and advice,
and we are grateful to everyone for their understanding
and cooperation.
After the successful commemoration last year
of the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the
Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture of
Peace, the draft resolution has returned to its original
form. It requests the President of the General Assembly
to consider convening a high-level forum on the culture
of peace in September 2021. As in previous years, we
look forward to working with the Office of the President
of the General Assembly to make next year’s event yet
another success.

A/75/PV.33

The notion of the culture of peace, which began
in 1999 as a modest venture, has over time and with
the mandate of the Assembly evolved into a dominant
theme, finding larger footprints and recognition in
all major United Nations discourses. In the rapidly
changing global security scenario, it has proved to be a
useful tool to complement the obligations of the Charter
of the United Nations for maintaining peace in the
world. During this pandemic, when we are seeing rising
intolerance, the importance and relevance of the notion
has only grown. We hope to overcome the challenges
posed by the coronavirus disease by continuing to
spread the message of the culture of peace.
As of my last count, 99 countries had joined to
co-sponsor the draft resolution. The large number
of cross-regional co-sponsors is a demonstration of
the unwavering commitment of the international
community to the universal appeal of the culture
of peace.
Over the past 21 years, the Assembly has endorsed
the enduring value of a culture of peace by adopting
the flagship draft resolution under this agenda item by
consensus, and we expect the same support this year.
We sincerely thank those delegations that have already
co-sponsored the draft resolution. We look forward to
more delegations co-sponsoring from the floor ahead
of its adoption.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): We are proud to address
the General Assembly on behalf of Albania, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Bulgaria, Colombia, Croatia,
Czechia, Denmark, Estonia, Georgia, Greece, Hungary,
Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, the Netherlands, Poland,
Senegal, Slovakia, Slovenia, Ukraine, the United
Kingdom, the United States and my own country,
Brazil, as member countries of the International
Religious Freedom or Belief Alliance.
The Alliance is a network of like-minded countries
that are fully committed to advancing the freedom of
religion or belief around the world, complementing the
existing work of the United Nations and other relevant
organizations. The work of the Alliance is based on the
principle that all human rights are universal, indivisible,
interdependent and interrelated. Launched in February,
this growing group is composed of 32 States from
different regions, whose people follow a wide diversity
of faiths and beliefs.
The countries of the Alliance recently held their
first annual Ministers’ Forum on 17 November on the

20-3372419/28

A/75/PV.33

margins of the third Ministerial to Advance Freedom
of Religion or Belief, hosted by Poland. We renewed
our commitment to a shared vision for advancing the
freedom of religion or belief for all in a world in which,
as studies indicate, more than 80 per cent of people live
in countries with restrictions on the free practice of
faith and beliefs.
The freedom of religion or belief is an integral
part of the international framework for human rights.
It matters, for everyone, everywhere. For that reason,
our countries will remain engaged and speak out for the
freedom of religion or belief for all, including the right
of individuals to hold any belief, or none, to change
their religion or belief and to manifest their religion
or belief, either alone or in community with others, in
worship, observance, practice and teaching.
The Alliance invites Members of the United
Nations that are committed to upholding the right to
the freedom of thought, conscience and religion or
belief to join us in our fight against persecution and
hatred. That can only contribute to the promotion of the
inherent dignity and worth of all, as well as to fostering
a worldwide culture of peace and understanding.
Ms. Sulaiman (Brunei Darussalam): I am honoured
to deliver this statement on behalf of the 10 States
members of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) — Cambodia, Indonesia, the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Myanmar,
the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, Viet Nam and my
own country, Brunei Darussalam.
At the outset, ASEAN would like to express its
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his report
(A/75/233) under this agenda item. We are pleased to note
the significance and scope of the promotion of a culture
of peace, interreligious and intercultural dialogue and
cooperation undertaken by the Organization.
South-East Asia is a region of more than 640 million
people, with a multitude of ethnicities, religions,
languages and cultures. The region’s rich diversity and
peaceful coexistence have enabled unity and harmony
for ASEAN since its establishment, 53 years ago. It
has a profound understanding of the culture of peace
and embraces it as a core value, as enshrined in the
Bangkok Declaration of 1967.
In a world with many challenges, ASEAN recognizes
the need to institutionalize a culture of prevention in
order to address the root causes of violent extremism
20/28

01/12/2020

and other forms of violence, social issues such as the
displacement of populations and destabilizing factors
such as poverty and inequality. Therefore, at the thirtyfirst ASEAN Summit, held in 2017, ASEAN leaders
adopted the Declaration on a Culture of Prevention for a
Peaceful, Inclusive, Resilient, Healthy and Harmonious
Society, which represents an upstream approach to
policymaking in order to build a culture of prevention
and strengthen resilience in ASEAN.
ASEAN’s culture of prevention summarizes
six key thrusts — promoting a culture of peace and
intercultural understanding, promoting a culture of
respect for all, promoting a culture of good governance
at all levels, promoting a culture of resilience and care
for the environment, promoting a culture of a healthy
lifestyle and promoting a culture that supports the
values of moderation. With the complementarities
between ASEAN Community Vision 2025 and the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development as the backdrop,
the six thrusts of ASEAN’s culture of prevention are
well aligned with the 17 Sustainable Development
Goals, focusing on key areas such as education, the
empowerment of young people and poverty eradication,
among others.
To further implement and realize the Declaration,
ASEAN developed a plan of action on the culture of
prevention in 2019, which informed outreach campaigns.
We believe that those initiatives will contribute towards
achieving ASEAN’s aspiration for an inclusive, rulesbased, people-oriented and people-centred community.
ASEAN’s culture of prevention is our contribution
to the fuller development of the culture of peace.
In promoting that principle, ASEAN has always
underscored the importance of international
cooperation and multilateralism, both of which have
become more important in view of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
The plan of action reflects the importance that
ASEAN places on multicultural and peace education
for young people to further advance the culture of
prevention, promote a regional sense of belonging
and foster a shared identity. ASEAN’s focus on
education recognizes that the defence of peace must
be constructed in the minds of young people. The plan
of action also expresses our dedication to continue
upholding the centrality of ASEAN in the evolving
regional architecture, as well as to further promote
shared values and norms of conduct and principles of
20-33724

01/12/2020

international law governing friendly relations among
States, in order to contribute towards maintaining and
promoting sustainable and inclusive peace and stability
in the region and beyond.
At the international level, ASEAN continues to
support the Security Council’s women and peace and
security agenda, as well as its youth, peace and security
agenda. We also support multi-stakeholder initiatives
for the active participation of women and young people
that foster a culture of peace, such as the ASEAN youth
volunteer programme.
This year, ASEAN has shown its commitment to
advancing the role of women through the convening
of the ASEAN Leaders’ Special Session at the thirtysixth ASEAN Summit on Women’s Empowerment
in the Digital Age, held on 26 June; the ASEAN
Ministerial Dialogue on Strengthening Women’s
Role for Sustainable Peace and Security, held on
10 September; the ASEAN Women Leaders’ Summit,
held on 12 November on the margins of the thirtyseventh ASEAN Summit; and the adoption of the East
Asia Summit Leaders’ Statement on Women, Peace
and Security.
Apart from its work with the United Nations,
ASEAN is very much committed to engaging with its
dialogue partners and other partners across the globe
to promote a culture of peace, security, stability and
prosperity through other key instruments, such as the
Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in Southeast Asia;
the Treaty on the Southeast Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free
Zone; and ASEAN-led mechanisms such as the East
Asia Summit, the ASEAN Regional Forum and the
ASEAN Defence Ministers’ Meeting-Plus.
ASEAN welcomes the invaluable role of the
United Nations Alliance of Civilizations in promoting
intercultural and interreligious dialogue and greater
understanding and respect among civilizations,
cultures, religions and beliefs. We appreciate the role
played by Turkey and Spain as co-sponsors of the
Alliance and congratulate them and the community of
the Group of Friends on the successful convening of
the virtual high-level meeting in September, which also
marked the fifteenth anniversary of the Alliance.
We further recognize the role of the Alliance
in developing the United Nations Plan of Action to
Safeguard Religious Sites and also support its call
for mutual respect, which stresses that the freedom
of expression and the freedom of religion or belief

A/75/PV.33

are interdependent, interrelated and mutually
reinforcing rights rooted in the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights.
ASEAN shares the aspiration of United Nations
States Members to achieve global peace, security and
prosperity through multilateralism, mutual respect,
tolerance, acceptance, reconciliation and upholding the
rule of law. Therefore, allow me to reiterate ASEAN’s
support for resolution 2535 (2020) and the SecretaryGeneral’s appeal for a global ceasefire during the
COVID-19 pandemic.
In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm ASEAN’s
commitment to promoting a culture of peace and its
readiness to work with partners in the international
community and the United Nations towards maintaining
global peace and stability, as well as achieving more
inclusive and prosperous societies.
Mr. Mohamed (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, my country’s delegation would like to thank the
President for convening this meeting, which gives us
an opportunity to take stock of our efforts to promote
dialogue, understanding and cooperation among
religions and cultures and to promote the culture of
peace among the nations, peoples and societies of
the world. That objective is at the core of purposes
and principles of the United Nations. We would like
to sincerely thank the delegation of Bangladesh for
introducing draft resolution A/75/L.28.
Peace is the foundation for the stability, security
and prosperity of peoples. Without peace, there is
no stability, prosperity or decent life for humankind.
Therefore, the periodic review of this agenda item helps
us to take stock of the efforts of the United Nations in an
area in which its role is no longer confined to conflict and
dispute resolution and de-escalation but is also focused
on other approaches to maintaining international peace
and security, including the promotion and support of
a culture of peace and dialogue among religions and
cultures and the denunciation of hate speech and
discrimination in all their forms.
We have at our disposal many mechanisms that, if
effectively implemented, will help us to establish and
promote peace, including the United Nations Strategy
and Plan of Action on Hate Speech and the United
Nations Plan of Action to Safeguard Religious Sites.
We have witnessed many incidents that have
proven the necessity of making greater efforts to foster

20-3372421/28

A/75/PV.33

interreligious and intercultural dialogue. Consideration
must be given to the fact that the freedom of opinion
should not be a pretext in any way for offensive
behaviour towards religions or religious symbols.
We stress the importance of not linking any terrorist
act with a particular culture or religion. Attempts to
promote such irresponsible ideologies lead to more
hatred and division, while undermining efforts that
should be directed towards overcoming the challenges
that we face. They also threaten the safety and security
of all.
We stress the importance of the common appeals to
religious leaders issued by the Secretary-General, the
High Representative for the United Nations Alliance of
Civilizations and the Special Adviser of the SecretaryGeneral on the Prevention of Genocide, which call for
solidarity, tolerance, the promotion of intercultural
and interreligious dialogue and the denunciation of all
forms of hatred, discrimination and intolerance.
Peace is a sustained commitment to the values of
freedom, justice, equality, tolerance and respect for
human dignity. It is closely linked to development and
Goal 16 of the Sustainable Development Goals, which
stresses the nexus between peace, development and
social justice. Therefore, peace is a prerequisite for all
and can be achieved only when injustice is addressed
along with all forms of discrimination and hate speech.
That requires fostering the media in order to realize the
goals of tolerance, rapprochement and solidarity.
We should closely monitor the Internet and ensure
that it is not misused and utilized as a platform to spread
the toxic ideology of extremist groups that seek to
radicalize young people with criminal plans. Awareness
campaigns must be intensified to fight those destructive
trends, given the threat they pose to the future of
young people. In that regard, we stress the importance
of fostering the important role of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization.
Given the harsh conditions that my country is
experiencing during the transitional period, we are
keen to spread the culture of peace. The Government of
National Accord is committed to a peaceful solution as
the only option for resolving the crisis in my country.
The Government aims to encourage and enable media
institutions, as well as writers and journalists, to address
confrontational and hate speech. In that context, we
welcome and express our satisfaction with the ceasefire
agreement that was concluded recently by the 5+5 Joint
22/28

01/12/2020

Military Commission. In one of its provisions, the
agreement states that a committee will be established
to address any irresponsible media speech that could
underline the national unity and coherence of the
Libyan people.
In conclusion, Libya reiterates its readiness to use
all its potential to contribute to international efforts
towards broadening and strengthening dialogue
in order to achieve tolerance and solidarity among
nations and end all forms of hatred, discrimination
and violence, thereby creating an environment
conducive to establishing security and prosperity for
future generations.
Mr. Abd Aziz (Malaysia): Malaysia aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the representative of
Brunei Darussalam on behalf of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations.
This year has been a taxing and testing one
for humankind. We have heard the difficulties of
communities and States in facing the challenges posed
by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
Initially we were in a state of shock, as we saw the
manner and speed with which the COVID-19 virus
spread to every corner of the world. That state of shock
turned into despair and sorrow as we witnessed the
increasing number of deaths, which continue today
and are in the millions. We found hope and resolve
in ourselves, as humankind came together in a global
effort to fight the pandemic. Through unity and
multilateralism, we hoped to fight this new common
enemy that had emerged.
Nonetheless, when we thought things could not
get any worse, we were struck by the increase in racial
attacks, xenophobic violence, discrimination and hate
speech, exacerbating the COVID-19 situation, which
was already appalling. Now not only is health under
siege but also peace. We must admit that more needs to
be done to halt that old but common enemy.
When Malaysia became the eighty-second member
of the United Nations on 17 September 1957, it did so
with a sense of duty, pride and honour. It did not matter
that our fledgling nation was only less than one month
old. Our first Permanent Representative, Tun Dr. Ismail,
stated, I quote
“To a small nation such as ours, it is in the moral
strength of our people that we shall find the
20-33724

01/12/2020

inspiration to shoulder the responsibility which
membership in the United Nations bestows on us”.
The moral strength of Malaysians, our people, is the
foundation of Malaysia’s nation-building process.
Our moral strength includes embracing differences
and peculiarities. It includes learning to love, accept,
understand and appreciate the diversity, distinctiveness
and uniqueness of others.
We believe in the importance of mutual respect
and tolerance and in promoting understanding and
acceptance among different groups, faiths and religions.
We see ourselves as an example of how different
ethnic communities can live in peace and harmony
and work together for the progress and well-being of
the nation. Those principles are critical foundations
that have allowed us to enjoy peace and prosperity as
a nation. The same moral compass that has guided our
nation-building process throughout the years guides
us in our relations with the global community. We
have also learned to love and embrace the diversity,
distinctiveness and uniqueness of the nation States that
make up the global community. It is the same ideas and
knowledge that we have shared with our people for the
common good of the nation that we are now sharing
with the global community.
Malaysia is fully supportive of, and strongly
committed to, fostering a global culture of respect
for peace and non-violence, intercultural dialogue
and social inclusion, in which human values, human
rights and dignity are truly celebrated. Our success
in nation-building is not only premised on the moral
strength of our people but also on the advancements
and empowerment of human rights and the rule of law.
The holistic approach of human rights not only focuses
on fundamental freedoms and the liberation of people,
as enshrined in the Malaysian Constitution, but also in
ensuring a balance in the promotion and protection of
human rights.
The simple fostering of human rights without any
check or balance of any kind has both a positive and
a negative side. For the enjoyment of rights per se is
not an end in itself. All people should understand that
the rights that are conferred come with responsibility.
If not, we would not only reap the positive benefits of
human rights but also face the unwanted growth of the
negative effects of unchecked rights.
Malaysia believes in the constellation of human
rights. If rights are not promoted and protected in

A/75/PV.33

a balanced manner, or if one right is pursued more
than others, then all other rights and freedoms suffer
an eclipse. Human rights and fundamental freedoms
must complement one another. Rights should not be in
competition with one another, and neither should one
right be seen as superior to another. The freedom of
expression, for example, should not usurp the freedom
of belief, or vice versa.
The promotion and protection of human rights in
a balanced manner is not without challenges. For the
challenge we face nationally also remains a challenge
faced in this institution. We must admit the hard truth
and reality that there have been instances in which
some delegations have advocated or pushed one right
over another. We must work together to address that
and find mutual respect and understanding among
Member States.
It is important that we rise beyond hate and fear
and continue in our resolve to further enhance positive
interaction among nations and peoples of diverse
cultures and values. We need closer collaboration
among all Member States in exploring ways to further
strengthen the culture of peace by the sharing of
experiences and best practices in enhancing cohesion
among individuals, communities and nations. We must
not allow irresponsible individuals or groups to take
advantage of a world facing despair as a result of a
pandemic and continue to spread racism, hate speech,
religious discrimination and xenophobia unchecked.
It is also important that we recommit ourselves to
the basic principles of the Declaration and Programme
of Action on a Culture of Peace, which was adopted
by the General Assembly in September 1999. The
international community should strengthen its ongoing
efforts to promote a culture of peace and effectively
implement the Programme of Action. We welcome the
United Nations Strategy and Plan of Action on Hate
Speech and call for its implementation. Malaysia also
commends the work of the United Nations Alliance
of Civilizations in promoting intercultural dialogue,
understanding and cooperation.
As we continue to fight the COVID-19 pandemic
and build back better, let us not forget that the quest for
peace is for our people and the global community. We
must end the rise in racism, hate speech and religious
discrimination, as well as the siege against peace. We
must be united in addressing and facing that threat. To
that end, we must be steadfast in the cause of peace,

20-3372423/28

A/75/PV.33

human rights and justice. The preservation of harmony
and peace, whether nationally or globally, is not easy.
But we must do what is right, not what is easy, as to
abandon such a cause is not an option.
Let me conclude by affirming Malaysia’s full
commitment to our common goals of achieving a
sustainable, peaceful and prosperous world through the
promotion of a culture of peace.
Mr. Poveda Brito (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We appreciate the
presentation of draft resolutions A/75/L.28 and
A/75/L.36/Rev.1, under agenda item 15, “Culture of
peace”, which were co-sponsored by Venezuela. The
draft resolutions refer to the Declaration and Programme
of Action on a Culture of Peace, interreligious and
intercultural dialogue and the safeguarding of religious
sites. We again commend the delegations of Bangladesh,
Pakistan, the Philippines and Saudi Arabia for their
historic leadership at the helm of such initiatives.
The coronavirus disease pandemic has once again
demonstrated not only the fragility of the human race
but also how much work remains to be done in terms of
building robust and universal health-care systems. The
challenges facing us in this crisis compel us to renew
our international partnership so that it ensures that
cooperation and resources, without exceptions, prevail
over political interests, since such an emergency can
be overcome only by humankind working together as a
whole. It is a timely opportunity to honour the memory
of the victims of the disease and pay tribute to the heroes
and heroines, the front-line workers, who have done
their utmost to deal with the ravages of the pandemic.
Despite that situation of uncertainty and turmoil,
there are those that use their influence to threaten the
stability and peace of other nations, making political
use of a global health emergency. That goes as far as
the imposition of unilateral coercive measures by the
current Government of the United States of America
and some of its partners, which prevent our country
from having access to financial systems, steal public
resources and stop us from buying medicines, medical
treatments, diagnostic tests, food and fuel. That
amounts to collective punishment, a crime against
humanity, which affects the entire Venezuelan people,
particularly the poorest. The strategy has failed to
achieve its goals but has left a trail of sorrow with often
irreversible consequences. We once again condemn
and deplore those acts of economic terrorism, which
24/28

01/12/2020

represent crimes against humanity under article 7 of
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court,
and we demand that they be lifted immediately.
Throughout its recent history, Venezuela has
always actively promoted peace and solidarity with
genuine and concrete actions. That has been affirmed
by sisterly nations and the international community,
including even amid the ongoing attacks and threats.
The various approaches for Latin American and
Caribbean integration, including at the intercontinental
level, and the mainstreaming of democratic and
participatory mechanisms in decision-making and
ownership among historically forgotten sectors of our
country, such as women, young people, indigenous
peoples and persons of African descent, ensure stability
amid the unequal distribution of wealth and the social
exclusion that has taken root.
We reaffirm our strong belief that the policies of
inclusion and social development for all on the basis
of the framework provided to us by the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and the Sustainable
Development Goals are the way to move forward
towards a world of peace and genuine justice based on
respectful coexistence among nations, even with our
differences. We have that duty to future generations.
Venezuela reiterates its support for the call made
by the Secretary-General at the start of the pandemic
to put an end to hostilities across the globe and to use
the opportunity provided by the crisis to put an end
to armed conflicts throughout the world. We strongly
believe that peace can be achieved through diplomacy,
multilateralism and a genuine commitment on the part
of national Governments. Humankind has proved that
to us in the past and can do so again today.
Mr. Al Zadjali (Oman) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, on behalf of the delegation of the Sultanate of
Oman, I would like very much to thank the President
for this opportunity to address the topic of a culture of
peace, which is a key priority for the Government of
my country. I would also like to take this opportunity
to pay tribute to the report of the Secretary-General
(A/75/233) on the promotion of a culture of peace
around the world.
Peace is the greatest blessing. It gives nations
stability and encourages cooperation among States. The
Charter of the United Nations affirms the importance
of peace. It urges States to adopt policies in support
20-33724

01/12/2020

of peace and to establish good-neighbourly relations,
while refraining from interference in the internal affairs
of other States and fostering a spirit of coexistence,
tolerance and cooperation.
Based on our conviction and the Sultanate of
Oman’s belief in the importance of peace, we made the
promotion of peace a key element of our foreign policy
and a noble goal that we are striving to achieve through
our relations with all States. The Sultanate of Oman
will always support peace and the culture of peace with
all its values and noble principles that encourage States
to reject violence, refrain from the use of force and
resolve disputes peacefully.
In that context, allow me to recall the speech by
His Majesty Sultan Bin Tarik of Oman on 23 February,
when he said:
“Oman’s message of peace will continue to go forth
in the world, carrying a great heritage and noble
goals, building and not demolishing, approaching
and not distancing.”
However, peace will be achieved not through words but
through acts that are in line with international values,
principles and norms, in a way that does not contradict
the Charter of the United Nations and international law.
I would like to conclude by saying that the delegation
of my country, the Sultanate of Oman, is ready to work
with the President and all delegations of Member States
to achieve the desired purposes and principles, at the
forefront of which is spreading peace and promoting it
through actions and words.
Mr. Mohammad (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, my country’s delegation would like to express its
sincere thanks to the Secretary-General, Mr. António
Guterres, for his report entitled “Promotion of a culture
of peace and interreligious and intercultural dialogue,
understanding and cooperation for peace” (A/75/233).
The increasingly complex and interconnected
challenges that we face have significantly worsened in
an unprecedented way this year, with the effects of the
threat posed by the outbreak of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, which transcends borders
and does not differentiate between developing and
developed countries. The pandemic has had a negative
impact on all aspects of our lives — health, economic,
social and political — and is now the greatest challenge
facing the world since the Second World War. It has
also revealed an increase in the forms of racism, hate

A/75/PV.33

speech and discrimination. Such phenomena, which
have emerged with the spread of the virus, are of great
concern, as are other phenomena from which we have
all suffered for a number of years, such as intolerance,
violent extremism and religious and sectarian tension.
All those challenges undermine and threaten
the spread of a culture of peace in our societies.
Such behaviours are due to a lack of respect for the
opinions of other people, intolerance, a growing
rhetoric of exclusion and lack of awareness of peaceful
coexistence. We all must therefore pool our efforts at
the international, regional and national levels so that
we can transform a culture of hatred, intolerance and
conflict into a culture of dialogue, peaceful coexistence
and peace, particularly in view of the unprecedented
health crisis facing us.
In that regard, we reiterate our support for the
Secretary-General’s call in March for a ceasefire in all
parts of the world that are experiencing armed conflict
in order to focus on the real struggle of our lives — the
fight against COVID-19.
The Secretary-General’s report also refers to many
issues in the context of promoting a culture of peace
that are ambitious and noble goals, which require
greater cooperation in order to achieve them. Such
issues encompass addressing hate speech, including
on the Internet, preventing attacks on religious sites,
promoting interreligious and intercultural dialogue
and ensuring respect for human rights and support for
peacebuilding efforts. We reaffirm what the SecretaryGeneral’s report mentions with regard to the importance
of the role of women and young people in promoting
a culture of peace. In that context, we emphasize the
importance of empowering them and their participation
in all areas, including political processes.
A commitment to peace is a sine qua non in order to
achieve the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
in particular Sustainable Development Goal 16, which
seeks to promote peaceful and inclusive societies. In
that context, we affirm that there will be no lasting
peace without development and no development without
lasting peace, as the two elements are closely related.
On the other hand, we renew the position of the
State of Kuwait, which condemns terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations whatever its motives. It is
a criminal act that can never be justified, and should
not be linked to any religion, nationality, culture or
ethnic group. We also affirm the need to put an end

20-3372425/28

A/75/PV.33

to defamation of all heavenly religions in both official
and political speeches, which will only increase hatred,
hostility and racism among peoples.
The culture of peace is deeply rooted in my country.
The Kuwaiti Constitution states in one of its articles
that “Peace is the aim of the State”. A spirit of tolerance,
acceptance of others and dialogue among cultures,
religions and civilizations has been deeply rooted in
the history of Kuwaiti society for hundreds of years. In
our modern era, those values have been translated into
a Constitution that ensures the freedoms of opinion,
expression and belief and the right to practise religion
in all freedom and safety.
In conclusion, my country’s delegation affirms its
readiness to participate in all regional and international
efforts to promote a culture of peace, foster dialogue
among civilizations, spread the values of moderation,
tolerance and mutual respect and reject extremism,
hatred and violence in all their forms and manifestations.
We urge all Member States to cooperate and work in a
unified manner through our international multilateral
system and the United Nations — an Organization that
was established to embrace and strengthen dialogue
as a constant principle in international relations in
pursuit of peace and to build bridges of cooperation and
communication among nations and peoples.
Ms. Wong (Singapore): My delegation thanks
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(A/75/233) on actions undertaken by Member States and
the United Nations system to promote a culture of peace
and interreligious and intercultural dialogue. We also
thank the delegations of Bangladesh, the Philippines,
Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Egypt and Morocco for their
respective initiatives under this agenda item.
Singapore aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Brunei Darussalam on behalf
of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (see
A/75/PV.32). We would like to add the following points
in our national capacity.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has
highlighted vulnerabilities, inequalities and increasing
intolerance and social tensions in many countries. In the
face of that complex and multidimensional threat, it is
now more important than ever to work towards a culture
of peace as the essential foundation of multilateralism
and global and regional cooperation. As the SecretaryGeneral states in his report, the commitment to peace
is critical for the achievement of the 2030 Agenda for
26/28

01/12/2020

Sustainable Development, particularly in the current
global context.
Singapore believes that strengthening social
cohesion by building bonds of trust and understanding
that bridge racial, social and cultural differences is
key to a more peaceful and stable global environment.
To promote interreligious and intercultural dialogue,
Singapore hosted the inaugural International
Conference on Cohesive Societies in 2019. More than
1,000 delegates from some 40 countries discussed the
issues surrounding faith, identity and cohesion and
pledged to safeguard religious harmony across the globe.
Those kinds of conversations are important in forging
stronger interfaith understanding and developing new
ways to foster greater harmony in societies.
As stated in article 10, paragraph 4, of the
Declaration of Peace and Cessation of War, education
is one of the principal means of building a culture of
peace. In Singapore, we believe that it is important to
teach children from a very young age about respect
for, and the understanding of, other religions, cultures
and ethnic groups. Multiracialism and the importance
of racial harmony are taught as compulsory subjects
in school. Students learn about cultural diversity and
issues related to living in multicultural Singapore,
such as racial and religious sensitivities, in both the
past and the present. We hope that this will shape the
values, attitudes and behaviour of our young people
so that they become responsible global citizens who
will advocate for more peaceful, tolerant, inclusive,
secure and sustainable societies in our increasingly
interconnected world.
Singapore will continue to work with all United
Nations Members to promote a greater intercultural
and interreligious understanding. We also reaffirm
our commitment to supporting multilateralism and the
work of the United Nations in fostering a global culture
of peace.
Amid the growing turbulence in many parts of
the world and the threats brought about by COVID-19,
it is timely to renew our collective commitment to
fostering a culture of peace. It is only through peace
that our countries and our peoples can focus on
building back better and achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank the President for convening this meeting. I
20-33724

01/12/2020

also thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report (A/75/233).
The international community renewed its
commitment to peace in the Declaration on the
Commemoration of the Seventy-fifth Anniversary of
the United Nations (resolution 75/1), which sends a
clear message to unite around the promotion of a culture
of peace with the aim of building a generation that
supports peace and peaceful coexistence and respects
all religions and cultures so that everyone can live in
peace and security.
It is of concern to see that inflammatory rhetoric has
taken a dangerous turn with the increasing institutional
and systematic calls for the repeated targeting
of more than 2 billion Muslims around the world
through deliberate attacks on their religious symbols.
Consequently, the State of Qatar condemns the
significant escalation in populist rhetoric that incites
hatred against religions. We categorically reject all
forms of hate speech based on belief, race or religion.
In affirmation of the State of Qatar’s commitment
to implementing the Declaration and Programme of
Action on a Culture of Peace, and since we believe that
achieving peace at the national and international levels
requires focusing all our efforts to realize sustainable
development, ensure respect for human rights, the rule
of law and gender equality, fight terrorism and combat
extremism and corruption, my country has strengthened
its capabilities for establishing and promoting peace
by adopting an impartial and reliable foreign policy as
well as embracing positive and balanced relations.
In the context of benefiting from the trust placed
in the policy of the State of Qatar at the international
level, my country has worked towards preventing and
resolving disputes peacefully through mediation and
preventive diplomacy as tools for achieving peace
in accordance with Chapter VI of the Charter of the
United Nations. The efforts made by my country have
contributed to the peaceful settlement of a number of
disputes, most recently through the facilitation and
hosting of the Afghan peace negotiations in Doha,
which was welcomed by the Security Council.
Demonstrating such a commitment to the
Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture of
Peace entails distancing ourselves from policies that
undermine the efforts of the international community to
promote peace and security. Accordingly, the creation
of crises and the spread of hatred among peoples

A/75/PV.33

undermine the efforts of the international community
to promote a culture of peace. Likewise, the violation of
the sovereignty of States, interference in their internal
affairs and disrespect for the rule of law and human
rights contradict the endeavours of the international
community to promote a culture of peace.
The continued unjust blockade imposed on the State
of Qatar for more than three years is a flagrant violation
of the Charter of the United Nations, which calls on all
States to refrain from fuelling disputes and to resolve
them through dialogue in line with the provisions of
international law and the Charter.
In conclusion, we reaffirm the commitment of the
State of Qatar to actively participate in the international
efforts to promote a culture of peace, spread the values
of moderation and tolerance while rejecting hatred,
violence and extremism in all its forms.
Mr. Pedroso Cuesta (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
The year that is coming to an end has been marked
by the unprecedented impact of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which has added
new challenges and highlighted other problems
already facing the international community. With its
devastating effects, the pandemic has demonstrated the
inequality of the international order in which we live,
which prioritizes rich countries and perpetuates the
deprivation of the poor. It favours inequality, poverty
and hunger in a world with all the necessary wealth,
expertise and technologies in an unsustainable paradox
and supports unilateralism.
In the midst of a pandemic that is far from
diminishing, we have seen the increased application
of unilateral coercive measures, which run counter to
the Charter of the United Nations and international law
and further undermine the ability of affected countries
to deal with COVID-19. At the same time, we have
witnessed the prevailing selfishness among some of the
richest nations, which have unleashed their competitive
spirit in order to secure for themselves the medicines
and technologies needed to respond to the pandemic,
while ignoring the fact that we live in an interconnected
world and the pandemic is a global problem that we all
should resolve. As always, such competition will harm
only the countries of the South. The situation of the
pandemic has also been used by some, such as the
United States, to promote racist and xenophobic ideas,
which will lead only to confrontation, and to withdraw
from the World Health Organization.

20-3372427/28

A/75/PV.33

Apart from COVID-19, none of the phenomena
I have mentioned are new. Inequality, exclusion,
unilateralism, a lack of solidarity, and intolerance are
the same problems that hamper greater progress in the
implementation of the Declaration and Programme
of Action on a Culture of Peace. There can be no
peace without economic and social development.
Justice and equality for all need to prevail within and
among countries. Neither can there be peace or the
promotion of such a culture without strict compliance
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and international law, in particular
the prevention of the use or threat of use of force,
non-interference in the internal affairs of others,
respect for sovereignty and self-determination.
We cannot advance a culture of peace, a goal that
Cuba shares, while we continue to promote supremacist,
racist and xenophobic ideas that are not based on science
or morally unacceptable. A world of peace will remain
an elusive ideal until we prioritize multilateralism and
respect our legitimate differences.
Cuba is well aware of the value of peace and the
importance of promoting an environment that fosters
such a culture. For six decades, we have had to deal with
the effects of the criminal financial, trade and economic

28/28

01/12/2020

blockade imposed by the United States, which are
exacerbated amid the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as
its acts of non-conventional war and aggressive policies
against our people. Nevertheless, to date we have
remained fully committed to peace and will continue to
support the Declaration and Programme of Action on a
Culture of Peace, as well as the Proclamation of Latin
America and the Caribbean as a Zone of Peace, adopted
in Havana in 2014 at the second Summit of the Heads
of State and Government of the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States.
In line with that commitment, Cuba decided to join
the Group of Friends of the United Nations Alliance of
Civilizations. We are convinced that the promotion of a
culture of peace is the way to achieve a fairer and more
sustainable world.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker for this meeting. We will hear the remaining
speakers tomorrow, Wednesday, 2 December, after
the consideration of the agenda items “Question of
Palestine” and “The situation in the Middle East”.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 15.
The meeting rose at 5.55 p.m.

20-33724
