IX.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

(h) To draw the attention of the States and other
participants referred to in subparagraphs (d) to (g)
above to the desirability of appointing as their representatives persons especially competent in the field to be
considered;
(i) To place before the Conference:
(i) All comments and proposals received from
Governments;
(ii) Working and background papers which may
be received from the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law, the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and other interested international
organizations, taking into consideration the
legal, economic and shipping trade aspects of
the draft Convention;
(iii) Draft provisions concerning implementation,
reservations and other final clauses and all
relevant documentation and recommendations
relating to methods of work and procedure;
(j) To ensure that all relevant documentation for
the Conference will be distributed to all participants in
the Conference at the earliest possible date;
( k) To arrange for adequate. st~ and. facilities required for the Conference, beanng m mmd the fact
that the legal, economic and shipping trade aspects of
the carriage of goods by sea should receive due consideration at the Conference.

99th plenary meeting
15 December 1976

31/101.

Report of the Committee on Relations
with the Host Country

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Committee on

Relations with the Host Country, 21
1. Accepts the recommendations of the Committee
on Relations with the Host Country contained in paragraph 65 of its report;
2. Decides to continue the work of the Committee
on Relations with the Host Country, in conformity with
General Assembly resolution 2819 (XXVI) of 15 December 1971, with the purpose of examining all matters
falling within its terms of reference and requests the
Secretary-General to provide the Committee with all
necessary assistance;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda
of its thirty-second session the item entitled "Report
of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country".
99th plenary meeting
15 December 1976

31/102.

21 [bid.,

Measures to prevent international terrorism which endangers or takes innocent human lives or jeopardizes fundamental freedoms, and study of the
underlying causes of those forms of
terrorism and acts of violence which lie
in misery, frustration, grievance and
Supplement No. 26 (A/31/26).

185

despair and which cause some people
to sacrifice human lives, including their
own, in an attempt to effect radical
changes

The General Assembly,
Deeply perturbed over acts of international terrorism

which are occurring with increasin~ frequency and
which take a toll of innocent human lives,
Recognizing the importance of international cooperation in devising measures effectively to prevent
their occurrence and of studying their underlying causes
with a view to finding just and peaceful solutions as
quickly as possible,
Recalling the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations, 22
Noting that the Ad Hoe Committee on International
Terrorism, established under General Assembly resolution 3034 (XXVII) of 18 December 1972, has been
obliged to suspend its work,
Deeply convinced of the importance to mankind of
the continuation of the work of the Ad Hoe Committee,
1. Expresses deep concern over increasing acts of
international terrorism which endanger or take innocent
human lives or jeopardize fundamental freedoms;
2. Urges States to continue to seek just and peaceful solutions to the underlying causes which give rise
to such acts of violence;
3. Reaffirms the inalienable right to self-determination and independence of all peoples under colonial and
racist regimes and other forms of alien domination,
and upholds the legitimacy of their struggle, in particular the struggle of national liberation movements,
in accordance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter and the relevant resolutions of the organs of
the United Nations;
4. Condemns the continuation of repressive and
terrorist acts by colonial, racist and alien regimes in
denying peoples their legitimate right to self-determination and independence and other human rights and fundamental freedoms;
5. Invites States to become parties to the existing
international conventions which relate to various aspects
of the problem of international terrorism;
6. Invites States to take all appropriate measures
at the national level with a view to the speedy and final
elimination of the problem, bearing in mind the provisions of paragraph 3 above;
7. Invites the Ad Hoe Committee on International
Terrorism to continue its work in accordance with the
mandate entrusted to it under General Assembly resolution 3034 (XXVII);
8. Invites the States which have not yet done so
to submit their observations and concrete proposals
as soon as possible to the Secretary-General so as to
enable the Ad Hoe Committee to carry out its mandate
more efficiently;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
the Ad Hoe Committee an analytical study of the observations of States submitted under paragraph 8 above;
22 Resolution 2625

(XXV), annex.

186

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

10. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee to consider
the observations of States under paragraph 8 above and
to submit its report with recommendations for possible
co-operation for the speedy elimination of the problem,
bearing in mind the provisions of paragraph 3, to the
General Assembly at its thirty-second session;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Ad Hoe Committee with the necessary facilities and
services, including summary records;
12. Decides to include the item in the provisional
agenda of its thirty-second session.
99th plenary meeting
15 December 1976
31/103.

Drafting of an international convention
against the taking of hostages

The General Assembly,
Considering that the progressive development of international law and its codification contribute to the
implementation of the purposes and principles set forth
in Articles 1 and 2 of the Charter of the United Nations,
Considering that, in accordance with the principles
proclaimed in the Charter, freedom, justice and peace
in the world are inseparable from the recognition of
the inherent dignity and the equal and inalienable rights
of all members of the human family,
Having regard to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 23 and the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights, 24 which provide that everyone has
the right to life, liberty and security,
Recognizing that the taking of hostages is an act
which endangers innocent human lives and violates human dignity,
Gravely concerned at the increase of such acts,
Recalling the prohibition of the taking of hostages
in articles 3 and 34 of the Geneva Convention relative
to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War,
of 12 August 1949,211 the Hague Convention of 1970
for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft, 26
the Montreal Convention of 1971 for the Suppression
of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Civil Aviation, 27
the Convention of 1973 on the Prevention and Punishment of Crimes against Internationally Protected Persons, including Diplomatic Agents,28 as well as General
Assembly resolution 2645 (XXV) of 25 November
1970 condemning aerial hijacking or interference with
civil air travel,
Recognizing the urgent need for further effective
measures to put an end to the taking of hostages,
2s Resolution 217 A (III).
24 Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
25 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 973, p. 287.
26
United States Treaties and Other International Agreements, vol. 22, part 2 (1971), p. 1644.
21 Ibid., vol. 24, part 1 (1973 ), p. 568.
2s Resolution 3166 (XXVIII), annex.

Mindful of the need to conclude, under the auspices
of the United Nations, an international convention
against the taking of hostages,
l. Decides to establish an Ad Hoe Committee on
the Drafting of an International Convention against the
Taking of Hostages, composed of thirty-five Member
States;
2. Requests the President of the General Assembly,
after consultations with the chairmen of the regional
groups, to appoint the members of the Ad Hoe Committee on the basis of equitable geographical distribution and of representation of the principal legal systems
of the world;
3. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee to draft at the
earliest possible date an international convention against
the taking of hostages and authorizes the Committee,
in the fulfilment of its mandate, to consider suggestions
and proposals from any State, bearing in mind the views
expressed during the debate on this item at the thirtyfirst session of the General Assembly;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to afford the Ad
Hoe Committee any assistance and provide it with all
facilities it may require for the performance of its work,
to provide the Committee with pertinent information
on the taking of hostages and to ensure that summary
records of the meetings of the Committee will be drawn
up and submitted;
5. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee to submit its
report and to make every effort to submit a draft convention to the General Assembly in good time for consideration at its thirty-second session and requests the
Secretary-General to communicate the report to Member States;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-second session the item entitled "Drafting of
an international convention against the taking of hostages".
99th plenary meeting
15 December 1976

*

*

*

The President of the General Assembly subsequently i11formed the Secretary-Genera/29 that he had appointed as
members of the Ad Hoe Committee on the Drafting of an
International Convention against the Taking of Hostages thirtythree of the thirty-five State.t to be appointed by him ill accordance with paragraph 2 of the abol'e resolutio11.
As a result, the Ad Hoe Committee is composed of the following Member State.s: ALGERIA, BARBADOS, CANADA, CHILE, DEMO·
CRATIC YEMEN, DENMARK, EGYPT, FRANCE, GERMANY, FEDERAL
REPUBLIC OF, GUINEA, IRAN, ITALY, JAPAN, JORDAN, KENYA,
LESOTHO, LIBYAN ARAB JAMAHIRIYA, MEXICO, NETHERLANDS,
NICARAGUA, NIGERIA, PHILIPPINES, POLAND, SOMALIA, SURINAM,
SWEDEN, SYRIAN ARAB REPUBLIC, UNION OF SoVIET SoCIALIST
REPUBLIC'S, UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN
IRELAND, UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA, UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA, VENEZUELA and YUGOSLAVIA.
29 A/31/479.
