L

TWENTY-SIXTH

YEAR
th
MEETING: 9 DECEMBER 1971

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1610) . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

I

Tribute to the memory of Dr. Ralph Bunche, former Under-Secretary-General for
Special Political Affairs , , . . . . . . . . , . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . , . , . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , , . . .

3

Letter dated 3 December 1971 from the representatives of Algeria, Iraq, the
Libyan Arab Republic and the People’s Democratic Republic of Yemen to the
President of the Security Council (S/10409) . , . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3

S/PV.1610

NOTE
Les totes des documents de l’organisation des Nations Unies se composent de lettres
majuscules et de chiffres. La simple mention d’une tote dans un texte signifie qu’iI s’agit
d’un document de I’Organisation.
Les documents du Conseil de stkurite (totes S/. . .) sont, en regle genbrale, publies
dans des Supplhents trimestriels aux Documents officiels du Cbnseil de st+curitC. La date
d’un tel document indique le supplement dans lequel on trouvera soit le texte en question, soit desindications le concemant.
Les resolutions du Conseil de securite, numerotees selon un systeme adopt.5 en 1964,
sont publikes, pour chaque an&e, dans un recueil de Rksolutions et dkisions du Conseil
de s&wit& Ce nouveau systeme, applique retroactivement aux resolutions antdrieures au
ler janvier 1965, est entrd pleinement en vigueur a cette date.

SIXTEEN

HUNDRED

AND TENTH

Held in New York on Thursday,
fiesiderzt:

Mr. I. B. TAYLOR-KAMARA

9 December

(Sierra Leone).

6. An intellectual of the highest calibre, Dr. Bunche gave
dedicated service to the United Nations and to humanity as
a whole. A result of his work is to be seen in the increased
membership of this world Organization. Only last year he
and his assistants concluded complex private negotiations
which finally led to the solution of the problem of the
status of Bahrain.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l610)
Adoption

2.

Letter dated 3 December 1971 from’the representatives!
of Algeria, Iraq, the Libyan Arab Republic and the
People’s Democratic Republic of Yemen to the President of the Security Council (S/10409).

1971, at 3.30 p.m.

States and Israel, and restored, peace for a while in that
region. For this he was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize. In
Africa, we remember his peace-keeping efforts and achievements in the newborn Republic of the Congo.

Assazt:
The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, China, France, Italy, Japan;
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Syrian Arab
Republic,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United
States of America,

1.

MEETING

of the agenda.

7. The world can never forget the extraordinary mind and
quality of service given by this great man, whose ancestry
included the blood of great Africans, who graduated summa
cum Zaude from the University of California and won a
doctorate in international relations at Harvard.
8. The United Nations will miss the greatest “troubleshooter” of our times, and his family will miss the warmth
and tenderness of a selfless and dedicated husband and
father.

Tribute to the memory of Dr. Ralph Bunche, former
Under-Secretary-General
for Special Political Affairs
I - The PRESIDENT:
As President of the Council, it is
with great regret that I inform members of the demise early
this
morning of Dr, Ralph Bunche, formerly UnderSecretary-General
for Special Political Affairs.

9. The President and the Government and people of Sierra
Leone are distressed at the death of so outstanding a man.
10. May his soul rest in peace.

2. It is with a sad and heavy heart that I have to say these
few words on behalf of my delegation, News has reached us
that a personality highly respected in this Council chamber,
removed by Illness from our midst some months ago, has
now been permanently snatched from us.

11. Mr. VINCI (Italy): Mr. President, I wish to associate
myself with the expression of sorrow which you have just
pronounced in memory of Dr. Ralph Bunche. My delegation also learnt with great grief of the passing away of this
high-standing, retired Under-Secretary-General
for Special
Political Affairs.

3. I speak of a man who in his own lifetime became, in the
words
of the Secretary-General, an “international institution in his own right, transcending both nationality and
race in a way that is achieved by very few”. That man, YOU
all know, was Dr. Ralph Bunche, retired Under-SecretaryGeneral for Special Political Affairs, That post was held by
him for 14 years.

12. For many years he had put his intelligence, his skill
and his patience at the service of our Organization, with
fruitful results for the United Nations. His efforts and
successes in the solution of difficult and dangerous international problems-and it is sufficient, I think, to recall the
prominent role he played in the Middle East and Cyprus
crises-are all very much in our minds.

4. Those of us who had been privileged to make his
acquaintance
admired his soft-spoken but tenacious disposition. His patience was extraordinary and had been likened
to
that of the Biblical Job.

13. His life, his dedication to peace and his devotion to
the ideals of the Charter made of Ralph Bunche an
outstanding figure in the history of the United States and
of the United Nations. He was, indeed, one of the great
peace-makers of our time. For us, in our work here, he has
been an example, a great encouragement and an inspiration,
and we all specially remember him during those last months
serenely present among us, attending to his activities and

5. The late Dr. Bunche was perhaps best known for the
admirable
and indefatigable manner in which, as Mediator
in the Middle East in 1948 and 1949, he conducted
negotiations‘in
Ptlestine and later on in Rhodes, as well as
elsewhere.
We might also recall that the negotiations
resulted
in four Armistice Agreements between the Arab
1

giving his personal advice, in spite of the illness that was
undermining his body.

and his colleagues in the United Nations, all of whonl lLi,,
miss him profoundly.

14. His death is a great loss for the United States, for the
United Nations and for us all, especially for those among us
who enjoyed and had the privilege of his friendship.

24. Mr. TERENCE
(Burundi)
(irzterpre&atioll ficl,,,
French): My delegation is deeply moved upon learnineaf
the demise of a great man, a great universalist, a grrar
internationalist.

35. May I convey through you, Mr. President, the Italian
delegation’s feeling of sorrow to the Government and the
delegation of the United States and to Dr. Bunche’s family.

25. Ralph Bunche was one of those rare men who was able
to overcome race, religion and ideology, and to work for
peace alone. He was a man who always strove to cff~~
reconciliation among men and nations. Several times he llad
to serve in the Middle East; several times he had to be SQ,
to the Congo, a neighbouring friendly country, and
therefore he also served the cause of peace for the peopfa
and nation of Burundi.

16. Mr. VAN USSEL (Belgium) (interpretation fi’orn
French): It was with a deep and understandable sadness
that my delegation learned o$ the demise of Dr. Ralph
Bunche. The devotion which that great man constantly gave
the international community is equalled only by his renown
as a tireless worker for peace, which earned him the Nobel
Peace Prize in 1950.

26. We are deeply grieved to learn of his death and \re
should like, through you, Mr. President, and the delegatio,,
of the United States to transmit our heartfelt condolence
to the Government and people of the United States and thp
bereaved family of Dr. Bunche. We express the hope 11131
the United Nations will be true ta the spirit of under.
standing and peace which always characterized Dr. Burl&e.

17. In the United Nations Dr. Bunche started as Director
of the Department of Trusteeship and Non-Self-Governing
Territories; later he became Acting Mediator in the Middle
East conflict. His functions as Under-Secretary-General for
Special Political Affairs later led him to discharge various
missions for the Organization. It was thus that he organized
the United Nations Emergency Force in the Middle East
and the United Nations Operation in the Congo, where he
became the Special Representative of the Secretary
General. It was at that time that my Government had the
privilege of co-operating most closely with him.

27. Mr. JOUEJATI (Syrian Arab Republic) (irzterprefatk~~z
from French): Mr. President, at this sad moment when you
have announced the demise of a man of internatiorlat
standing, Dr. Ralph Bunche, the Syrian Arab Republic
wishes to endorse the words that you have spoken regardiq
the brilliant and active career of this devoted servant of ttic
United Nations, its cause and its objectives.

18. In his successive functions, Dr. Bunche distinguished
himself by his devotion to the cause of fraternity and
understanding among men and nations. In him our Organization loses a great servant, and the cause of peace, one of
its most fervent advocates.

28. We also join in the condolences that you haue
addressed to his family, his friends and his Governmetlt.
May the soul of this man who worked so hard for peace rtjl
in peace and enjoy divine grace and mercy.

19. To his bereaved family and to the American nation
which salutes his memory, I should like to express the
condolences of my Government and to tell them how much
we share in their grief.

29. Mr. KOSCIUSKO-MORIZET
(France) (interpretaria!r
fvom French): I wish to endorse all the words that IW
been spoken here. I knew Ralph Bun&e personally for
more than 20 years. We followed his activities as a
collaborator of Dag HammarskjBd, U Thant and of many
non-governmental organizations and associations. He was an
international servant in the best meaning of the words; lie
was simply a man, a peace-loving man, a freedom-loving
man and a man devoted to progress. His death is a great 101s
to the United Nations as a whole and to all delegations
associated with the work of the Organization. To Iii5
family, to the Secretary-General, who had such deep
affection for him, and to the delegation of the United
States we express our deepest sympathy.

20. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): Mr. President, my delegation
wishes to associate itself with the sentiments which you
have expressed on the death of Ralph Bunche. He was a
man of peace and for peace in a world so savagely torn by
war and dissension. I trust that you will convey to his wife
and family the sympathy of my delegation in their great
loss.
21. Sir Colin CROWE (United Kingdom): I should like to
join members of the Council in their tribute to Dr. Bunche.
He was the ideal of the international civil servant-in his
honesty, h.is total integrity and his devotion to the United
Nations.

30. Mr, LANG (Nicaragua) (interpretatiorz .fb?z L$xzN~#:
To be silent at the irreparable loss of our great and
unforgettable friend Dr. Ralph Bunche would be unpardon.
able for those of us who knew him, worked with him aad
listened to him with respect and admiration for all there
years. The LJnited Nations has lost one of its greaterl
collaborators, U Thant has lost a brother-in-arms and tilt
United States has lost a great citizen who brought glory tQ
his country. My delegation shares that loss. Dr. Bunche’s
life must serve as an example to everyone. May he rest in

22. As for myself, I worked closely with him 10 years ago
and came not only to respect him but to hold him in the
deepest affection. He was a great man, and his like will not
soon be found again.
23. I should like you, Mr. President, to convey the
sympathy of my Government, my delegation and myself to
Mrs. Bunche, Dr. Bunche’s family, the Secretary-General

peace.

2

31. Mr. ISSRAELYAN (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (transluted fiorn Russian): The Soviet delegation
associates itself with the expressions of grief at the death of
the United Nations Under-Secretary-General
for Special
Political ‘Affairs, Dr. Ralph Bunche. We would like to ask
YOU,
Mr. President, to transmit the condolences of the
Soviet delegation on the occasion of this loss to the family
of Dr. Bunche and to the United States Mission to the
United Nations.
32. Mr. ORTIZ

DE ROZAS (Argentina)

one secret o’f his peace-making and negotiating powers
which enabled him to achieve the 1949 Armistice Agreements in the Middle East. For this, as others have noted, he
earned the Nobel Peace Prize and was one of the youngest
men ever to be so honoured. From relative obscurity the
name of Ralph Bunche became a household word throughout the world.
38. Dr. Bunche dealt throughout his life with the weakness and combativeness of human nature, but he remained,
in his own words, “an incurable optimist”.
He once
explained the tragic recurrence of war by observing that
throughout history man has been less virtuous, less constant, less rational, less peaceful than he knows how to be,
than he is fully capable of being.

(interplatation

fronz Spanish): Ralph Bun&e was an upright man who
devoted all his efforts and ability to the cause of peace and
the service of the United Nations. The Argentine delegation
whoIehe&tedly
joins in the tribute that is being paid to the
memory of Dr. Bunche.

39. No man in United Nations history has given a finer
example of those qualities of which man is capable at his
best than Ralph Bun&e. Through an illustrious career he
has put his rare gifts at the service of peace as an
international servant, and also at the service of justice and
fair play for aI1 people, regardless of race.

33. Mr. LUDWICZAK
(Poland): Mr. President, the Polish
delegation joins you and the representatives who preceded
US in paying a tribute to the memory of the late Dr. Ralph
Bunche.
34. It is in this organ more than anywhere else that his
great contribution to the work of the United Nations and
his pursuance of the cause of international peace ought to
be remembered, and that his quiet, persevering efforts on
behalf of a peaceful contribution to understanding among
nations ought to be most highly appreciated. Nor can we
forget his great experience as a true international servant,
which he so readily shared with all of us; his devotion to
the United Nations, which seemed to transcend his long
sickness; and his moral qualities, which won him universal
respect. We convey to the family of Dr. Bunche and to the
Secretary-General our deepest condolences.

40. Finally, may I assure you, Mr. President, and the
members of this Council, of our intention to transmit to
the family of Ralph Bunche the condolences which have
been so generously expressed here today. On behalf of the
United States delegation may I also express the deep
appreciation we feel for the moving sentiments which have
been expressed here in honour of our distinguished native
son.

41. Mr. FARAW (Somalia): I wish to propose’ that the
record of this part of our meeting in which we have paid a
tribute to Ralph Bun&e be forwarded to his family so that
they may know the esteem in which he was held by the
international community.

35. Mr. NAKAGAWA
(Japan): It was with the greatest
sorrow that my delegation heard of the death of Dr. Ralph
Bunche. His name has long been associated with the
peace-keeping
and humanitarian work of the United
Nations. The people of Japan join with the other people of
the world in expressing the sincere feeling of sorrow at this
sad news and wishes to extend deep condolences to the
bereaved family, to the United Nations and to the
Government and people of the United States.

42. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Somalia has
suggested that the record of this meeting, containing the
statements which representatives have made in tribute to
the late Dr. Bunche, be transmitted to his family.
43. As President of the Security Council, I shaII forward
the record to the bereft family in accordance with his
suggestion.

36. Mr. PHILLIPS (United States of America): In the
constellation of United Nations leaders, the name of Ralph
Bunche holds a unique place of honour. His death marks
the end of a United Nations era. His example will be a
permanent
inspiration to aII of us who care about the
future of the United Nations as a world organization for
peace. We in the United States have special cause to be
proud that this eminent American has given his greatest
years of service to the United Nations and to the goals of
the Charter. There could have been no finer embodiment of
our country’s enduring support for the United Nations than
his impartial service at the highest levels of the world
Organization for 25 years.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 3 December 1971 from the representatives of
Algeria, Iraq, the Libyan Arab Republic and the People’s
Democratic Republic of Yemen to the President of the
Security Council (S/10409)
44. The PRESIDENT: In a letter dated 3 December 1971
[S/10409],
requesting an urgent meeting of the Security
Council to consider the situation in the Arabian Gulf area,
the representatives of Algeria, Iraq, the Libyan Arab
Republic and the People’s Democratic Republic of Yemen
requested that they be allowed to participate without the
right to vote in the Council’s discussion of the matter.

37. Dr. Bunche rose from humble beginnings, and through
the force and goodness of his own character overcame the
obstacles
of poverty and racial bias. He learned, as he
himself said, to fight without hatred and to harbour no
bitterness
against anybody. That facet of his character was
3

55. Mr. EL-SHIBIB (Iraq): Mr. President, allow me to
associate myself and my delegation with the words of
condolence expressed by you and the members of the
Council on the death of Dr. Ralph Bun&e, farmer Under.
Secretary-General for Special Political Affairs, As ~1,~
representative of a small country, a peace-loving country, 1
feel a particular sense of sorrow and loss at the demise ofa
man who was a dedicated international civil servant, a great
believer in the Charter, a tireless servant in the task of
fulfilling the purposes and principles of the Charter of tile
United Nations. Iraq, as a small country, puts its faithand
hope in the belief that these principles and these purposes
should be and will be the overriding rule of international
life. I would ask the Secretariat to convey to Dr. Bunche’s
family and to his country our condolences and our sense of
deep sorrow.

45. In a letter dated 6 December 1971 [S/10431] the
representative of Kuwait also requested to be allowed to
participate without the right to vote in the Council’s
discussions.
46. Today, 9 December 1971, I have received a similar
request from the representative of Iran [S/I 04361.
47. In accordance with the usual practice of the Council,
and if there is no objection, I shall invite the representatives
of Algeria, Iran Iraq, Kuwait, the Libyan Arab Republic
and the People’s Democratic Republic of Yemen to
participate without the right to vote in the Council’s
discussion of this item.
48. As I hear no objection, it is so decided.
49. In view of the limited number of seats available at the
Council table, and in accordance with the usual practice, I
invite the representatives of Algeria, the Libyan Arab
Republic, the People’s Democratic Republic of Yemen and
Kuwait to take the places reserved for them at the side of
the Council chamber on the understanding that they will be
invited to the Council table when it is their turn to address
the Council.

56. I should like to begin, Sir, by extending to you and te
the members of the Council my sincere thanks and
appreciation for your response to my Government’s request
LOhold this meeting of the Council, and for allowing me to
participate in the debate. The request of my Government
and the Governments of Algeria, the Libyan Arab Republic
and the People’s Democratic Republic of Yemen called for
an urgent meeting of the Council in order that we miglrt
submit for its consideration our complaint regarding the
recent events in the Arabian GuIf which have resulted in a
tense and serious situation and a potential threat to the
peace and security of the entire area, endangering the vital
interests of my country.

50. I also invite the representative of Iraq and the
representative of Iran to take a place at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. T, El-Shibib (Iraq)
and Mr. A. K. Afshar (Iran) took places at the Security
Council table; and Mr. A. Rahal (Algeria), Mr. M. Maghribi
(Libyan Arab Republic), Mr. A. M, Ismail (People’s Democratic Republic of Yemen) and Mr. A. Y, Bishara (Kuwait)
took the places reserved for them in the Council chamber,

57. As you have mentioned, Mr. President, our request
was submitted on 3 December, but we are aware and
appreciative of the most serious, tragic and dangerous
situation of which the Council was seized, and the delay in
holding this meeting is understood and appreciated by my
delegation.

51 I The PRESIDENT: I wish to inform the Council that I
have just received a letter dated 9 December 1971
/S/10439/ from the Minister of State of the United Arab
Emirates, requesting that his delegation be allowed to
participate without the right to vote in the discussion on
this item. If there is no objection, I shall invite the
representative of the United Arab Emirates to participate
without the right to vote in the Council’s discussion of this
item.

58. On 30 November 1971 my Government received the
following cable from the Ruler of Ras Al-Khaima, Sheildr
Saqr Bin Mohamad Ali Al-Qasimi:
“This morning, Tuesday the 30th of November 1971,
Iranian troops have invaded the two islands of Tunb and
thus violated the brotherly rights of neighbourliness and
transgressed against our historical and national rights. The
small garrison stationed for the defence of the islands and
composed of six policemen valiantly resisted the invasion;
four of them were killed and the other two injured. The
two islands of Tunb are and have always been, since
ancient times, an indivisible part of the territory of Ras
Al-Khaima, and their occupation by Iran is a blatant
aggression not only against Ras Al-Khaima alone, but
against all the Arab people in all their countries. We call
upon you to take immediate and effective measures to
repulse the aggressors and to unite in support of Arab
rights. We appeal to you to shoulder your full natioml
responsibilities before God and history. We request you
to submit the call to the United Nations, the Security
Council and the Council of the League of Arab States.
Awaiting your speedy reply, we wish you success,”

52. As there is no objection, I invite the representative of
the United Arab Emirates to take the place reserved for him
at the side of the Council chamber, on the understanding
that he will be invited to take a place at the Council table
when called upon to speak.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. A. Pachachi
{United Arab Emirates) took the place reserved for him in
the Council chamber.
53. The PRESIDENT: The Council will now begin its
consideration of item 2 on the agenda. In addition to the
document mentioned in the agenda, there is an additional
document, document S/10434, which contains a letter
dated 7 December 1971 from the representative of Iraq,
together with the text of a cable from the Ruler of Ras
Al-Khaima,

59. Thus, I have come to the Council to submit not the
complaint of my own Govermnent only, but also that of a

54. I call on the representative of Iraq.
4

small and helpless Arab State which has no means to defend
itself against aggression.

Haji Meerza Aghassistated that the whole Gulf “from the
commencement of Shatt-Al-Arab to Muscat belongs to
Persia,and all the islandsof the sea,without exception, and
without participation of any other government, belong
entirely to Persia”. I have quoted from the Foreign Office
Papers,dated 31 May 1845. The letter from the Persian
PrimeMinister wasdated I5 March 1844.

60. The two islands of the greater and lesser Tunb are
situated at the exit of the Straits of Hormuz which connect
the Arab Gulf to the Gulf of Oman and the Arabian Sea.
61. Here may I pause for a moment to say that,
notwithstanding the map generously provided by the
Iranian delegation, I would request the Secretariat of the
Security Council to distribute to membersof the Council a
map which
showsthe position of the islandsconcernedin
our debate, becausethere are many representativeswhose
backs are turned to the other map so that they cannot
profit from the generosityof the Iranian delegation,

66. In recent years such ludicrous blanket claims were
reducedin scopeand the Iranian Government first pressed
forth its claimsto the islandsof Bahrain, then increasingly
concentrated its demandson the acquisition of the three
islandsof Abu Musa and the Greater and the LesserTunbs,
particularly after the announcementin 1968 of the British
Government’sintentions to withdraw from the Gulf by the
end of 1971. Abu Musa and the Greater Tunb are sparsely
inhabited; the LesserTunb is uninhabited.

62. The Iranian invasion of these two islandswas the
culmination of the often repeatedthreats by the highest
authorities in Iran to “regain” the allegedrights of Iran to
the islandsby the useof force. This indefensibleact by the
Government of Iran is clearly a flagrant violation of the
purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter,and
particularly Article 2, paragraph4, which reads:

61. All three islands,however, are strategically situatedat
the approaches to the Strait of Hormuz, which is the
Arabian Gulf outlet into the high seas.
68. In order to pave the way for the actual seizureof the
three islandsupon British withdrawal from the Gulf, the
Government of Iran, with the aid and connivance of the
United Kingdom and the United States, embarked on a
twofold propaganda campaign resting on three major
allegations.

“All Members shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or useof force againstthe territorial
integrity or political independenceof any State, or in any
other manner inconsistent with the Purposesof the’
United Nations.”

69. First, there are the repeated claims by Iran of alleged
historical rights to the islands.In a recent interview with
representativesof the international press,the Shah of Iran
statedthe folldwing, in connexion with the Gulf:

63. A day prior to the invasionof the two Tunb islands,
Iran had occupied part of the adjacent island of Abu Musa
under the pretext of an allegedagreementwith the Sheikh
of Al-Sharjah, of whoseterritory this islandis an indivisible
part. The so-called agreementwas supposedlyconcltided
just before the occupation, and while the Governmentof
the United Kingdom was responsiblefor the territorial
integrity of the territories of the States cdnstituting the
“Trucial Coast”. The obligations of the United Kingdom
emanate from agreementsconcluded previously with the
rulers of these States in return for commitmentsnot to
dispose of their landsor parts thereof in any mannerexcept
to the Government of the United Kingdom, aswe shallsee
later. Thus the allegedagreementbetweenthe Government
of Iran and the ruler of Al-Sharjahwasconcludedat a time
when the latter had not yet fully regainedthe right to enter
into any international commitment, with or without the
consent and approval of the Government of the United
Kingdom.

“What we are demandingis what has always belonged
to our Country throughout history. . . . It is perfectly
natural and reasonable that, now that imperialism is
withdrawing, Iran should regainwhat has alwaysbeenits
possession
historically.”
That was_aquotation from the Iranian newspaperKaykan
Internationd, dated 23 October 1971.
70. Secondly, there is the claim, particularly by Iran and
the United States,that British withdrawal from the Arabian
Gulf would create a so-calledpower vacuum in the area,
insinuatingthat such an alleged“vacuum” should be filled
by Iran. An article which appearedin The New York Times
on 25 July 1971 starts with the following paragraph:
“Iran’s military power on land, in the air and on the sea
is being built up in the Middle East under a billion-dollar
defence programme quietly underwritten by the United
States and Britain in preparation for British withdrawal
from the PersianGulf later this year.”

64. The invasion of the Tunb islands and the partial
occupation of the island of Abu Musswasthe latest stepin
a policy of expansion by the Government of Iran, and a
blatant demonstration of the collusion between Iran and
the United Kingdom Government to bequeathto Iran the
colonia! role played in the area by Britain for more than
three centuries.

The article continues:
“This whole build-up, according to officials”-meaning
Washingtonofficials-‘is designedto fill the vacuumthat
would have been created by the British departure andto
counter Soviet influence and Arab radical moves in the
strategic Persian Gulf, whose coastal States and islands
produce much of the oil on which the United States,
WesternEurope and Japan depend.”

65. Iranian rulers have intermittently over many yearslaid
claims to certain areas and islandsin the Arabian Gulf
which have been under Arab jurisdiction for centuries.
There have even been times when Iranian Governments
llave claimed the whole Gulf area. In a letter addressed
to
t.he British Government in 1844,the PersianPrimeMinister
5

71. The third contention put forward by Iran is the
strategic value to Iran of these islands. In the interview with
the press, which I have already mentioned, the Shah of Iran
referred-and here again I quote from the issue of Ka@~n
Internutiond, dated 23 October 1971-“to the possibility
of certain strategic positions”-meaning
these three
islands-“falling into the wrong hands: a small group of
men using a boat and a bazooka could threaten navigation
in the waterway”,
72. Thus, the invasion of the two Tunb islands and the
incursion on Abu Musa island by the Iranian forces rests, it
would seem, on three major allegations and assumptions:
alleged historical rights, filling a presumed “political vacuum” in the area and, finally, the strategic value of the
islands. Allow me now to deal with these three allegations
one by one.

“Broadly speaking, the western shores of the Gulf arc
inhabited by Arabs and the eastern shore by Iranians.
There are, however, several qualifications to this. Descen.
dants of groups who originated in Iran, Baluchistan and in
the Indian subcontinent are still to be found along the
Arab coast. More importantly, in Khuzistan, the soutlt.
western province of Iran, formerly called Arabistan, the
population is still partly Arab, while other Arab conr+
munities are spread extensively throughout the coastal
plain of Iran,
“As late as the nineteenth century many of these
groups still wielded independent local power, and at that
time it would have certainly been more appropriate,
though the expression was not then used, to speak of an
Arab Gulf.”
77. From what I have just quoted it is amply demon.
strated that even the eastern coast of the Gulf is largely
Arab in character. For Iran to allege that islands which have
been Arab throughout centuries should now belong to Iran
is going beyond the bounds of all logic and reason.

73. Let us take historical rights first. The claim of the
rulers of Iran to the three islands and on some occasionsto
the whole Gulf, to which I have previously referred, is not
substantiated by any historial or legal facts and documents,
Iran has never, to our knowledge, put forward a document
stating any historical grounds for its claim to the islands.
History, in fact, clearly shows not only that these islands
have always been under Arab jurisdiction, but that Arab
domination often extended to the islands situated off the
Iranian coastline-such as Qishm, Lingeh, Shinas and
Hormuz-and sometimes reached farther east to the Persian
littoral.

78. Now let us turn to the theory of a “power Y~CLIIIIII",
This theory is evidently an imperialistic and colonial
concept, a concept with which we have all become familiar,
a vestige of the scramble of the colonial PowersPortuguese, Dutch and British-since the fifteenth century
for acquisition of territories and ascendency in the Arabian
Gulf area. It is unfortunate that this concept is now being
employed in major power politics by virtue of which Iran
has been chosen by the United States and the United
Kingdom to replace the latter in exercising hegemony over
the area. As early as February 1969 the special report by
the Center for Strategic and International Studies entitled
“The Gulf’ and referred to earlier undertook to study the
implications of British withdrawal from the area. On page
94 of the report we read:

74. Sir Arnold Wilson-of whom, I am told, the British
delegation is very much aware-one of the foremost
authorities on the Gulf, who served in the area for many
years, states the following on page 8 of his book, which was
first published in 1928, entitled The Persian Gulf
“The Arabian coastal region is peopled almost exclusively by Arabs, but alien elements occur in many of the
towns. . . . At the head of the Persian Gulf the indigenous
population is principaIly Arab, while, along the Persian
littoral from the Shatt-Al-Arab as far as the Strait of
Hormuz, is composed of a medley of races and racial
blends, of which the most important elements are
Persians and Persian Arabs, the latter of whom may be
described as Arabs under Persian rule who have become
denationalized by settlement, subjection or intermarriage.”

“For the past 20 years the British and, perhaps to a
lesser extent, the United States have regarded Iran as a
major obstacle to Soviet expansion towards the Gulf. This
would still seem to be so from London’s point of view,
but the attitude of Washington towards the Gulf seems ta
be one of ‘wait and see’ “.
79. The report also states that the British Government has
agreed to sell a considerable quantity of arms to Iran, but
the attitude of the United States two years later, as the
article in The New York Times of 25 July indicated, was no
longer one of “wait and see” but of being the active patron
of Iran in its assumption to fil! the alleged vacuum in the
area; thus the underwriting of the $1 billion programme of
the massive armament of Iran referred to in that article.

75. Further on in that work, specifically on page i 1,Sir
Arnold Wilson also states:
“The three outstanding indigenous spheresof dominion
of the Persian Gulf, all through these events”-meaning in
the eighteenth century-“were the Persians in the northeast, the Turks in the north, and the Arabs in the south.
Each had its period of supremacy, but, finally, the
controlling element seemed to be the Omani Arabs of
Muscat whose power extended both to the African coast
and to India.”

80. My Government firmly rejects the fallacy of the
so-called power vacuum. I should like to refer tb what 1
stated in the general debate at the twenty-sixth session of
the General Assembly, on 7 October 1971:

76. The Arab character of the Gulf is further confirmed in
a recent study, namely, the special report published by the
Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington and entitled “The Gulf ‘, which states on page 34:

“It is the firm belief of my Government that the future
of peace and tranquillity in the Gulf can only be assured
through co-operation among the States of that region, a
co-operation based upon complete equality and respect
6

for each other’s sovereignty and independence and
conforming to the strict rules of international law. In this
respect it is imperative that all territorial claims and
ambitions be relinquished.“l
Forgive me for quoting myself, but that is a rather
pertinent point. On the very day on which I made that
statement I was heartened to hear the permanent representative of Iran giving me and the General Assembly assurance
in the following words:
“I would like to assure the permanent representative of
Iraq that we have absolutely no territorial ambitions with
regard to anyone.“2
Unfortunately
the assurances of the Government of Iran
have proved as worthless as its claims are baseless.
81. Let me turn now to the third allegation or claimstrategic importance. The waters of the Gulf cover an area
of 97,000 square miles, with a northern limit of 30 degrees
north. It extends south-east for about 500 miles, and its
width varies from 180 miles to 26 miles at the Strait of
Hormuz. I am sorry if I am boring the Council with these
geographical details, but I believe they are very pertinent to
the argument. The shorelines of the following States stretch
from the head of the Gulf at Shatt-Al-Arab-the
Iraqi
national river formed by the confluence of the two rivers
flowing through Iraq, the Tigris and the Euphrates: Iraq,
Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, the seven sheikdoms of the Trucial
coast, namely, Abu Dhabi, Dubai, Sharjah, Ajman, Umm
Al-Qaiwain,
Ras Al-Khahna and Fujairah, and Qatar and
Oman. Iran occupies the entire north-eastern shore.
82. The Gulf is remarkably shallow for so large an area of
water. Soundings on the Gulf range from 240 to 300 feet,
and the Iine of greatest depth lies much nearer to the
Persian coast than the Arabian coast, the consequence being
that the whole of the western and southern shore is
extremely shallow and shelving, making it impossible for
ships of 5,000 tons or more to approach within five miles
of the shore, according to the information found in The
Persian GulfPilot of 1924. The shallowness is intensified by
an intricate maze of shoals and reefs in the southern sweep
of the Gulf.
83. The report of the Center for Strategic and International Studies, which I referred to earlier, and the article
in The New York Times relate the strategic significance to
two main factors, namely, communications and oil. Evidently the purchasers of oil have as much interest in seeing
that the flow of oil through the Straits is not disrupted as
the oil producing countries themselves. It will be recalled
that Iran is not the only major oil producing country of the
Gulf; indeed most of the other littoral countries, all of
them Arab and including Iraq, are also major oil producers.
84. If security and stability in the area were the major
concerns
of the United Kingdom, the United States and
their client Iran, the Governments of those States should be
2 Official Records

plenary Meetings,
2 Ibid..

1957th

of the General Assembly,
1956th meeting,
para.63.
meeting,para.278.

Twenty-sixth

Session,

reminded that security and stability can truly be achieved
only through the co-operation of the Statessituated on the
shelf. Are the threats of the use of force, the claimsto
territories, the abrogation of international agreements,the
invasion and occupation of territories by armedforces-all
of which actions constitute violations of the principlesof
the Charter and a betrayal of its purposes-conduciveto
security and stability? I submit that the leadersof Iran
have by their covetous and expansionistpoliciesendangered
the very purposesfor which Iran’s armed forces have been
ostensibly bolstered and Iranian interests fostered by the
erstwhile colonial Power in the1Gulf. I assurethe Council
that security and stability are the vital concern of all the
States of the Gulf, including my own. It is in our interest to
ensurethat stability should prevail in the Gulf to safeguard
the economic lifeline of our respective countries. The
Straits of Hormuz and thti strategic three islands now
illegally occupied by Irail do control the lifeline of the
littoral States, which have no outlet to the high seasother
than through the Strait. Iraq is amongthose States,whereas
Iran, occupying the whole easterncoastlineof the Gulf and
the Gulf of Oman, has direct outlets on the Arabian Sea.
85. The Iranian rulers are therefore not motivated by
considerations of stability and security in the area. They
are, rather, obsessedby the dreamsof grandeur that drive
them to adopt policies of territorial aggrandizementin
order to re-establishan empire which has been dead and
buried sincethe time of Alexander the Great.
86. Their attempts are all too reminiscent of Mussolini’s
disastrousdreamsof reviving the Roman Empire. No, the
Iranian Government is not concerned with security and
stability. It is bent upon expansionism.The security of the
region can best be achievedand guaranteedby co-operation
among the Gulf States within an agreed framework. But
obviously the rulers of Iran are not thinking in theseterms.
They already fancy themselvesas the great Power in the
area, and by their actions they prove their readinessnot for
co-operation but rather for confrontation.
87. We are not the only oneswho seerecent developments
in this light. The Guardfan of London, dated 3 December
1971, after this infamous action by the Iranian forces,had
similar misgivingsabout the actions of tile Iranian Government. Let me quote a few words:
“Iran has always said it would take the islandsoneway
or another, for strategic reasons.Britain was clearly not
going to carry out its defence obligations to the Sheikhdoms in the last stageof its military pullaout, and against
Iran. But the fact remainsthat the West waslooking to
Iran, the local Power, to ensureregional stability. But it is
Iran which has managedto bring latent strainsbetween
the Arabs and itself to an open crisis alarmingly swiftly.
This is a risky thing to have done. The Gulf Statescontain
the seeds of instability. . . . The vacuum left by the
British withdrawal will be ffied successivelyby the local
Powersonly if tensionsare kept to a minimum.”
88. We reject the appointment of Iran, or any other single
State, as the sole guardian and guarantor of the continuation of the flow of the Gulf oil to the outside world. The
Government of Iraq alsorejects the control by Iran of the

only outlet of Iraq’s commerce to the high seas.In fact the
parable of the Shah of “A group of men in a boat with a
bazooka” applies more to Iran than to anybody else. It is
Iran now that is straddling the Strait of Homnrz, not only
with a few men and a bazooka, but, according to the latest
reports, with modern armaments, including sophisticated
missiles, which have already been installed on the occupied
islands. We have every reason to believe that Iran will use
this military build-up to threaten the sole commercial and
main oil artery of Iraq, and to bring pressureto bear on my
country, and other countries of the area, in fulfilment of
Iranian expansionist policies.
89. The article of The New York Times of 25 July
1973-forgive me for quoting again from it, but it is most
informative-provides very revealing and alarming lnformation of the tripartite collusion that fitted Iran for its
present aggressiverole. Let me read from it:

“A base for the Hovercraft has been built on the Island
of Kharg off the Iranian coast in the northern section of
the Gulf.
“Iranian ground troops and the Hovercrafts are to be
supported by a fleet of more than 200 helicopters.”
90. Now, let us pause and ask ourselves the following
questions: first, would small and poor Ras Al-Khaima, to
whom the two occupied Tunb islands belong-and towards
whom the great victorious and gallant amlada of the Iranian
Imperial Forces headed on the night of the 30th-with a
population of only 25,000 inhabitants, pose any threat to
Iran even with a “bazooka” on the Greater Tunb?
Secondly, against whom is this formidable military Power
supposed to be used?
91. My Government has every reason to believe that this
huge military, air and naval power is being built to support
the expansionist policy of Iran, to threaten every neighbouring country that resists this policy of hegemony and
expansion, and to impose a self-proclaimed hegemony over
the area. Thus, old Imperial interests are preserved, though
it is “imperialism by proxy”.

“Unpublicized United States credits, including the rare
participation of the Export-Import Bank, are financing
the current secret deliveries of the F-4-E model of the
supersonic fighter-bomber.
“The Bank usually refuses to finance sales of military
equipment. Officials of the Bank declined this week to
discuss the Iranian credits.

92. It will be recalled that in April 1969, Iran declared as
“null and void” the 1937 Boundary Treaty between Iraq
and Iran,s and claimed equal sovereignty, in defiance of
that Treaty, with Iraq over the Iraqi national river of
Shatt-Al-Arab. That unilateral abrogation of a valid and
mutually binding boundary treaty violated the first and
foremost tenet of international law: namely, the sanctity of
treaties.

“Britain is selling Iran 800 new tanks, partly on credit,
this year”-and we, knowing the financial situation of the
United Kingdom may wonder at that-“as well as
missile-equipped frigates and large armoured Hovercraft
for troop transport.”
I shall continue the quotation:

93. The Permanent Mission of Iraq to the United Nations
on that occasion addressed two official notes to the
President of the Security Council regarding that indefensible act by the Government of Iran and reaffirming
Iraq’s rights, as well as its obligations under that Treaty.
Here I refer to document S/9205 of 13 May 1969 and
document S/9323 of 11 July 1969.

“In the last two years, Washington had provided credits
for $220 million worth of Iranian aircraft purchases in
the United States. They covered 31 Phantoms of the
earliest F-4-D model and 109 fighters of the type P4,
already in service in Iran.
“Under present plans, the Iranian Air Force is to be
expanded to a total of 135 Phantoms by 1975, to serve
alongside the F-3 and F-86 squadrons already in its
possession.”

94. That violation by Iran of the elementary principles of
international law was accompanied by a show of force all
along the Iraqi-Iranian borders, and particularly along
Shatt-Al-Arab, our only outlet to the Gulf. In response to
the policy of restraint pursued by the Iraqi Government,
Iran persisted in its illegal acts and particularly in defying
the Iraqi regulations designed to ensure the safety of
navigation in the river.

Allow me to quote a little further:
“To bolster its American-built armour force, the Iranian
Government signed an agreement with Britain early this
year to buy 330 Chieftain tanks and ammunition for
$13 5 million.

95. Iran also declined to accede to our request, addressed
to the Secretary-General, to send a special mission or a
special representative to investigate the troop concentrae
tions along our common borders. Prior to the occupation of
the three Gulf islands, Iran’s illegal claim to equal sovereignty with Iraq over Shatt-Al-Arab constituted another
attempt at territorial expansion by the Government of Iran.
My Government condemns and totally rejects both these
acts. We have every reason to believe that the Iranian

“Last month, it contracted to buy an additional 470
Chieftains for $240 million. The first 36 Chieftains are to
be delivered in 1971.
“The Shah is said to believe that a high degree of
military mobility is essential to control the Persian Gulf
area.“-and I emphasize the word “control’‘-“Therefore,
his Government has been buying the most modern
supersonic aircraft, new Hovercraft and helicopters, as
well as hundreds of tanks suited to the mountain and
desert terrain of Iran and adjoining countries.

3 Boundary Treaty between the Kingdom of Iraq and the Empire
of Iran, signed at Teheran on 4 July 1937 (League of Nations,
Treaty Series, vol. CXC, 1938, No. 4423).

8

occupation of the islands is designed to strengthen Iran in
the implementation of its expansionist policy vis-$-vis my
country. The Government of Iraq reserves its fight, therefore, to take any and every action regarding both of Iran’s
illegal acts in order to protect Iraq’s territorial integrity and
its vital interests in the Arabian Gulf.

100. In ‘accordance with the terms of the exclusive
agreement of 1892, no ruler of any Tmcial State could
conclude any agreement with a third Power affecting the
territorial
integrity of the State. Accordingly, the alleged
agreement between the Ruler of Al-Sharjah and the
Government of Iran with regard to the island of Abu Muss
is null and void, as the Ruler was not then, on 29 November
1971, in possession of the sovereign right to “enter into . . .
agreement or correspondence with any Power other than
the British Government”, according to the terms of the
treaty, nor was he to dispose of the territory or any part
thereof “save to the British Government”, And much as
Iran may wish to play the part of the British Empire, the
Iranian Government is not yet the British Government.

96. Now, there is a very interesting aspect to all this, and
that is the responsibility of the United Kingdom in this
matter. Perhaps the representative of the United Kingdom
may see fit to enlighten the Council on this question, But
alloy me first to say a few words in this connexion.
97. In what may appear a minor drama, the implications
of which should never, under any circumstances, be
minnnized, the role of the Government of the United
Kingdom has been the usual one whenever it left any of its
coIonia1 possessions: a role of perfidy, scuttling, and sowing
the seeds of trouble and enmity.

101. With regard to the islands of the-two Tunbs, the
Government of the United Kingdom always acknowledged
and reaffirmed on various occasions that they were an
integral part of Ras Al-Khaima, and that they were Arab
islands. Accordingly, the United Kingdom has failed to
honour its obligations towards Ras Al-Khaima in not
defending those two islands where protection was a British
responsibility. The issue of The Times of London of
1 December 1971, one day after the occupation, acknowledged Britain’s responsibility when it said:

98. The Government of the United Kingdom, between
1820 and 1922, concluded various agreements and obtained
several commitments from the rulers of the Trucial States.
The undertakings of the rulers more often than not were
clearly defined, while the obligations of the British Empire
were left, as usual, vague and ambiguous. But the commitment of the United Kingdom to respect and preserve the
territorial integrity of those States was acknowledged in all
of the agreements. The “exclusive agreements” concluded
with the Sheikhs of the Trucial Coast between 6 and 8
March 1892 conferred on the United Kingdom even more
rights to interfere in the internal affairs of the States
inasmuch as the rulers committed themselves and their heirs
and successors to the following undertakings, and here let
me quote from a sample agreement between the United
Kingdom and the Ruler of Al-Sharjah:

“Iran has thus in the end settled her claim by force just
before Britain’s treaties of protection with the Trucial
Sheikhdoms were due to end. , , . Technically, therefore,
Britain was still responsible for the defence of the Greater
Tunb at the time of the [Iranian] landing.”
102. Under the circumstances, it is definitely established
that the United Kingdom has reneged on its international
obligations and has to be condemned for not living up to
those obligations. British apologists have maintained, since
the occupation, that the Sheikh of Ras Al-Khaima, as The
Times put it, “has only himself to blame” because he
refused to barter away the integrity of his territory on the
same lines as in the case of Al-Sharjah, under the
circumstances. If Iran was prepared to “make a deal”
similar to that with regard to Abu Musa, then this would
prove only one thing: that Iran had no substance to its
claim to the islands, historical or otherwise, and that the
sole purpose of Iran is the control of the Straits of Hormuz,
and thereby the control of the whole Arabian Gulf,
whether that aim can be achieved by a “deal” or through
naked aggression, as happened with the two Tunb islands.

“1.. That I will on no account enter into any agreement or correspondence with any Power other than the
British Government.
“2. That without the assent of the British Govern
ment, I will not consent to the residence within my
territory of the agent of any other Government.
“3. That I will on no account cede, sell, mortgage or
otherwise
give for occupation any part of my territory,
save to the British Government.”
99. Although the responsibility of the United Kingdom
Government to protect the territorial integrity of the States
was not explicitly mentioned in so many words, it is
obvious that the undertaking of each of the rulers in
article 3 of the executed agreements bound the Sheikhs not
to cede, sell, mortgage or otherwise give for occupation any
pad of their territory, save to the British Government. This
definitely
constituted a commitment that no legal disposition of the territory by its ruler was valid if it was not
directly
made to the British Government. The British
Goverr-m-ient may dispute the point of whether a legal
protectorate
situation exists here, but the terms of the
agreements of March 1892, particularly articles 1 and 3,
prove
beyond any shadow of doubt Britain’s responsibility
for the territorial integrity of each and every one of the
Trucial States.

103. &ning
the Sheikh of Ras Al-Khaima will riot
exonerate either Iran or the United Kingdom of their
obligations under the Charter of the United Nations or
under the treaties with the Trucial States. Fortunately,
there are some British voices which echo this. The Financial
Times of 1 December 1971 had this to say about the illegal
act of occupation by Iran and the abysmal inaction of the
British Government:
“Clearly, the British Government, which claimed it
would have been unrealistic to exercise treaty reSpOnSibilities a day before they were due to end, must be
embarrassed, and many even risk speculation that there
was collusion with the Iranian authorities.”
9

What else could one say of Britain’s inaction and of its
strange silence? It did r&t even deem it necessary to advise
the United Nations of the situation, or to bring the matter
to the Security Council when it knew very well of the
serious threat of force. What else but collusion can one
infer?
104. The ultimate conclusion from this dangerous situation created by the collusion of Iran and the United
Kingdom, aided and abetted by the United States, is the
following.
105. First, the alleged agreement between Iran and the
Sheilch of Al-Sharjah regarding the island of Abu Musa is
not valid for a number of good reasons. It was concluded
when the Sheikb was bound by the terms of the exclusive
Agreement of 1892 with the United Kingdom and had no
power to “enter into any agreement or correspondence
with any Power other than the British Government”. I was
quoting from treaties. It was concluded under duress, and
the threat that was carried out against Ras Al-Khaima when
its ruler refused to submit to those threats and barter away
his territory is a clear example and proof.

to injury, the erstwhile protector of the victim turns around
and accuses the helpless creature of being responsible for
this dismal state of affairs, because it refused to succumb lo
the threats of the aggressor in the first place.
111. IF such ignominious actions are allowed to pass ia
silence, if no counter-action is taken by the international
community to remedy the injuries inflicted on the weakest
and the smallest of its members, then not only shall webe
betraying the noble principles of the Charter but we shall
also prove that the world today is ruled by laws which are
in fact far worse than the law of the jungle.
112. The Iranian Goyernment has, by its armed aggression,
created an extremely critical situation in the area. Tile
Government of Iraq has exercised extreme self-restraint ia
spite of the fact that the Iranian aggressions and violations
of the Charter directly threaten Iraqi interests. My Govern.
ment’s overriding consideration has been the preservation
of peace in the area. We sincerely hope that the crisis can be
settled peacefully by the United Nations.
113. We therefore appeal to you, distinguished members
of the Security Council, to shoulder your responsibilities,
to take all effective measures to condemn the aggressors
and their British collaborators, and to ensure the with.
drawal of the forces of occupation. Should the Council fail
to fulfil its duties in this instance, it would only serve to
encourage any expansionist State to resort to all the actiorls
specifically prohibited in the Charter in order to realize
whatever territorial ambitions it harbours against its neighbours. The failure of the Council to take appropriate action
would then leave no option to others-like ourselves-but to
believe that force is the only answer to aggression, and we
would then act accordingly.

106. Second, with the invasion of the two islands of Tunb,
Iran has violated its international obligations under the
Charter, which recognizes the inadinissibility of the acquisition of territory by threat or the use of force, and
particularly Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter.
107. It has been reported that the Iranian forces
occupying the Greater Tunb have now deported all the
inhabitants of that island and that they have been dumped
on the Arabian mainland.

108. The smallness of Ras Al-Khaima, the Tunb islands,
114. The PRESIDENT: I now invite the representative of
and the number of the islanders ejected by Iran should not
Kuwait to take a place at the Council table and to make a
be dismissed as being too insignificant to merit the
attention of this august body. The injustices, grievances and
statement.
aggressions suffered by Ras Al-Khaima are only too real and
drastic. How often has history witnessed critical and highly A- 115. Mr. BISHARA (Kuwait): At the outset. I should like
dangerous sittiations arising from acts of aggression anh
to express my delegation’s p&found condole&es and deep
injustices committed against minor States? But it is
sympathy on the passing of Dr, Ralph Bunche. He was
precisely the small States which are in greatest need of
indeed a man of great integrity and honesty. May God rest
protection. by the United Nations. Where else should they
his soul in peace.
appeal for the safeguarding of their interests and their
territorial integrity?
116. Mr. President, may I express the gratitude of any
delegation for your granting me the opportunity to address
109. We profoundly believe that the united Nations
the Council on this highly important question. You have
should show special concern for the fate of countries like
been an outstanding politician and an exponent of the
Ras Al-Khaima. It had been under the total domination of a
African cause during your long service in your country. We
colonial Power for over a century and a half. It suddenly
should congratulate ourselves for having such an able
finds itself left out in the cold because the colonial Power
veteran of Africa and of the principles of the United
had decided, for its own interests, to withdraw without
Nations presiding over the deliberations of the Security
making any provision for the de,fence of the small island
Council.
and, in fact, colluding with other Powers to endanger the
territorial integrity of that very small State.
117. Let me admit, first of all, that for me it is an
awesome experience to participate in the Security Council
110. Overnight that small State is left as a helpless prey to
deliberations on a matter in which Iran is involved. I
the vicious assaults of any predator. In the case of Ras
enjoyed, during the frequent visits which I paid to Teheran,
Al-Khaima the attack, as we have seen, took place before
the exquisite hospitality and affability of the Iranian
the departing colonial Power had actually withdrawn-and
people, with whom we have historical, cultural and religious
the protecting Power had indeed encouraged the ambitious
ties. The links between the Arabs and the Persians go back
aggressor to grab what it covets when it can. To add insult
to the early era of Islam, and many years before Islatn
10

indeed. Needless to say, both peoples have benefited from

Government of Kuwait wasto persuade Iran not to resort
to force in solving the problem of the three Islands. Iran’s
argument was as follows: “The islands belong to us, we
want them back, by peaceful means or by force, and Iran
would not stop short of that”.

those old links.

I 18. Thousands of Iranians have been living in Kuwait.
They are extremely happy with the conditions that
surround them, The southern part of Iran is inhabited by
many Arabs and by Iranians of Arab origin. During the past
centuries there was always unrestricted traffic between the
two sides of the Gulf.

124. That was the conclusion of the many letters exchanged between Teheran and Kuwait. The Foreign Minister of Kuwait, Sheikb Sabah Al-&mad AlJaber and the
Foreign Minister of Iran, Ardeshir Zahedi, met in Jeddah in
March 1970, during the Conference of the Islamic Countries. The “Islands Affair” was discussed extensively, but to
no avail. On 4 August 1970, Mr. Zahecli visited Kuwait
officially. The islands were the main issue in the discussions
which took place between my Foreign Minister and
Mr. Zahedi. In that meeting Mr. Zahedi reaffirmed Iran’s
determination to occupy the islands, if no other solution
consonant with the Iranian demand was found. He distirictly elaborated on Iran’s opposition to any federation in
the Gulf, if the Iranian claim on the islands was not
favourably accepted. However, the Foreign Minister of
Kuwait explained clearIy Kuwait’s position. It is briefly as
follows: first, an unshakable belief that every problem can
be solved peacefully; second, the belief that no problem is
insoluble, since all problems of the world are man-made;
third, complete adherence to the Charter of the United
Nations, which prohibits the use of force for solving
problems.

119. Notwithstanding the flow of harmony, there were
occasional differences between the Arab States and the
Government of Iran, which were always solved amicably
and in a spirit of co-operation and friendliness. For there
are always imperative factors which necessitate the overcoming of differences in their embryonic stages. These
factors are common religious background, neighbourliness,
long historical ties, similarity of traditions and common
values.
120. However, contrary to all the Iranian traditions in
solving the problems peacefully-and I have in mind the
question of Bahrain, in which His Majesty the Shah
demonstrated his flexibility and his statesmanship; I shall
not forget that, and my Government cherishes that with
great admiration-the Iranian Government, on Tuesday, 30
November 1971, occupied without any provocation the
Arab islands of Greater Tunb and Lesser Tunb that have
belonged for centuries to Ras Al.Kbairna. The Iranian
troops landed also on a certain area of Abu Musa Island,
which belongs to Sharjah.

125. Although Mr. Zahedi expressed his country’s belief in
self-determination and its dedication to the Charter of the
United Nations, he gave no assurancesat all that Iran would
not resort to force. On the contrary, he left us with the
unmistakable impression that the Iranian Government was
determined to use force to occupy the Arab islands.

121. In so doing, the Iranian Government has unravelled
the d&ouement of a mysterious drama. Those who have
been involved in the quest for a peaceful solution to this
problem-and
I am one of them fortunately-suffer not
only from the suspense of the play, but also from the
tragically unexpected end.
122.

126. In December 1970 during the Conference of the
Islamic Countries in Karachi, my Foreign Minister met
Mr. Zahedi and again the question of .the islands was the
dominant issue. Mr. Zahedi was more explicit in spelling
out the Iranian design on the Arab islands.

Let me now start from the first act.

12 3 a Immediately after the British Government’s announcement that Britain would withdraw from the Gulf by the
end of 1971, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kuwait
declared that Kuwait welcomed the British withdrawal
from the Arabian Gulf, and that Kuwait believed that the
littoral States of the Gulf should be responsible for the
security of the area. Kuwait, motivated by its belief that
the stability and security of the Gulf should continue
unhampered, spent tireless efforts to assist the Emirates of
the Gulf to lay down the foundations of a federation that
would encompass the nine Gulf Emirates. On 28 February
Dubai’s agreement was announced, as a basis for the
federation of the Emirates of the Gulf. With all the efforts
undertaken by Kuwait, and despite the series of conferences and meetings among the Rulers of those Emirates, the
federation did not stand on its feet at that time. The reason
was simple. Iran blocked the road to federation, since it set
a condition for its sup&r? for the proposed federation. The
condition was “no islands, no federation”. It wanted the
Arab islands of Greater Tunb, Lesser Tunb and Abu Musa.
When the Government of Kuwait realized the seriousnessof
the Iranian condition, a flurry of correspondence and trips
between Kuwait and Teheran started. The aim of the

127. This unprecedented flurry in the diplomatic history
of our area culminated in an official visit paid by my
Foreign Minister to Teheran on 8 August 1971.
128. On 9 and 10 August 1971 the Foreign Minister of
Kuwait held extensive meetings with Mr. Zahedi on the
islands problem. I wasinvolved in those meetings.
129. On 11 August the Foreign Minister of Kuwait met
His Majesty the Shah of Iran. During that visit my Foreign
Minister suggested that the Arab islands should be demilitarized; such a suggestion meant that the islands would not
be used for military purposes, that the Arab Emirates
would under no circumstances place military installations
on them, and that the sovereignty of the Arab Emirates on
the islands should not be questioned. Iran categorically
rejected this proposal. Kuwait, prompted by its unlimited
goodwill and its wish to ensure the continuance of the
stability and the security of the Gulf area, has been second
to none in its unstinting attempts to work out an
acceptable formula that might secure the consent of all
parties concerned in this tragedy.
11

,, 130. Iran, which only recently gave the United Nations a
replica of the Charter of Cyrus on human rights, and which
has been trying to promote its image as a country that
espouses
scrupulously the United Nations purposes and
principles, disrupted and now unnecessarily threatens the
security of the Gulf by its occupation of the Arab islands.
This occupation wasplanned and carried out with complete
disregard of the Charter of the United Nations and its
tenets, especially Article 2, paragraph 3, which reads:
“All Members shall settle their international disputes by
peaceful means in such a manner that international peace
and security, and justice, are not endangered.”
Article 2, p,aragraph4, reads:
“All Members shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force against the territorial
integrity or political independence of any state, or in any
other manner inconsistent with the Purposes of the
United Nations.”
131. One of the most sacred principles of the Charter is
the inadmissibility of territorial acquisition bY force. Iran
flagrantly annexed the Arab islands by force, in contravention of the Charter.
132. On Tuesday, 30 November 1971, the Foreign Minister of Kuwait said in the Parliament that Kuwait had
always maintained the view that these islands “are Arab
islands, historically, and demographically. Kuwait has exhausted all efforts to affirm this fact to all parties
concerned; and it always maintains the view that these
islands are always Arab islands and that it disapproves of
the Iranian occupation, and deplores the use of force”.

137. Unfortunately, intimidation and the eventual rewr:
to force was the only answer to our appeals. Neiglrbolcltrfiness, old ties and mutual interests are 011 nxilly OCCaSiwi
solid factors for solving problems peacefully. Iran diseardrZ
this fact and followed the out-dated gun-boat policy. ‘I%*
Prhne Minister of Iran, Amir Abbas Hoveida, infonu@J 1
jubilant Parliament that the Arab islands were now tmd:
the Iranian flag, He said: “The presence of some fort?&+
elements in no way indicated that the islands were IIO~ ~tau
fully in Iranian control.”
138. He meant by foreign elements the defenceless in&$+
nous Arab population of these islands. Later it ~25
disclosed that about 200 Arabs were evicted from tile ish4
of Greater Tunb and sent to Ras Al-Khaima. These :1rabt
had been living in the island for rnany centuries.
139. As a result of the Iranian occupation four islacI
policemen were killed and five injured. The Iranians lost z
officer, a sergeant and a soldier and another soldier M’HI!:
wounded.
140. The jubilation of the Iranian Parliament
reminiscent of the Victorian imperial era.

was in&&

134. The Iranians, throughout all our contacts with them,
maintained the view that these islands belonged to Iran and
that Britain usurped them 150 years ago. Our argument was
Peaceful and simple. We told Iran that it could refer the
case to the International Court of Justice or accept
arbitration. Btit all our bids for a peaceful solution were
turned down. NO spirit of accommodation was detected;
only an unbridled determination to use force to occupy the
islands if the Arab Emirates would not obediently accede to
the demands of Iran.

142. Britain, whose history is characterized by a chrcxl$tl;,
disease of pulling out and leaving behind explosive sitrutions, is the country which deserves severe condemnation
Britain maintained since it signed the treaties with the
Emirates early last century that these islands had been, a&
were always, Arab islands. All the documents about 0~
history of these islands still lie-maybe neglected-in the
drawers of Whitehall. It was bound by the treaties TV
defend the territorial integrity of the Emirates. it was able
to observe scrupulously the provisions of these treatks
which were advantageous to it, but at the same time II
maintained a singular reputation of defaulting whea itr
obligations were invoked.

135. The Iranian argument always claimed that these Arab
islands were strategically important to Iran, since its od
Passesby these islands. Iran cannot adjust itself, apparently,
to the undisputed fact that these islands have always been
Arab islands and that the continuation of free passage
through the Strait of Hormus is not only essential to Iran’s
economic life but also equally essential and vital to Kuwait,

143. Only last week the British House of Commons, by an
overwhelming majority, approved the agreement arrived a~
during Sir Alec Douglas-Home’s visit to Southern Rhodesia.
The Home-Smith agreement perpetuated the grip of Ian
Smith and his white minority on the 5 million indigenow
black Africans. It is a “sell-out” marked by a white rackst
veto over the blacks. Britain, reluctant to meet its oblip.
12

/
/

136. We hoped that Iran would give way to rt?aSOR, he~h~
our appeals for a peaceful way out and conform t0 #hr
norms of international law and respect the Charter of e&
United Nations.

141. I have revealed these facts to familiarize the Se~ri1>
Council with the unflagging efforts and the unflinching
patience the Government of Kuwait had demonstrated tri
achieve a peaceful solution to this problem. I am sure rtu;
the Ambassadors of Iran and the United Kingdon a~-’
familiar with these facts and they know quite well what ft:r
Government of Kuwait had been trying to attain,

133. The Under-Secretary of the Ministry bf Foreign
Affairs of Kuwait called in the Charge d’affaires of Iran in
Kuwait and conveyed to him that Kuwait deplored the
Iranian action on the Arab islands, He also called in the
British Ambassador in Kuwait and lodged a strong protest
against Britain for its ignoble role in this tragedy. The
Ambassadors of France, the Soviet Union, China and the
United States were called in by the Under-Secretary and
wereinformed of Kuwait’s viewpoint.

.’

Iraq and the other littoral States of the Gulf. The Gulf&
our sole economic life-line. My Government, aware of SW
fact, left no stone unturned in its endeavour to work 0~6 2
peaceful solution.

tions in Southern Rhodesia, took the easiest exit and left
hurriedly from an area which it considered “a pain in the
neck”.
144. To relieve itself from this pain, which its policy
generated, it simply succumbed to Smith’s diktat. The same
policy was pursued in Palestine. Britain, unwilling to bear
its responsibility in maintaining the rights of the Palestinian
majority, resorted to the easiest formula. It packed up and
left Palestine in chaos and disarray. The Zionists, who were
armed to the teeth and worked in collusion with the British
administration, took over and expelled the indigenous
Palestinians.
145. Sir William Lute, the personal representative of the
British Foreign Secretary-his name is written “Lute”, but
in the Gulf it is written “Loose” as a sign of anger towards
Sir William Lute-had been engaged in extensive consultations with the Rulers of the Emirates and with the Shah of
Iran about the fate of the Arab islands. He had been
preaching the British view and conviction that the islands
were Arab islands; but, equally, he wasexerting pressureon
the Rulers of Ras Al-Khaima and Sharjah to accept a
compromise with Iran. While he was persistent and consistent in expressing the fact that these islands were Arab
islands, he was equally persistent in urging the Rulers to
abrogate the territorial integrity of their Emirates.
146. Sir William came td Kuwait many times and
discussed the issue of the islands with the Foreign Minister
of Kuwait. Our view was always that Britain was responsible for the protection of the territorial integrity of the
Emirates, in accordance with the provisions of the treaties
signed between the Emirates and Britain.

that Arab territory was seized not from Arabs but from
Britain. In Britain’s view, as The Times wrote with
cynicism, Sheikh Saqr, the Ruler of Ras Al-Khaima, has
only himself to blame, the main reason being that he
declined to yield to British pressure to compromise on the
territorial integrity of his Emirate. It is not the British
Government which has to be blamed and condemned but
the defenceless Ruler of Ras Al-Khaima. Such arguments,
needless to say, rest on flimsy premises,
150. Sheikh Saqr, the Ruler of Ras Al-Khaima, appealed
for help to Mr. Julian Walker, the British political agent in
the Lower Gulf, but his appeals were left in the limbo of
forgetfulness.
151. The British Government, through Sir William Lute,
approached us many times and sought our assistance to
encourage the Rulers of the Emirates, especially Sheikh
Saqr of Ras Al-Kbaima, to co-operate with Sir William in
finding a formula that would satisfy Iran at the expense of
the territorial integrity of the Emirates. The Government of
Kuwait rejected that approach.
152. The stability of the Gulf was disrupted and the
security of the Emirates was encroached upon. The Iranian
Government demonstrated its contemptuous disregard of
Arab feelings and the legitimate Arab national interests. It
is by no means a manifestation of courage, morality and
coexistence to occupy small defenceless islands that belong
to another party. It is not an act commensurate with
normal State behaviour.
153. We demand that the Security Council call on Iran to
withdraw its troops from the Arab islands immediately.
What we ask is that the Iranian troops on the Arab islands
should spend New Year’s Eve in Teheran, enjoying the bliss
of the peoples of the world and sharing with them the
prayers for a New Year in which dialogue replaces force,
patience supplants fanaticism, and respect supersedes disregard of international law and morality.

147. On 20 May 1971 Sir William Lme had his last
meeting with my Foreign Minister-and I was present at
that meeting, writing the minutes-in which Kuwait urged
Britain to respect its commitment. During the last two
years many British officials and politicians visited Kuwait
and the area. Mr. Louard, the Minister of State in the
Foreign Office in 1970, George Brown and Edward Heath,
the present Prime Minister, all came to Kuwait and heard
reiterated many times Kuwait’s position that Britain was
bound to honour its treaties with the Emirates so long as
those treaties were not terminated.

154. The Security Council shouId adopt a resolution
calling on Iran to withdraw its forces from Arab territory,
since the occupation of that territory not only is a violation
of the Charter of the United Nations and its principles, but
will also endanger the stability and peace of the Gulf. We in
Kuwait never indulge in vituperation, tirades and vil.ification. We harbour no malice, but at the same time we cannot
tolerate the malice of others. We are always flexible, but
not weak; determined, but not obstinate; confident, but
not arrogant.

148. On 30 November 1971 Iran occupied the Arab
islands. Britain’s responsibility to protect the territorial
integrity of the Emirates wasnot honoured despite the fact
that the treaties had not been terminated. The Times of
London, on 1 December, expressed vicariously the satisfaction of the British Government with the Iranian occupation of the Arab islands. it wrote:

155. The Government of Kuwait hopes that Iran will
reconsider its action, taking into account the old ties, good
neighbourliness and mutual benefit to the entire area.

“From the point of view of stability in the Gulf in the
future, there is some advantage in the act that Iran seized
the islands while Britain was technically still responsible.
The seizure is technically, therefore, not a seizure of Arab
territory from Arabs.”

156. Kuwait will always maintain the view that these
islands are Arab islands and will not recognize any change
in their status. They have always been Arab islands and will
continue to be so, regardless of the Iranian occupation on
Tuesday, 30 November 1961.

149. The Times admitted that the islands were Arab
islands and that Britain was responsible for protecting
them. However, it went along by acknowledging the fact

157. Finally, my delegation will be extremely grateful if
the British representative, Sir Colin Crowe-who is indeed a
13

gentleman-is asked to give the Council the historical
background of the status of the islands and to spell out the
view which Britain has always maintained concerning the
Iranian occupation. This will be a significant contribution
which will enhance the chances of adopting a resolution
affirming Arab rights in these islands and bringing about the
immediate withdrawal of the Iranian troops in the interest
of the stability and security of the area.
158. The PRESIDENT: I invite the representative of
Algeria to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
I-\I 159. Mr. RAHkL (Algeria) (interpretation fiorn French):
Mr. President, I should like, first of all, to thank you and
the members of the Council for having allowed me to
participate without the right to vote in this discussion. This
will permit me, in the first place, to extend to you our
congratulations on your assumption of the Presidency of
the Security Council for the month of December and to
express our pleasure at seeing a representative of our
African continent bearing this high responsibility. Now
when events of the utmost gravity are causing turmoil in
the world, the highest international body, the Security
Council, can only benefit from your wisdom and farsightedness, your great human qualities and your special
and thorough knowledge of problems which concern the
international community and above all the third world,
which is a victim of so many threats and so much poverty.
160. Now that the situation resulting from the IndoPakistani conflict has acquired increasingly tragic dimensions requiring an immediate and total mobilization Of our
efforts to put an end to the killing, now when the Middle
East crisis has reached a dangerous stage and is being
discussed by the General Assembly once again, the military
occupation by Iran of three islands in the Straits of Hormuz
constitutes a very serious step which introduces a new
element of tension in the area. No one can be blind to the
fact-and Iran less than anyone else-that the islands of the
Greater and Lesser Tunbs, as well as the island of Abu
Muss, have long been contested by the different countries
of the area. The claims of Iran over those islands have
always been met by the more legitimate and just as
well-founded claims of the Arab countries directly concerned.

162. If the use of force for the settlement of international
problems has been condemned unani.nlOLlSly, the Declamtion on the Strengthening of International
Security ha
specified that n0 territorial acquisition resulting from the
threat or use of force can be recognized as legal. The haste
Of Iran in militarily taking over these islands that have beep
claimed by s0 many at a time when the Arab Emirates ore
achieving independence is part Of the all-too-familiar
POk)
Of confronting the internationa1 community
with a fail
accompli, thus placing OneSelf
ill a position
Of StrWlgtll for
any later talks. The legitimacy of a cause that has to rCSOrt
to such measures is always debatable, even WOtihy oi
suspicion, and this resort to force, which is unjustified on
any grounds, should in itself cast doubt on the foundations
Of Iran’s claims and prompt a condemnation
by the
Security Council.
163. But the responsibility of Iran is not the only one that
has to be questioned in these events. The responsibility
of
Great Britain is no less significant, for the British Govemmerit wasentrusted with the territory, which it should have
restored in its entirety to those countries that have now
achieved their independence. It was up ta the United
Kingdom to ensure that those territories suffered no
territorial dismembennent until they were in a position
themselvesto defend tlieir own interests.
164. The Iranian occupation took place before the de&
ration of independenceof the Emirates, when the responsibility for their security still fell within the purview of the
British Government. Not only could the United Kingdom
under no circumstancesuse any part of the territory under
its authority but it was duty bound as the administering
Powerto protect the integrity of the territory and to ensure
the successionof the whole of the territory under its
control for the newly independent states,
165. Regardlessof the nature and complexity of the
problemsarising in the area, the timing and the premedi.
tated nature of that inadmissibleact betrays at the very
least a disquieting greed. The world is full of many
distressingproblems, and the Arab world itself is today
confronted with many of them and therefore cannot open
up new fronts. Iran knows this full well, for Iran took an
active part in the Islamic Conference of Rabat, and there
hasbeen an obvious show of interest in its attitude towards
Arab concernsand even a mark of solidarity with them.

161. I shall not deal at great length with this specific point
that has already given rise to comprehensive statements by
the interested parties themselves, but it is an undeniable
fact that during the entire period of British domination
over the area, the three islands were part of the territory
that became the federation of the United Arab Emirates,
which has just joined the United Nations. The question of
proprietorship over the islands cannot be settled by way of
a dubious agreement between Iran and the United Kingdom; it should have been discussed among all the parties
with claims over these territories. It is not a question that
can be settled unilaterally or by a military occupation such
as Iran has recently carried out. The actions of Iran are
contrary to the principles of the Charter. These acts also
violate the provisions of the Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security, which was adopted at the
twenty-fifth session of the General Assembly [resolution
2734 (XXV)/ and which Iran itself supported.

166. Therefore, it is with much sorrow that we now see
being called into question by a hasty and unjustified act
that whole reserve of confidence and mutual respect, It jr
now apparent that, taking advantage of the present plight
of the Arab world, using a period when world pllbli’c
Opinion has been very much moved by the grave events
taking place at present in the Indo-Pakistan subcontinent
and benefiting from outside complicity, Iran, instead of the
friendshipOf peopleswhich it was certainly in the interest
of Iran to cultivate, has chosena military adventure with
unpredictable results. Algeria must decisively denounce
these manifestations of a bellicose imperialism, and condemnsin this caseas elsewhereany annexationist policies.

167. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative
&Pea for the very nice things he said about me.
14

of

168. The next name inscribed on the list of speakers is
that of the representative of the People’s Democratic
Republic of Yemen. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to address the Council.

their true objectives-the
exploitation of the territory’s
naturai resources, oil, and the securing of naval bases in that
strategic area.
174. From these brief historical notes, it is evident that,
first, an invasion of one part of this territory is but the first
step in launching a larger invasion. An invasion in that part
of the world has never been an isolated incident, but has
affected the entire Gulf area and its people. Secondly, these
three islands, Abu Musa and the Greater and Lesser Tunbs,
have never been considered separate entities in themselves,
but as parts of the Arab mainland, parts of the Arabian
Gulf area as a whole.

169. Mr. ISMAIL (People’s Democratic Republic of
Yemen): I should like to associate my delegation with the
Security Council’s expression of condolence to the family
of Dr. Ralph Bunche.
170. Mr. President, I should like to thank you and all the
members of the Security Council for allowing me to address
the Council on behalf of my Government and its delegation
on a matter of such vital concern. But first, Mr. President,
let me congratulate you on your assumption of the office
of President of the Security Council. Throughout your
distinguished career, both in your own country and here at
the United Nations as Permanent Representative, you have
displayed outstanding leadership qualities, and I am confident that your term of office will be marked by eminence
and wisdom.

175. The British Government must assume resporisibility
for this most recent illegal act of aggression committed by
Iran, because the United Kingdom has declared itseIf
responsible for this area until the end of 1971. All treaties
between the United Kingdom and the rulers of the area
clearly grant the United Kingdom full authority in this
territory.
176. Allow me to introduce to the Council a specimen of
an agreement between the British puppet sheikhs of the
Gulf and the United Kingdom. My colleague the representative of Iraq has already quoted parts of it; allow me to read
it as a whole:

171. Any discussion of the islands of Abu Musa and the
Greater and Lesser Tunbs necessarily concerns the entire
Gulf area. Indeed, our discussion would be superficial and
incomplete if we did not consider these islands in their
proper context, as extensions of the Arab mainland.
Together with the coastal area they form one integral
WhOle,
one unit, one entity in all aspects-political, economic, social and cultural. To discuss them otherwise
would be a distortion of fact. Thus, it is not a question of
the seizure of three isolated islands in the Arabian Gulf, but
rather of the attempted usurpation of part of the Arabian
Gulf territory.

“Exclusive agreement of the Chief of Abu Dhabi with
the British Government, dated 6 March 1892.
“I, Zaeed bin Khalifah, Chief of Abu Dhabi, in the
presence of Lieutenant Colonel A. C. Talbot, CIE,
Political Resident in the Persian Gulf, do hereby solemnly
bind myself and agree, on behalf of myself, my heirs and
successors, to the following conditions, viz.:

172. Within this context, we, as an international body
dedicated to the preservation of peace, must ask what the
Government of Iran hopes to gain by this illegal invasion;
when was the decision made to invade the islands; who is
responsible for such a decision; and what are the long-term
goals-and, I repeat, what are the long-term goals?

“1. That I will on no account enter into any agreement or correspondence with any Power other than the
British Government.
“2. That without the assent of the British Government
I will not consent to the residence within my territory of
the agent of any other Government.

173. To understand the area and the problem today, it is
first necessary to understand the history of the Arabian
Gulf. Portugal was the first European country to express
interest in this land, In 1497, the Portuguese explorer
Vasco Da Gama explored the Gulf region en route to India,
with the aid of a local navigator; and in 1507 the King of
Portugal sent a military expedition to the Gulf. This
expedition later occupied the Hormuz Straits. The following year Muscat came under Portuguese rule. On 30
November
1521, the peopIe of the Gulf area revolted
against their colonial masters, but were defeated. That same
year Portugal successfully invaded Bahrain. In 1602, the
Arabian Gulf people of Muscat, Sahar, Ras Al-Khaima,
Alfonse, and Al Jakerek launched a massive revolt against
the Portuguese colonials and expelled them forever from
their land. Subsequently, Britain and the Netherlands
formed an alliance to rule the area by direct and indirect
means. After 1763, however, the British established themselves as the sole Power in the Gulf area and began to bind
together the ignorant and illiterate native rulers by the
forced imposition of inequitable treaties and agreements.
Through these documents the British attempted to disguise

“3, That I will on no account cede, sell, mortgage or
otherwise give for occupation any part of my territory,
save to the British Government.
“Dated Abu Dhabi, 6 March 1892, corresponding to
5th Shaaban, 1309 Hijri.
“Signature of Zaeed Bin Khalifah, Chief of Abu Dhabi,
A. C. Talbot, Lieut. Col., resident in the Persian Gulf,
Lansdowne, Viceroy and Governor-General of India.
“Ratified by His Excellency the Viceroy and GovernorGeneral of India at Simla on the twelfth day of May
1892.
“H. M. Durand, Secretary to the Government of India,
Foreign Department.”
At the end of the agreement appears the following:
15

“The agreements signed by the other Trucial Shaikhs,
viz. the Chiefs of Dubai, Ajman, Shargah, Ras ul Khima,
and Umm ul Gawain, the first three dated the 7th and the
last two the 8th of March 1892, are identical in form.”

immoral aggressioncommitted by Iran againstthese three
islandsin the Gulf.
181. Iran’s act of hostility and belligerence towards
Greater and LesserTunb hasno justification. Even if Iran’s
claim were valid, it would not be proper for it, asa Member
of the United Nations, to seize the islands by force. It
would not be proper for any nation to do so. Iran’s seizure
of these islands is a violation of the Charter and the
principles of the United Nations and an affront to sll
Membernationswho do abideby theseprinciples.

177. Please note that this agreement has no expiration
date. It is treaties like this that bound the sheikhs of the
area. Even with the terms of the treaty in effect, Britain
permitted the Sheikh of Shargah to cede the island of Abu
Musa to Iran and the so-called ruler of Ras Al-Khaima to
allow the Iranians to occupy Greater and Lesser Tunb.
Britain failed to fulfil not only its legal responsibilities but
also its political and social responsibilities to the area. I
refer to General Assembly document A/AC.109/L.738
dated 2 September 19714 concerning Oman as an example
of the years of British exploitative policies in this area. This
document states that as of 1971, after more than 160 years
of British occupation, there are only two primary schools,
no newspapers, one hospital and no roads. After 150 years
of bleeding the country of its oil, draining all its resources,
living like parasites on the land and its people, the British
left it in a weakened and mined condition without health
facilities, without social and political development, without
economic development, without transportation facilities
and without educational facilities and means to begin any
of those things. It is no wonder Iran finds this crippled land
an easy prey.

182. The Persiansinvaded Bahrain in 538 B.C. and took
possession
of Omanand Yemen shortly afterward, conquering the Kaldanians, one of the ancestors of the Arab
inhabitants of the area. The Persiansremained there for
about two centuries. They were followed by the Remans,
the Portuguese,the Dutch and the British respectively. It is
this two-century occupation on which the Iranians base
their claim to the islands.If this is a valid claim, then the
Remans,the Portuguese,the Dutch and the British would
alsohaveequal claimsupon this area. If the Council accepts
asvalid the Iranian claim, then the map of the world should
be changedto conform with periodsof foreign occupation,
We Arabs have existed for centuries beyond our present
borders. We carried culture and Islam to many peoples,
including the people of Iran. Therefore, according to
Iranian logic, we should have a legitimate claim to Iranian
territory.

178. The British Government oppressed and undermined
the people of the Gulf in order to strengthen the power of
the sheikh collaborators. In 1956 the British Government
used the sheikhs’ armies to destroy the national movement
in Bahrain. The British did likewise in Qatar in 1957, in
Oman in that same year and in Abu Dhabi in 1964.
However, the British Government failed in its attempt to
silence the voice of the people of the Gulf. Since 1965 the
Popular Front for the Liberation of the Occupied Arabian
Gulf has waged its armed struggle against British colonialism and its agents. The Liberation Front, which has now
liberated 90 per cent of the Dhofar Province, knows that
the Gulf area is indeed one unit, and it will not cease its
efforts until the whole area is liberated.

183. Al Hawadess,the Lebaneseweekly newspaper,pub.
lished an article in its 761st issue dated 11 June 1970,
written by its chief editor, Salim Allozi, a well-known
journalist. The article is a debate between Mr. Allozi and
one of the prominent officials of the Iranian Government,
May I be permitted to read to the Council several
paragraphs
from this article.
184. The Iranian official stated:
“The Gulf areaproduces 15 million barrelsof oil daily.
Iran producesbetween40 and 50 per cent of that amount
and the rest is produced by other Gulf areas. In a few
years the production will increaseto 50 million barrels
daily. Thus, one half of the world’s consumption will
come from that area. That is why we bar the door-the
door to the Gulf-to any adventurist and stranger.”

179. The recent influx of Iranian immigrants into the Gulf
area is the result of collaboration between the sheikhs and
the Iranian Government,
180. The facts of this situation prove conclusively that
Britain is the Power in the Gulf area and, as such, has full
knowledge and command of any and all situations existing
there. It is Britain that commands and controls the
political, social and economic actions of its puppet rulers.
According to treaty these rulers cannot even correspond
with another party without permission from the United
Kingdom. Then why does the United Kingdom suddenly
choose to ignore the terms of these treaties by letting the
Sheikh of Shargah sign an agreement with the Iranian
Government to share Abu Musa? Why does the British
Government permit such a violation? Obviously, only to
further its own interests and those of its allies. Thus it is
Britain that is entirely responsible for the unjust, illegal and
,’
/

He continued:
“Last year our expenditure for armswas $780 million
plus $500 million for the army. We needthis money for
the development of our people, but we spendit on the
protection of this area. We have Phantom jets that cost
$4 million each. We spend the same amount on the
training of pilots, maintenanceand spareparts. Wehavea
huge armed force, more than our Arab friends estimate.
Out of a tank force of 1,900, 900 of them are the most
modern Sheften tanks, equipped with electronic devices.
Wesay proudly that we can refuel our jets in the air.”
The sameIranian official further stated:
“If the British leave Oman, Iran will be able to put an
endto the revolution in Dhofar in lessthan one week.”

4 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-sixth
Session, Supplement No. 23, chap. XIII.

16

185. The last statement exposes the true purpose of the
Iranians. They intend to interfere in the domestic affairs of
: Oman and destroy the revolution in another area-an area
removed from Iranian territory.

here and throughout the world as a great artisan of peace
and a foremost authority in the United Nations on the
Middle East. He had many friends in Iran and I was
privileged to know him personally. The United Nations, as
well as the world, will sorely miss this great man.

186. The Iranian official continued:
19.5. We deeply mourn his death and wish to extend to
Mrs. Bunche and her family our deepest condolences upon
this great loss.

“You Arabs think that when the area is exposed to a
serious and dangerous situation, you can escape. You are
mistaken. Our jet fighters will not let you reach the
airports. We will be there before you. We have been in
this area for more than 2,500 years; we will not abandon
it. Sometimes we feel we are Kuwaitees more than the
Kuwaiti people; Omanies more than the Omani people;
and Bahrainies more than the Bahrainians.”

196. A full-scale war is reported to have been started in
South Asia. Fighting in Viet-Nam and Cambodia continues
unabated. In the Middle East itself, despite the present lull,
the threat of armed conflict and war has escaped no one.
197. Under the circumstances, the Security Council is
convened to discuss the suggestion that there is a danger in
a recent action taken by the Iranian Government to put an
end to the last vestiges of a dying era in the Persian Gulf
area.

These are the real desires and dreams of Iran in our Arabian
Gulf.
187. The Iranians have stated that they negotiated with
the ruler of Al Shargah concerning Abu Musa. What is Al
Shargah? It is a piece of land of 100 square miles with a
population of 3 1,688 persons, These negotiations were not
carried on between equal parties. If the Sheikh of Shargah
had delayed in selling Abu Musa to Iran, Iran would have
seized it by force as it did the islands of Greater and Lesser
Tunb, which belong to Ras Al-Khaima, an area of 650
square miles and 24,387 people.

198. While I wish to thank you, Mr. President and
members of the Council, for the invitati-on extended to the
Iranian delegation to participate in the discussions on this
item, nevertheless we cannot hide our concern over the fact
that at a time when the flames of war are rapidly spreading,
the valuable time of the Council is taken up not by actual
and real threats to peace, but by the wanton and fanciful
preoccupations of a few.

188. On one of his trips to Switzerland, the Shah of
Iran-he
always likes Switzerland, it seems to me-declared:
“When the British withdraw from the Gulf area, Iran will
OCCUPY Abu Musa and Greater and Lesser Tunb by force.”
That is what he said., He added: “I am not ready to put my
country up for auction”.

199. I have come before this august body, which is
responsible for the maintenance of international peace and
security, to state the facts about recent actions taken by
my Government. I shall not tax the patience of the
members of this Council by attempting to respond to
baseless accusations and charges against my country. This is
essentially an internal matter for Iran, but out of deference
to the Security Council I am glad to be.able to restate
publicly the policy of the Government of Iran in this
matter.

189. In another declaration, Mr. Zahedi, former .Ambassador of Iran to the United States, stated:
“We should be present in the Gulf area”-that is what
Mr. Zahedi said-“and the Gulf area is not Abu Muss,
Tunb, Greater or Lesser”-he means the Gulf area as a
whole-“We
cannot let a communist regime spread to this
area as it did in southern Yemen.”

200. The present meeting of the Security Council has been
called for the purpose of examining what the permanent
representative of Iraq, in his letter of 3 December 1971
[Sf 10409], purports is “the dangerous situation in the
Arabian Gulf area”.

190. In conclusion, we believe firmly that the British
Government
is responsible for the recent brutal, arrogant
and illegitimate action taken by Iran and that Iran must
immediately
withdraw from Abu Musa and Greater and
Lesser Tunb.

_‘-.,,.. 193. Mr. AFSHAR (Irap): I would like to begin by
.,’
‘expressing
my delegation’s profound grief, as well as my
own, upon hearing today the sad news of the demise of
Dr. Ralph
Bunche, the distinguished Under-Secretary
General of the United Nations.

20 1. This use of the expression “Arabian Gulf’ warrants
an immediate preliminary observation. This is not the first
time that this expression has been imported into the United
Nations. At first sight one might think that the name by
which an international waterway is described has no more
than an academic interest. But in this case this is not so. We
are here dealing with a sea which, as everyone knows, has
from the most ancient times been called the Persian Gulf.
To call it something else is to distort fundamental truths.
This misrepresentation
of facts demonstrates a spirit of
distortion that characterizes the speeches which we have
just heard. It is symbolic of a deliberate attempt to alter
historic reality and betrays a wish to attribute to the area
an Arab character not justified by the facts.

194. Dr. Ralph Bun&e was a major figure on the
international
scene and he will be remembered by all of us

202. May I now begin by stating the basis of Iranian
policy in the Persian Gulf. It is based on creating conditions

191. The PRESIDENT: I thank the Ambassador of the
People’s Democratic Republic of Yemen for the nice things
he said about me.
192.

I call on the representative of Iran.

17

for peace and security so that all the littoral States, large
and small, may strive for progress and prosperity with equal
rights and mutual respect for our freedom and independence.
203. We strongly believe that it is for the Persian Gulf
States alone to deal with this vital international WaterWaY.
To this end we considerthat the riparian Statesshould
work together in a spirit of friendship,co-operationand
harmony. Any interferenceby outsidePOWerS in the affairs
of the PersianGulf would undoubtedlyendangerpeaceand
stability in the area.
204. Iran entertainsno expansionistambitions.It has no
designson anyone’sterritory. Its land areahasbeenrichly
endowed with resources.Under the wise and dynamic
leadershipof my augustSovereign,theseare beingrapidly
developedin conditions of peace and stability for the
benefit andprosperity of the Iranianpeople.
205. Iran’s peace-lovingpolicy and its strict adherenceto
the principle of the peaceful settlement of disputesby
negotiation cannot be challengedby anyone. If Iran’s
policy wasother than this, it would neverhave acted two
yearsago,in the caseof Bahrain,in the way it did. This was
acclaimedin this very Council as a statesmanlikeand
enlightenedact. We now enjoy the best of relationswith
our Bahraini brothers on the basisof equal rights and
mutual respect.I canassurethe Councilthat our policy has
undergoneno changesincethen.
206. We have proceededin accordancewith this basic
policy in trying to find a peacefulsettlementwith regardto
Abu Musaand the Tunb islands,althoughthere is no doubt
that thoseislandsbelongto Iran. Yet we now find ourselves
involved in a debatein the Security Councilon a question
which must surely strike most of those here as being de
minimis,minusculeto the point of embarrassment,
207. Membersof the Security Councilwill recallthat 10
yearsagoa comparablyprovocativecampaign,launchedby
the Iraqi Governmentagainsta neighbouringcountry, gave
rise to the samesort of episodewith which the Council is
now faced. In 1961, by its hostile activities againstthe
sovereigntyand territorial integrity of the Stateof Kuwait,
the Government of Iraq created a tensesituation in the
area.At that time alsoit raisedin the Security Councilthe
assertion-andhere I quote from the statement of the
representativeof Iraq at the 957th meetingof the Security
Councilon 2 July 1961-that Kuwait was“an integralpart
of... Basra”or Iraq [9.57th meeting,para.551. Now again
the time of the Security Council is being wastedon the
basisof an ill-founded proposition that the islandsin the
PersianGulf are “Arab territories” occupiedby Iran,
208. Membersof the Councilwill not fail to take note of
the fact that in their initiative the Governmentsof Iraq,
Algeria, the Libyan Arab Republic and Southern Yemen
referred to a dangeroussituation arisingfrom the Iranian
occupationof three islands:Abu Muss,the Greaterand the
LesserTunbs. In sodoing,they havetotally disregarded
the
facts that the arrangementsmade concerning Abu Musa
have already met with the approval and satisfaction of
Sharjah.
18

209, Now I ask, can Iraq here claim to be speaking on
behalf of Sharj&?
What basisis there for this interVonfi@E
by Iraq and those who have joined it? Can it be nnythir??
but an attempt to divert the Arab people’s attention from
their immediateand grave problems?
210. With regard to the Tunb islands we also sought tt’
find a solution by negotiation. Despite our COJG~IIUW:S
efforts it failed. We had gone as far as we could nrld %e
were left with no alternative but to establishthe CXWC~S~ t*g*
our sovereignrights. It must not be forgotten that tlris HT~
not foreign territory; it was Iranian territory. It has ol\va>i
been Iranian territory and, let there be no mistake about ia,
it will alwaysremain Iranian territory.
211. I do not propose to enter into a detailed refrrtaticnr?
of the Iraqi arguments regarding the claim of Ras .-\I*
I&ima to the Tunb islands.This is not a court of law5 bu;
a body concerned with the maintenance of internation&
peaceand security. But it is right, I think, that the Cn~rrerl
should know that the Iranian title to the islands is holh
long-standingand substantial. It has not been developed
recently to justify the measuresnow taken. Thesearc onI?
the present reflection of a historic title which could n<br
remain physically unassertedupon the removal front lfte
PersianGulf of the British presence.And can one ask for 1
better recognition of such a title than its repeated n&now-.
ledgementby those who had a special knowledge of and
interestin suchmatters?
212. For more than a century, beginning in 1770, Urlti&
mapsmarked the Tunb islandsas being Persian. A ntlistakc
can be made once, perhaps, but what sort of mistake is ia
that can be madefor 120 years?
213. In addition, in a highly authoritative encyclopacdb.
publishedasrecently as 1967 to cover the events of the 1z.a
SO years, by another major Power, the Tunbs have heen
identified as Iranian territory. The map showsthe islandt
having the samecolour as the mainland and, in addition.
they are expressly marked as being Iranian. Moreover, 1
shouldemphasizethat throughout the period during wIri&
Iran hasbeendeprived of the exercise of its sovereign riglrr~
over thoseislands,Iran hasnever ceasedto protest,
214. Now, in the circumstanceswhich have come about in
the PersianGulf, Iran cannot tolerate a situation in which
Part of its territory remains separated from the metros
politan area.Iran has for many years publicly and ur~eclrrri+.
ocally defined its policies in this regard. It was, therefore.
well known that Iran would not shirk its responsibility la
safeguardits legitimate sovereignrights.
215. I cannot conclude this statement without SOIIV
referenceto the geographicalposition of the islands. With
the h.mil’s leave, I should like to distribute a map ofYlme
areato the membersof the Council. As can be seen from
the map, these islands form part of a group of islarrdr,
virtually constituting an archipelago, all of wliiclr Itake
always been part of Iran. Moreover, the Greater Tunb liti
only 17 miles from the Iranian mainland and the Lcsszr
Tunb 22 milesoff-shore. On the other hand, both islands lir
almost 50 miles away from Ras Al-Khaima on the other
sideof the PersianGulf.

216. And need I mention the thousands of miles which
separate the Libyan Arab Republic from those islands? The
reason I speak of the Libyan Arab Republic is simply
because it was the Minister of Industry of that far-away
country who, a few days ago, declared to the press .in
Kuwait that its Government planned to dispatch troops in
order to occupy the islands. But the reason that they have
failed to carry out that idea was that they were not assured
of SuppIy lines.
217. The Government of Iraq, too, has reportedly entertained similar fanciful ambitions, such as the landing of
paratroops in the islands.
218. I have tried to explain recent developments in the
off-shore islands of Iran. I must reaffirm once again a basic
fact which transcends every other consideration, namely,
that the Iranian Government will not allow a single inch of
its territory to be violated. And we will not allow our
sovereign rights over the islands in question to be infringed
in any way.
219. We are not ,surprisedat all at the attempt madeto
undermine the friendly relations that exist *betweenIran
and our Arab brothers. It is an irresponsibleattempt which
does not even take into account the best interestsof the
Arab world, particularly at a time whenthe greatestdegree
of solidarity and unity is neededamongall MoslemStates.
220. History will, I am sure, confirm that through the
exercise of its sovereignrights in theseoff-shoreislands,the
Iranian Government can only be regarded as having
contributed to the promotion of peaceand stability in the
area.
221. Sir Colin CROWE (United Kingdom): I think it
would be well to start by putting this matter in its proper
context.
222. Members of the Council may recall the announcement made by my Foreign Secretary in the Houseof
C~IXIIO~S
on 1 March 1971. He stated that, following the
conclusion of the review of Gulf policy which the British
Government had been conducting sinceit cameto office in
June 1970, it had been decided that the existing treaties
between the United Kingdom and Bahrain, Qatar and the
seven Trucial Stateswould be terminated and British forces
withdrawn from the PersianGulf by the end of 1971.That
announcement confirmed the decision taken by the previous Government in January 1968.
223. From the time that the original decisionwastaken,
and indeed for many yearsbefore that, the primary concern
of the British Government has been to ensurethat the
stability which our presencein the area had helped to
preserve for nearly 150 years would continue after our
departure. As we saw it, there were two important
prerequisites if this aim wasto be achieved:first, that the
nine States concerned, especiallythe Statesof the Trucial
Coast, most of which were too smallto be politically or
economically viable’ on their own, shouldsucceedin their
efforts to come together in some form of federation or
union, preferably between all nine of the protected States
or, failing that, at least between the sevenTrucial States;
19

and, secondly, that we shouldhelp to the bestof our ability
to promote the settlement of outstanding territorial differences in the area. The majority of those differences
concernedconflicting claimsby the Arab Statesand Iran to
certain islandsin the Gulf.
224. That policy was undertaken publicly and was received with universal approbation in the Arab world. It was
carried out in lengthy and continuous consultationswith all
the Arab States. The only criticism we encounteredwas
whether we were sincere and would seeit through. The
situation we are now consideringis a natural consequence
of that universally approvedpolicy.
225. As memberswill know, the first aim of that policy
has now been fully achieved. Bahrain and Qatar are now
Members of our Organization. On 2 December,thanks to
the perseveranceof the Governments and peoplesof the
Statesconcerned and their unflaggingpursuit of the ideal of
union, the United Arab Emirateswas formally established.
This morning we welcomed the new State to membership
of the United Nations. Although only six of the seven
Trucial States have so far joined this union, it is our hope
that the seventh, Ras Al-Khaima, will do so shortly. We
hope that the foundation hasthus beenlaid for an enduring
political structure within wllich these small States can
develop and prosper, in collaboration with their neighbours
on both sidesof the Gulf.
226. The second aim has also been in large measure
accomplished.Of the four islandsin question, by far the
most important was Bahrain, with a population of over
200,000. Members of the Council will recallthe missionof
ascertainment carried out by the Secretary-General’s
Special Representative, Mr. WinspeareuGuicciardi,which
showed that the vast majority of the population wished
their country to become a fully independentArab State,
and the.endorsement of his report by the Security Council.
Immediately thereafter the Shah of Iran renouncedhis
country’s claim to the island, which had long been an
impediment to the improvement of Arab-Iranianrelations
in the area, and Bahrain was able to take its place in the
family of nations.
227. The second problem island, second in size and
importance though in no way comparableto Bahrain, was
Abu Musa: an island administered by the Ruler of
Al-Sharjah with a population of some800, situatedtowards
the Arab side of the Gulf. As a result of the unremitting
efforts of Sir William Lute, the Special Representative
whom the British Foreign Secretary appointedto pursue
the search for solutions to the problemsinvolved in our
withdrawal, an agreed settlement was eventually reached
between the Iranian Government and the Ruler of Sharjah
on 29 November. Under this agreement,neither party has
given up its claim to the island nor recognizedthe other’s
claim. It was agreedthat Iranian troops shouldbe stationed
on the island, in specified areas,A detachmenthasalready
arrived on the island and was welcomedby representatives
of the Sharjah Government. Arrangements were also
worked out to cover oil arrangementsandit wasagreedthat
oil revenues,should oil subsequentlybe found on or in the
vicinity of the island, would be divided equally between
Sharjah and Iran. In the view of the British Government

this represents a sensible compromise agreement, which
upholds the honour and dignity of both sides.

deliberations and resolutions. This diminishing faith in the
Security
Council is one of the reasons Why my statemw
will be brief.

228. The two remaining islands were the Greater and the
Lesser Tunb: the latter island having no inhabitants, the
former a small number, about 150. Both islands lie near the
Iranian shore and have long been claimed by Iran. For
many years the British Government has been trying to bring
about an agreed solution between Iran and the Ruler.
Following the decision to withdraw our forces from the
Gulf by the end of this year, these efforts were redoubled.
Indeed, the speech of the representative of Kuwait is a
tribute to how hard Sir William Lute tried. It is a matter of
great regret to the British Government that it was not
possible to reach a negotiated settlement.

233, We have witnessed that a big Power Can do ally&g
it wishes, anything it deems in accordance
with i!s
chauvinistic interests, in violation of the Charter of thu
United Nations. The small States have always been f&
powerless against such actions and behaviour. Furthermore.
we have seen that any State in agreement with a bjg POwcr
cm take similar liberties WithOUt respect for the Charter Or
international law. The Iranian military
aggression in
occupying the three Arab islands of Abu Muss ztnd h
Greater and Lesser Tunb, in connivance with Great Britain.
is a clear manifestation Of thiS.

229. The British Government has now terminated its
defence agreements with all the protected States in the area
and our forces are in the last stages of their withdrawal. As
I have said, we have carried out this policy by agreement
and with the approval, indeed with the encouragement, Of
all the States concerned, both in the area and beyond it. We
hope that we have done so in a way which will give a good
chance that the historical stability of the Gulf will be
preserved, to the benefit not only of its people but also of
all countries that have links with the littoral States
surrounding this ancient sea and a concern for their
well-being.
230. The ending of Britain’s special position and responsibilities with the Gulf has inevitably meant the striking of a
balance between the conflicting claims of neighbouring
States, and the taking into account of realities. It would
have been better if agreed solutions to all outstanding
problems could have been reached. It was not for lack of
trying that this was not possible. But I ask those yho insist
that every claim must be met in full to consider what would
otherwise have occurred. There is a French expression: “le
mieux est l’ennemi du bien”. The over-all outcome-and I
repeat once again, it was what the Arab States concerned
repeatedly urged upon us-though it falls short of the ideal,
represents a positive achievement and a contribution to
peace. The alternative could well have been disorder and
lasting animosity. I cannot see how the representative of
Iraq can describe the present situation as dangerous or as a
threat to peace. In the view of my Government this
outcome represents a reasonable and acceptable basis for
the future security of the area, which should in turn be
based on co-operation between all the States of the Gulf,
Arab and non-Arab. I would like to think that in time these
considerations will prevail over some of the more intemper.
ate views that have been expressed in our debate today.

234. The Government of Great Britain has violated &?
provisions of the very treaties it had itself imposed upon
the Sheikhdoms of the Arabian Gulf decades ago. Tht
treaties imposed occupation and colonialism.
However,
they also provided for the protection of the territo$W
integrity of those Sheikhdoms and their islands, For man>+
decades Great Britain has exploited all the provisions d:
those treaties to its own advantage and until now
it tlaa
readily exploited the natural wealth of the Sheikhdoms. 1)?3
the one occasion that Great Britain was called upon to
apply the protection provision, it failed miserably
and
intentionally, reflecting the true nature by which the world
has known it for centuries: “divide and rule”, trickery.
treachery and butchery.
235. A glance through past centuries gives proof of thb.
Indeed, hardly any major conflict or turmoil the n~~dcm
world has known has not been the creation of Britain 07
like-minded States, either directly or indirectly. And itr the
present instance of the Iranian aggression and occupation ~?r
the Arab islands, Britain has been faithful to its nature anif
tradition. Has not Great Britain done the sanle in Palestir~
although on a larger scale?
236. Great Britain violated the treaties that it had itsefi
imposed on the Sheikhdoms of the Arabian Gulf. It
violated the principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
237. MY Government, an Arab Government, replied in fk
only way understood by the imperialists-by
nation&zing
the oil interests of Great Britain in the Libyan Anh
Republic and withdrawing our deposits from British bank,
The British Petroleum Company, owned in essence by the
British imperialist Government, has exploited the natur.4
wealth of mY country for many years. Our step violates Ipc)
principle of the Charter or international law; it is in
accordance with those principles and also with the Genera!
Assembly resolutions concerning the natural resources of
States.

231. The PRESIDENT: The next name on the list of
speakers is that of the representative of the Libyan Arab
Republic. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.

238. Imperialism in all its forms-old, new or emerging-does not understand the language and high principles oi
justice and morality. These high principles are merely a
screen behind which imperialism hides its poisonous fangs.
According to British action the principles of justice and
morality are to be applied and respected by the small Statca
only, for it is in the interests of the big States that the smaIl
States be Members of the United Nations, with rhc

j,% 232. Mr. MAGHRIBI (Libyan Arab Republic): Although
\, we have great respect for the Charter of the United Nations
‘and its principles, we are on the point of losing faith in
some of its institutions, especially the Security Council. We
have reached this conclusion after many years of experience
during which we have observed the work of the Council, its
20

psychological satisfaction of a single vote, whereas in fact
they are powerless. The small States of the third world
should therefore unify their efforts so that their voice-the
voice of the conscience of the world-may
be heard.
Because the imperialists understand only the language of
their own self-interest, they must be hit there where it
counts instead of only complaining to the Security Council.

little of what Radio Teheran has been tellinn its listeners
about this episode’. I am quoting from the%tlmmary of
World Broadcasts, Part Four: The Middle East and Africa,
published daily by the monitoring service of no less a
network than the British Broadcasting Corporation. This
broadcast was made by Radio Teheran at 13.30 GMT on
1 December, one day after the occupation:

239. We have fulfilled but a small part of this objective,
for the United Nations lends a deaf ear to the loud cries of
the small and the weak while it listens attentively and
obediently to the words and whispers of the big Powers,

“Dear listener, you may recall that the Shahanshah in
one of his statements said: ‘The foreign forces must truly
leave the Persian Gulf, which belongs to its littoral States,
otherwise we shall vindicate our right by force in any way
deemed appropriate’.”

240. My’ Government strongly condemns the Iranian
military aggression and occupation of the Arab islands in
the Arabian Gulf. It also strongly condemns the connivance
of the British Government and its violation of treaty
provisions and international law. The Arab position-the
true Arab position-has been reflected and recorded recently on the island of Greater Tunb, where all of the small
police force were killed defending it. It has, also been
reflected and recorded in the demonstrations of the Arab
masses in their respective countries against the aggressors
and their partners.

246. That is not the language of a country which respects
the Charter and which accepts its principles and provisions,
but it is the Ianguage of a heady aggressor, confident with
his force and careless of what is right and what is wrong.
247. And, of course, in the course of this broadcast Iraq
and Kuwait did not escape the maligning. For representatives’ amusement I must read out this passage:
“Iraq and Kuwait and other known colonialist agents
are far too small to be significant enough for opposition.
We shall definitely erase these dirty stains and create a
stable and calm environment.”

241. May I conclude by expressing the hope that the
Security Council will rise to its responsibilities and to the
expectations of the world community.
242.
Iraq.

The PRESIDENT:

That is the sort of language which is being broadcast and
fed to the Iranjan people and that is the language which
motivates and impels such actions.

I call on the representative of

248. The representative of Iran has been referring to
friendship with the Arab people and stating that by our acts
we are creating a breach in this friendship. May I ask
him-and any member of the Council-whether
there is one
single Arab capital that has not issued a denunciation of
this act of aggression? Sir Colin Crowe-and he is a very
honourable man-speaks of the calm situation in the Gulf,
of stability in the Gulf. What was the reaction in the Gulf as
a result of Iran’s aggression? Was it calm? What happened
to the representative of the Ruler of Al-Sharjah, who
welcomed the Iranian troops? Has he recovered, or has he
not recovered yet? ‘What happened in Abu Dhabi? What
happened in Ras Al-Khaima? What happened in every part
of the Gulf as a result of this aggression?

243. Mr. EL-SHIBIB (Iraq): I beg the Council’s patience
.>.for taking the floor again, but I cannot help but reply to
some of the statements and accusations levelled at my
country and my Government by the representative of Iran
and to certain allusions to the situation in the Gulf area by
the representative of the United Kingdom.
244. When I made my statement I said that to our
knowledge
Iran has never presented any documents to
prove what it calls its rights to the three islands of Abu
Musa and the Greater and Lesser Tunb. I said “to our
knowledge”,
leaving an area for doubt. But the representative of Iran has put forward the argument that there are
coloured maps showing these islands to be part of Iran.
These coloured maps, I am sure, are of Iranian manufacture, and they remind me very much of the maps that used
to be manufactured showing Bahrain as part of the yellow
area of Iran. As to his famous encyclopaedia of 1967-of
whose place of publication and printing no member of the
Council was informed-I
leave it to the intelligence of
representatives to ponder and guess about the existence of
such an encyclopaedia or where it originated.

249. If we have been patient, if we have used self-restraint,
that does not mean that we have forgotten or will forgo our
rights. Our people will not forget.
250. It seems to me that it has become traditional policy
for the British to barter Arab lands. They have done it in
Palestine, and all of us have been witnessing the bitter
results, the tragic results, of what they have done in that
country. And now they are leaving another; and they call it
a “calm and peaceful situation”; they say that their policy
has achieved its purpose. If that is the purpose of British
policy, I would certainly not be proud to defend it in this
Council.

245. The representative of Iran referred to Iraq’s territorial ambition and desire for expansion. May I ask the
members of the Council to bear with me while I beg him to
answer the following: are Iraqi troops stationed anywhere
but in Iraqi territory? Was it Iraqi troops which, with a
great armada of arms and guns, attacked the little island of
Greater Tunb and butchered the six policemen there, killing
four and injuring two? Was it Iraq that was so jubilant at
such a glorious, brave and valiant act? Let me read out a

251. The representative of Iran has used the closeness of
the islands to Iran to claim justification for its aggression
and occupation of the islands. Many representatives here
71

are learned lawyers, international lawyers versed in international law. I would ask them: Has distance ever been a
valid reason for such claims? Are the British Channel
Islands French because they are closer to France than to
Britain’? Would anyone accept such a ridiculous reason?
And what happened to the population of these islands?
Why did they have to ship them to Ras Al-Khaima?

“2. The Security Council shall, when it deems neces.
sary, call upon the parties to settle their dispute by such
means.”

252. And why did they attack and kill six policemen? Of
course, Iran has had mentors in the art of double talk. They
did not say that they attacked these islands and took them
by force; they said there was an agreement and the
policemen had, mistakenly, not received orders to evacuate
these islands.

257. Has Iran brought its claims before this Council or any
other body? Has the United Kingdom as the protecting
Power, which reneged on them, brought the very serioe
case of these ill-fated islands before this body? It is a
member of the Security Council and is duty bound to do so
by all means.

253. A broadcast from Teheran Radio Home Service in
Persian at 10.30 Greenwich Mean Time on 30 November
said the following:

258. We have heard the statement of the representative uf
the United Kingdom. I asked him two questions and he
answered neither of them. The first was: were these islands
Arab, and did they belong to Sharjah and Ras Al-Khaima?
I do not think that we have received an answer to that
question. The’ second question was: was not Britain duty
bound to defend the territorial integrity, of these islands
until the final second of the expiration of British responsi.
bility for their protection and defence, or do British treaties
and British obligations have a duration of a period of minus
one or two days? Is this a new precedent in respect of
treaties and the carrying out of obligations of States?

“After these operations the Irani Commander landed
and told the inhabitants that they would be well treated.
The inhabitants then prayed for the health of the
Shahinshah.”
Now these are the people of the Yunb who have been
forcibly removed from their homes and from Ras AlKhaima. This is the kind of talk we are expected to listen to
and accept.

arbitration, judicial settlement, resort to regional agencies
or arrangements, or other peaceful means of their owl1
choice.

259. We came here to put our complaint before you, a
complaint on behalf of a small, helpless State of 25,000
inhabitants. All of you, of course, have your international
relations, your obligations, your friendships, your enmities
and your interests, and of course whatever judgements you
make must take those into consideration. Nevertheless, as
members of the Security Council, you have an obligation
under the Charter to uphold its principles. If you let that
fall by the wayside of political and national interests, then
no one will come here again. And each State, particularly in
a region so troubled and so beset by contention and
difficulty as the Middle East, will learn a lesson, namely,
that its rights can be gained, regained, and protected only
by its own force. More trouble will be brought upon that
unhappy area, which not only may expose all its inhabitants to mortal danger, but may draw the world as a whole
into conflict and war.

254. It seems that the representative of Iran was annoyed
with me for calling the Gulf the Arabian Gulf. We are not
obsessed by names, but they seem to be very irritable about
that. And this r,aises in my mind a question as to what
implication we can convey to them. You have all heard the
blanket claims that Iran has laid to the whole of the Gulf,
its islands, its inhabitants and its land. Is this what they
have in mind? I am wondering-and
I think that the
Council should wonder with me-if we have seen the end of
the aggression, or just the beginning,
255. The representative of Iran tells the Council that [his
is not a court of law. But it is. There is international law; it
has to be observed and respected. And the Council lives by
the rule of law; it acts by the rule of law. It is only those
who do not want to observe the law who telI you that it
should be disregarded. And let us forget all the claims and
counter-claims. Suppose Iran has a right to these islands,
however significant or insignificant that right or claim is.
But the Charter of the United Nations tells us something
about’ the behaviour of States in this respect. Article 2,
paragraph 4, states:

260. The situation, let me assure you, is potentially very
serious and very dangerous. We, as a country of that area,
are vitally concerned. We feel that our vital interests are
seriously threatened. We are aware of the seriousness of the
situation. We want to apprise you of that, and we leave it to
your conscience and your judgement to resolve the matter
accordingly.

“All Members shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force against the territorial
integrity or political independence of any State, or in any
otlier manner inconsistent with the Purposes of the
United Nations.”

261. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of the United Arab Emirates. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to address
the Council.

2.56. Article 33 states:

\
.A: 262. Mr. PACHACHI (United Arab Emirates): May I first
“1. The parties to any dispute, the continuance of
of all associate my delegation with the members of the
which is likely to endanger the maintenance of inter
Security Council and the other representatives in expressing
national peace and security, shall, first of all, seek a
our profound grief and shock at the death of Dr. Ralph
solution by negotiation, enquiry, mediation, conciliation,
Bunche, a distinguished international civil servant who has
22

r

served this Organization with great ability and devotion for
more than 2.5 years? I personally had the privilege of
knowing Dr. Bunche for almost 20 years. I knew him when
he was still the Director of the Division of Trusteeship
when 1 represented Iraq in the Fourth Committee of the
General Assembly. Our association continued when he
became Under-Secretary for Special Political Affairs with
special responsibilities for the Middle East, and later in the
Congo. Therefore, it was with great sorrow that Ilearnt of
his passing this morning. I extend to his family and to the
delegation of the United States our heartfelt condolences.

268. But official statements emanating from responsible
sources in the Iranian Government stated at the time that
Iran not only would not recognize the Union if the dispute
on the islands were not settled, but that it would do
everything in its power to disrupt that Union and prevent
its creation. We were therefore advised that we should delay
the proclamation of our independence and postpone our
application to the United Nations in the hope that a
satisfactory settlement could be reached with Iran so that
the Union could start its life of independent statehood in
peace and harmony and good relations with its neighbour.

263. May I take this opportunity also to thank you,
Mr. President, for your generous words of welcome at
yesterday’s
meeting when the Security Council voted
unanimously to recommend the admission of the United
Arab Emirates to the United Nations?

,269. The months passed and it was not possible to reach a
settlement of the Iranian claim, because Iran insisted on
taking over those islands and insisted on the view that those
islands were Iranian historically and that, therefore, Iranian
soyereignty had to be restored to them. Their insistence was
centred on the question of sovereignty. All proposals which
were made to the Iranian Government regarding the
possibilities of co-operation between the Arab sheikhdoms
concerned and Iran in respect of these islands were rejected,
and only the surrender of sovereignty of these islands to
Iran was acceptable to the Iranian Government.

264. I should also like to thank all the members of the
Council, particularly those who were kind enough to make
personal references to me on that occasion of the admission
of our new and young State to membership of this
Organization.
265. F know that members of the Council have had a
trying time today. It has been a long meeting. But I feel, as
the representative of the United Arab Emirates, that I must
say a few words about the question before the Council
which, of course, is of immediate concern to us and affects
our vital interests.

270. The Iranian Government was also told that perhaps
the United Arab Emirates, after its emergence as an
independent State, would be able to negotiate as an equal
with the Iranian Government, to negotiate as one independent State with another, as two Members of the United
Nations bound by the principles and purposes of the
Charter, that perhaps negotiations on those bases would
bear fruit and amicably settle this territorial dispute. But
unfortunately the Iranian Government reiterated its view
that it would not negotiate this dispute with the Government of the United Arab Emirates but that it would try to
prevent the proclamation of the independence of the
federation and that it would settle the island problem
before the emergence to independence of the United Arab
Emirates.

266. This morning in the General Assembly /2007th
plennry meet&l
when 1 spoke on the occasion of the
admission of the. United Arab Emirates to membership of
the United Nations, I expressed the deep regret felt by ,the
people of the country which I have the honour to represent
and its Government at the action talcen by Iran in forcibly
occupying the Arab islands in the Gulf. I said that we were
looking forward to a relationship of friendship and cooperation with Iran, a neighbour with which we have had
long historical and deep cultural and spiritual ties. The
action of the Iranian Government in using force to settle a
territorial dispute arising out of a claim which in our view is
untenable both historically and juridically is not only
contrary
to the Charter of the United Nations, but is
incompatible with the traditional friendship that has bound
the Arab and the Iranian peoples. I also stated that the
Iranian Government will realize before long that it is far
more important for it to maintain good relations with its
neighbours than it is to take possession of these Arab
islands.

27 1. In view of this, the United Arab Emirates had to wait
until almost the very last week of the twenty-sixth session
of the General Assembly to proclaim its independence and
make its application for membership to the Organization.
That having been done-unfortunately
in the shadow of
Iranian military occupation-it seems to me two questions
must be asked. First, are these islands in fact Iranian, or are
they Arab? Secondly, is Iran justified in the use of force to
press its claim to these islands? The answer to the first
question is that these islands, in our view, are and have
always been Arab. The British Government itself has on
numerous occasions’stated its belief that these islands were
Arab and that the Iranian claim to them was not based on
any legitimate historical or legal basis.

267. When the representatives of the United Arab Emirates met in Dubai on 18 July of this year to consider the
fLlture of their countries, they discussed the possibilities
open to them and decided that the only way to preserve
their independence an,d security was to federate in a strong
union that would be qble to play its part in safeguarding
their interests and in maintaining the peace and stability in
the Gulf. They agreed on 18 July 1971 on the constitution
of an independent State, which they called the United Arab
Emirates. It was our hope that we would be able to enter
the United Nations soon after the convening of the General
Assembly. That was our hope, and in fact that was t,he
aspiration of the people of the Gulf.

272. The representative of Iran, who is sitting next to me,
and whom I had the pleasure of meeting in London some
months ago, has repeated that these islands are Iranian but
has not in our view produced any convincing evidence to
prove that claim. And 1 am sure that if Iran felt it had
strong juridical and historical grounds for claiming these
islands it would not have hesitated to have recourse to the
International Court of Justice or perhaps to arbitration or
to negotiation with an independent State after its emer23

indirectly. With this common factor, and having regard ta
circumstance and the historic ties of friendship that bind
them, it is essential that these States settle their dispute
amicably so that the region may be assuredof peace,
security and stability.

gence, or even to the United Nations itself. Instead, they
insisted on one method of solving this problem, and that is
the unilateral use of force before the emergence of the
United Arab Emirates.
273. The reason the action of Iran was greeted with such
shock and consternation in the United Arab Emirates was
that a country with whom we had had the closest historical,
spiritual, economic and cultural ties, a country with which
we were hoping to have the closest ties in the future, had
unfortunately chosen the method of force to settle this
claim, in spite of the fact that thousands of Iranian citizens
have made their homes and found work in the Emirates
which now make up the United Arab Emirates. And I am
sure the representative of Iran would be the first to
recognize and admit that the large Iranian community in
these countries has always found a welcome, generous
treatment and co-operation from the people of the United
Arab Emirates. It was therefore a shock to see that in spite
of the close ties of neighbourliness and history, Iran chose
the path of force rather than that of negotiation with an
independent State following its emergence.

278. In dischargingits responsibilitiesin matters so sensi.
tive and delicate asthis matter of which we areseized,the
Council must alwaysact in strict conformity with the letter
and spirit of the Charter.
279. For it to do otherwise would create unlimited
difficulties and would lead to the injection of partisan
considerationsinto the deliberationsof the Council, guaraateeing thereby that chaos and not order will prevail, that
strife and dissension,and not peace, will be endemicarnoag
nations.
280. Chapter VI of the Charter provides for the peaceful
settlement of disputesand sets out the procedureswhich
Statesshouldfollow. Article 36 states:
“The Security Council may, at any stageof a disputeof
the nature referred to in Article 33 or of a situation of
like nature, recommend appropriate procedures or
methodsof adjustment.”

274. It is our sincere hope that the Iranian Government
will reconsider its position on these islands and will find it
possible to settle this problem in a way that befits relations
between neighbours and the deep spiritual and cultural ties
that have bound the Arab and Iranian peoples over the
centuries. And in all friendliness and frankness I tell the
representative of Iran that the use of force and the
inflicting of humiliation on the people of the Gulf in such
an unnecessary display of military force at a time when the
Members of the United Nations are striving to institute a
rule of law in relations among States was contrary to the
fundamental principles of the Charter but also negated the
friendly relations that have always existed between our two
peoples and has threatened to substitute for that historical
friendship a feeling of enmity and of hostility which all of
us, Iranians and Arabs alike, can ill afford to have in the
Gulf at this time.

In the view of my delegationit would be precipitate at this
stageto recommendany recourse under Article 36. I say
this becausemy delegation understandsthat some States
friendly to both the complainants and Iran have initiated
contacts, at government level, in an attempt to bring both
sidestogether so that the matter might be resolvedwithout
acrimony and with justice.
281. There is much to be said for the workings of quiet
diplomacy. This procedure might well bring about results
which public debatesat this stagewould fail to achieve.hly
delegationwould therefore suggestthat the Council defer
consideration of this matter to a later date, so thal
sufficient time is allowed for these efforts of quiet
diplomacy to work and to materialize. Naturally, should
these third-party efforts fail, the Council could, at the
request of the complainants, or by exercising its own
discretionshouldthe situation so demand,resumeconsideration of the complaint. The intervening period will enable
the Council to study carefully the facts of the situation as
presentedto usthis afternoon by the representatives.

275. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): My delegation has listened
carefully to the statements made in this Council this
afternoon on the complaint presented by Algeria, Iraq, the
Libyan Arab Republic and the People’s Democratic Republic of Yemen.
276. In matters affecting claims to or rights over a
territory my delegation is conscious that these are matters
that go directly to the heart of a people. History is replete
with conflict situations that developed because of unresolved territorial disputes. Many exist today, serving as a
barrier to permanent peace between neighbouring States,
Unresolved territorial disputes quite frequently give rise to
intractable issues in which only a combination of goodwih,
good faith and a disposition to justice can bring about a
settlement satisfactory to all concerned.

282. The PRESIDENT: Members of the Council have
heard the suggestionmadeby the representativeof Somalia
that the Council defer consideration of this matter to a
later date, so that sufficient time is allowed for thorough
third-party efforts to materialize.
283, As there are no objections; we will proceedaccordingly.

277. The parties in this dispute are all concerned with the
well-being of the people of the region, some directly, others

The meetingroseat 7.55 p.m.

24

MOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Nations
publications
the world.
Consul1
your
or Geneva.

may
bookslore

COMMENT

LES PUBLICATIONS

SE PROCURER

10s publications
des
diporitaircr
du monde
Naliona
Unisr,
Saclion

HAH

flOJlY’4HTb

II:I~JIIIJJIJ

be obtained
or write

from booksfores
and distributors
lor Uniled
Nations,
Sales Section,

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Nations
Unier
ronl
an venfe
dans
Icr librairicr
et les agencer
sntier.
Informez-vour
auprhr
de votrs
libroirie
ou odrersaz-vou,s
6:
dar venlsr,
New York ou GenCe.

H3AAHHR

OPTAHHSAIJHH

O~~~IJ~JJ:I~J~JJJ~ @k?),nJJcJJirJ,Js

06bEAHHEHHblX

hi(iiii

XOXJIO

JiyJJJJTb

HALlMA

R KlJniK(lJhlS

il~ClIT~‘TllLlS
110 JII’CS ~hlt!OJJJlS XJJpJl. hO#JTC
l’JlpaRJilJ
06 Jl:l~~JlWJX
mra:tnJJc
ii.111 JtJumi~c
JJo a;rpccg
: OyraJtnaaqnx
OGse~JrJu2JJJJtdr
upo~ait;c
JJ3,qaJJml,
ho-fkoyi
n.m XCeJJesa.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

Lar publicacionas
en todar
partss
Ventor,

Litho

in United

Nations,

Nuava

New York

throughout
New York

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

do tar Nocionar
Unidar
er16n
dot mundo.
Consulta
o su librero
York o Ginebra.

Price:$U.S.

II

uo

y cares distribuidorar
Unidar,
Sacci6n

do

UNIDAS

en vanla en librerlar
o dirljare
at Nacionar

1.50 (or equivnlent

~arasJJtJax

R HaJJJPY liJl!lXilOY
IIaJlJJti,
CCWJIH

in other

currencies)

82225-November

1973-2,050
