Resolutions adopted on reports of the Third Committee

41

--------------

"Whereas by Article 66 of the Charter, the Economic and Social Council may, with the approval of
the General Assembly, perform services at the request of Members of the United Nations and at the
request of specialized agencies,
"Whereas the General Assembly, after examining
the recommendations 1 of the Economic and Social
Council and the accompanying report 2 of services
rendered for the first three years of operation, approved the recommendations and placed the advisory social welfare services originally authorized
by resolution 58 (I) on a continuing basis, and requested that a review be made of the terms of that
resolution and appropriate recommendations made
with respect to desirable or necessary changes ( resolution 316 (IV)),
"Whereas the General Assembly recognizes that
the advisory social welfare services constitute a
practical operational programme of direct assistance
to governments and that the other activities of the
United Nations in the social field should be properly
correlated with these services in order to achieve
maximum effectiveness, to which end the Social
Commission has adjusted its long-range work programme,
"The General Assembly, therefore,
"A. Authorizes the Secretary-General:
"l. Subject to the directions of the Economic and
Social Council, to make provision for the undermentioned functions and services, such provision to
be made, where appropriate, with the co-operation
of the specialized agencies and in consultation with
non-governmental organizations having consultative status :
" (a) For a requisite number of social welfare experts to provide advisory services at the request of governments which show the need
for them, and to put into practice, over an
appropriate period, new methods m any
branch of social welfare ;
" ( b) For enabling suitably qualified social welfare
officials to observe, and familiarize themselves
with, the experience and practice of other
countries in any branch of social welfare ;
" ( c) For enabling suitably qualified persons who
cannot receive professional training in branches
of social welfare in their own country to receive appropriate training in foreign countries
having the necessary facilities ;
" ( d) For planning by appropriate methods projects
for experimenting in or demonstrating various phases of social welfare, organizing and
participating in these projects, providing the
necessary tools and equipment in connexion
therewith, and associating with the projects to
the extent practicable, the persons referred to
in paragraphs (b) and (c) above;
" ( e) For furnishing technical publications and
films;
1
2

See Economic and Social Council resolution 243 E (IX).
See documents A/C.3/521 and A/C.3/521/Corr.1.

"(f) For planning and conducting seminars;
"2. To include in the budgetary estimates of the
United Nations the smns necessary for carrying out
an effective operational programme based on the
provision of the above services;
"B. Instructs the Secretary-General to undertake
the performance of the functions listed in paragraph
A. l above, in agreement with the governments concerned, on the basis of requests i:eceived from g?vernments and in accordance with the followmg
policies;
"1. The kind of service to be rendered to each
country shall be decided by the government concerned;
"2. The furnishing of the experts and services
shall be undertaken by the Secretary-General,
with due regard to suggestions made by the requesting governments ; the Secretary-General shall,
normally, make application for experts to States
which are Members of the United Nations. The selection of grant-holders shall be made by the Secretarv-General on the basis of proposals received from
go.-:ernments, which shall indicate their preferences
with regard to host countries;
"3. The amount of services and the conditions
under which they shall be furnished to the various
governments shall be decided by the SecretaryGeneral with due regard to the greater needs of the
under-developed areas and in conformity with the
principle that each requesting government shall be
expected to assume responsibility, as far as possible,
for all or part of the expenses connected with the
services furnished to it, either by making a contribution in cash, or in the form of services for the purposes of the programme being carried out;
"C. Requests the Secretary-General to report
regularly to the Social Commission on the measures
which he takes in compliance with the terms of the
present resolution, and requests the Commission to
formulate recommendations from time to time concerning the continued action required to carry on the
essential advisory activities in the field of social
welfare."
314th plenary meeting,
1 December 1950.
419 (V). Report of the Economic and Social
Council (Chapter V, section VI) : 8 proposal
for a session in 1951 of the Suh-Commission
on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities

The General Assembly,
Considering the importance of the studies entrusted
to the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities, and having regard to
the fact that, in order to enable the Sub-Commission to
continue these studies, the term of office of its members
was extended by three years by a decision of the Commission on Human Rights dated 16 May 1949,•
3 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifth Session, Supplement No. 3, page 64.
4 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Fourth Year, Ninth Session, Supplement No. 10, paragraph 13.

42

General Assembly-Fifth Session

Considering, moreover, that the last meeting of the
Sub-Commission was held in January 1950,
Resolves to invite the Economic and Social Council
to reconsider its resolution 336 (XI) of 16 August
1950, with a view to including in its calendar of conferences for 1951 a session of the Suh-Commission
on Prevention of Discrimination am! Protection llf
Minorities.
314th plenary meeting,
1 December 1950.
420 (V). Report of the Economic and Social
Council (Chapter V, section VII, part 2) : 0
proposal for a session in 1951 of the SuhCommission on Freedom of Information and
of the Press
The General Assembly,
Considering it desirable that the Sub-Commission on
Freedom of Information and of the Press should continne the study of the agenda itemsG referred to it by the
Economic and Social Council for consideration,
Rcsoh•es to invite the Economic and Social Council
to reconsider its resolution 336 ( XI) of 16 August
1950, with a view to including in its calendar of conferences for 1951 a session of the Sub-Commission on
Freedom of Tnfo::mation and of the Press.
314th plenary meeting,
1 December 1950.
421 (V). Draft International Covenant on
Human Rights and measures of implementation: future work of the Commission on
Human Right~
The General Assemhly.
Appreciating the priority which, in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 217 (III), the Commission on Human Rights during its 1949 and 1950 sessions gave to the preparation of a draft International
Covenant on Human Rights and measures for its implementation,
Noting the decision' of the Economic and Social
Council at its eleventh session to transmit tht' draft
Covenant together with the relevant documentation
and records of the discussion in the Council to the
General Assembly at its fifth session for consideration
with a view to reaching policy decisions on the point,
listed in Economic and Social Council resolution 303 I

(XI),

Considering it essential that the Covenant should
include provisions rendering it obligatory for States to
promote the implementation of the human rights and
f~ndamental freedoms proclaimed in the Covenant and
to take the necessary steps, including legislation, to
guaran~ee to everyone the real opportunity of enjoying
those nghts and freedoms,
• G See O /ficial Records of the General Assembly, Fifth Session, Supplement No. 3, page 66.
6
See Economic and Social Council resolution 197 (VIII)
an7d document ~/1369-E/CN.4/Sub.l/98/Rev.1.
See Economic and Social Council resolution 303 I (XI).

Having considered the draft Covenant prepared by
the Commission on H urnan Rights, particularly with
reference to certain basic polici<.:s,

A
1. Commends the Commission on Human Rightc;
fnr the important work it has thus far accomplished:
.?. Calls U/'011 the Economic and Social Council to
rcqnc~t the Commi~~irin 011 Human Eights to contmue
to give priority in ih \\'urk to the completion of the
clrait Cun:nant and measures fur its implementation
in order that the Cencral Assembly may have before
it at its cixth session the r<"vis<'d draft of this
Cm-enant:
B

3. Considas.·
( a J That the list of rights in the first eighteen
:trticlcs of the draft Covenant dues not contai11 cert.,in oi the most elemeutary rights:
1. b \ That the present wording of some of the first
t·ightccu articll's of the draft Covenant should be improved in order to protect more effectively the rights
to \,·hich they refer;
(c) That in the drafting of the Covenant account
should be taken of the Purposes and Principles of
the Charter of the United ?\' ations and that these
Purposes and Principles should be consistently applied and assiduously protected;
4. Calls upon the Economic and Social Council to
rrquest the Co111missiu11 on Human Rights to take
into con~ideration in its \\'Ork of re\ is ion of the draft
Covenant:
l i) The views expressed during the discussion of
the draft Covcnant at the fifth session of the General
Assemhlv and at the ek:venth session of the Economic
and Social Council. including those relating to articles
13 and 14 of the draft Covenant and, with a view to
the addition in the draft Covenant of other rights,
those relating to the rights set forth by the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics in document A/C.3/L.96
and Yugoslavia in document A/C.3/L.92;
(ii) The view, expressed during the discussion ef
the draft Covenant at the fifth session of the General
Assem hly and at the eleventh session of the Economic and Social Council, that it is desirable to define
the rights set forth in the Covenant and the limitations thereto with the greatt:'st possible precision;
C

5. Calls upon the Economic and Social Council to
request the Commission on Human Rights to study
a federal State article and to prepare, for the consideration of the General Assembly at its sixth session, recommendations which will have as their purpose the securing of the maximum extension of the
Covenant to the constituent units of federal States,
and the meeting of the constitutional problems of
federal States ;
