S/2017/1008

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
28 November 2017
Original: English

Strategic review of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force
in Cyprus
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2369
(2017), in which the Council requested a strategic review of the United Nations
Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP) focused on findings and recommendations
for how UNFICYP should be optimally configured to implement its existing mandate,
based exclusively on a rigorous evidence-based assessment of the impact of
UNFICYP activities.
2.
In line with the request of the Security Council, the review focused on an
assessment of the key functions, tasks, and activities of UNFICYP, and their
respective impact. At the same time, the review assessed the Force’s existing capacity
and capabilities in an effort to ensure that it would be optimally configured to fulfil
its mandated tasks.

II. Methodology
3.
The strategic review was led by an external expert, Wolfgang Weisbrod -Weber,
former Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Western Sahara.
Mr. Weisbrod-Weber was supported by a review team consisting of representatives
from the Departments of Peacekeeping Operations, Field Support, Political Affairs
and Safety and Security of the Secretariat, as well as staff of UNFICYP.
4.
The UNFICYP review process was conducted in three stages. First,
consultations were undertaken, at both Headquarters and UNFICYP, with relevant
stakeholders, including representatives of the Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot
communities and of the Member States concerned, on the proposed objectives,
methodology and timeline of the strategic review. In parallel, the review team, with
support from UNFICYP, conducted a desk review of relevant background documents
aimed at identifying the Force’s key functions, tasks and activities, and the capacities
and capabilities available for their implementation.
5.
During the second stage, a team led by Mr. Weisbrod-Weber travelled to Cyprus
from 2 to 7 November 2017 to assess the impact of the activities performed by
UNFICYP and develop recommendations on how the Force could be reconfigured in

17-21045 (E)

041217

*1721045*

S/2017/1008

order to implement its mandated tasks more effectively and efficiently. To ensure a
rigorous evidence-based assessment, the review team conducted extensive
consultations with key interlocutors, including relevant authorities on both sides of
the island, members of UNFICYP, the good offices mission of the Secretary -General
and the United Nations country team in Cyprus, as well as the Commanders of the
National Guard and the Turkish Cypriot security forces. Consultations were also
conducted with members of the diplomatic community and civil society, and included
a round-table discussion with women from across the island. The team also conducted
field visits to all three sectors of the Force’s area of opera tions. During the third and
final stage, the report of the review team was assessed and evaluated by members of
the Departments of Peacekeeping Operations, Field Services, Political Affairs and
Safety and Security, who supplemented it with their comments a nd observations.

III. Background
6.
UNFICYP was established by Security Council resolution 186 (1964), with a
mandate to prevent a recurrence of fighting and, as necessary, to contribute to the
maintenance and restoration of law and order and a return to normal conditions. While
the mandate of the Force remains the same, its responsibilities evolved, following the
hostilities of 1974, to include supervising the ceasefire lines, maintaining a buffer
zone and facilitating intercommunal contacts.
7.
The Security Council, in its resolution 1568 (2004), approved the amended
concept of operations and force level of UNFICYP outlined in the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations operation in Cyprus dated 24 September
2004 (S/2004/756). That led to an authorized strength of 860 troops, including up to
40 military observers and liaison officers, and 69 police officers. Subsequently, the
Security Council, in its resolution 2263 (2016), decided to increase the Force’s force
level from 860 to 888. The increase was authorized in response to a recommendatio n
in the report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations operation in Cyprus dated
6 January 2016 (S/2016/11) that was based on enhanced planning efforts in UNFICYP
in anticipation of a possible settlement agreement and the opening of two new
crossing points. In addition to its military and police components, UNFICYP
comprises a civil affairs component as well as mission support elements.
Current situation
8.
During its visit to Cyprus, the review team found that the situation in the
UNFICYP area of operations remains calm. The number and type of military incidents
have been relatively constant over the past 10 years, and no violent military incident
has been reported since 1996. Nevertheless, challenges remain that have the potential
to escalate tensions, negatively affect a resumption of the talks and contribute to a
further deterioration in the relationship between the sides. Among those challenges is
the continued positioning of the opposing forces (i.e., the Greek Cypriot National
Guard and the Turkish forces and Turkish Cypriot security forces) along respective
ceasefire lines, in some cases divided by only a few metres.
9.
Between 1 January and 31 October 2017, 167 military violations of the status
quo were recorded in the buffer zone, as were another 147 violations of the maritime
security line, usually in the form of overmanning, construction violations involving
the building or improving of positions along the ceasefire lines and the forward
movement of troops into the buffer zone. That represents an increase in violations,
including those of the maritime security line, of 5 per cent compared with 2016, and
a decrease of 5 per cent compared with 2007, reflecting a relatively constant level and
severity of military incidents. Despite the relative calm, more than a thousand armed

2/14

17-21045

S/2017/1008

soldiers deployed along the ceasefire lines on either side of the buffer zone face each
other every day, and thousands more are scattered across the island. Cases of
ill-discipline, consisting mostly of provocations along the ceasefire lines, occur
frequently, as do occasional military training exercises close to the ceasefire lines,
including the movement of armoured vehicles and heavy weapons. There has also
been no genuine effort by the sides to resolve the long-standing military violations as
described in my regular reports on UNFICYP.
10. That being said, the review team found that tensions in the buffer zone mainly
relate to civilian activity. UNFICYP now records far higher numbers of civilian
incidents than military violations: on average, 3,180 civilian incidents each year have
been recorded in the past decade, representing 85 per cent of all unauthorized
activities recorded by UNFICYP. Since the demining of the buffer z one and the
opening of crossings between the northern and southern parts of the island in 2003,
large numbers of Cypriots have sought to use land in the buffer zone for farming or
other purposes. UNFICYP estimates that a high proportion of arable land in t he buffer
zone is currently cultivated by members of both communities, and about 20 per cent
of that land is being farmed without the authorization of their owners. Even land
closest to the positions of the Turkish forces, where, for security reasons, UNFI CYP
has consistently discouraged civilian activities, is now farmed.
11. As Cypriots seek to protect their rights to farm their land in the buffer zone,
tensions often arise between communities, between civilian authorities and
potentially with the opposing forces. For example, UNFICYP has received
43 applications to farm 117 plots of land in the Potamia and Pyroi area that are already
being farmed by others. A similar situation emerged in Katokopia, where Greek
Cypriots filed applications for permits to farm their land within 200 metres of the
Turkish forces ceasefire line.
12. As the only bicommunal village in the buffer zone, Pyla creates numerous
opportunities for tension, ranging from unauthorized casinos to drug trafficking and
other serious crimes. The review team found that while the Turkish Cypriot police
deal with criminal activities involving Turkish Cypriots and the Cyprus police deal
with those involving Greek Cypriots, most criminal activities and other incidents and
tensions are intercommunal, requiring the intervention and support of UNFICYP
police to resolve any ensuing conflicts.
13. Civilian demonstrations, though mostly peaceful, may nevertheless turn violent,
including when activists attempt to provoke reactions from the other side. Mos t
recently, in July 2017, nationalist demonstrators from both sides faced each other at
the Ledra Street crossing point in Nicosia, with those in the south burning flags,
throwing projectiles and beginning to dismantle the fences that restrict access to th e
buffer zone. Timely liaison with the Force and the visible presence of UNFICYP
military forces ensured that the situation was brought under control by the Cyprus
police.
14. With regard to the negotiations towards a settlement, the two sides remain in a
“period of reflection”. While the review team focused on its assigned task, that is, the
review of UNFICYP, interlocutors on both sides of the island took the opportunity to
note that talks could resume at an appropriate time after the upcoming 2018 elect ions
and under appropriate circumstances. The current status of the talks inevitably creates
opportunities for the hardening of positions and mistrust, making it all the more
important for UNFICYP to maintain stability and help create conditions conducive to
a political settlement.

17-21045

3/14

S/2017/1008

IV. Activities of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force
in Cyprus
15. Against that backdrop, the UNFICYP civilian, military and police components
undertake various activities to execute its mandate: to prevent a recurrence of fighting
and contribute to maintaining law and order in the buffer zone and a return to normal
conditions. Those activities revolve around the concepts of deterrence, prevention and
the resolution of conflicts through close liaison and direct engagement. While
deterrence and prevention fall mainly, but not exclusively, within the remit of the
UNFICYP military component, the resolution of conflicts through liaison and
engagement is carried out by all components. In fact, liaison by all components and
at all levels has become the primary tool for UNFICYP to resolve potentially
confrontational situations and defuse tensions.
16. In view of the above, the review team found that, in order to increase its
effectiveness, the capacity of UNFICYP for liaison and engagement should be
strengthened without, for the time being, weakening its preventive and deterrent
capability. That change in focus could be achieved by redirecting resources within the
Force and by eliminating some redundancies and military support functions, which at
the same time could result in some gains in efficiency.
Civilian component
17. The Office of my Special Representative and Head of UNFICYP provides
oversight and coordination of the activities of all mission components, ensuring an
integrated approach to all aspects of the Force’s work. The Office also leads the
Force’s planning efforts. During the past two years, in coordination with the
Departments of Peacekeeping Operations, Field Services and Political Affairs, it
developed comprehensive plans for United Nations support to the implementation of
a settlement in Cyprus.
18. With support from the Senior Adviser and the single UNFICYP Political Affairs
Officer, my Special Representative engages regularly with both sides to address issues
related to UNFICYP that have escalated to the leadership level. The Senior Adviser
and the civil affairs component facilitate the work of a number of technical
committees, which are bicommunal mechanisms established by the two sides in the
negotiations to address issues affecting the daily lives of Cypriots from both
communities. Specifically, facilitation is provided to the work of the technical
committees with regard to crossings, cultural heritage, the environment, health and
humanitarian matters as well as, with the support of UNFICYP police, the Technical
Committee on Crime and Criminal Matters (see para. 47). With the support of the
UNFICYP military component, facilitation is also provided to the work of the
Technical Committee on Crisis Management, and the Force’s support component
assists the work of the Technical Committee on Broadcasting. The tech nical
committees are important in their own right, but are also a significant example of how
the two sides, with support from UNFICYP, can find ways to come together directly
to address issues of mutual concern.
19. The review team found that the political liaison function of UNFICYP has
become increasingly important in recent years, including as a result of the increased
civilian activity in the buffer zone. However, UNFICYP has no dedicated political
office and relies, to a great extent, on the Office of my Special Adviser on Cyprus for
its political analysis. In order to improve mutual cooperation between the two entities,
the review team recommends that a mechanism be developed that includes more
regular and structured interaction, meetings and information-sharing. That would also
ensure a common approach by UNFICYP and the Office of my Special Adviser in
4/14

17-21045

S/2017/1008

their support to some of the technical committees, thereby rendering such support
more effective.
Civil affairs
20. The UNFICYP civil affairs component supports the implementation of the
Force’s mandate to contribute to a return to normal conditions, working in close
cooperation with the Force’s military and police components. In that respect, the
activities of the component are organized around three interrelated areas of work: the
management of civilian activities in the buffer zone, the provision of support to
intercommunal trust-building initiatives and the facilitation of the delivery of
humanitarian aid to the Greek Cypriot and Maronite communit ies living in the north
and support to Turkish Cypriots living in the south.
21. In 2014, to manage civilian activities in the buffer zone, UNFICYP established
an integrated office in each sector, known as a Sector Civilian Activity Integrated
Office, coordinated by one national Civil Affairs Officer and including two police and
two military personnel. The offices engage not only with local communities and
authorities, law enforcement agencies and the opposing forces, but also with
individual Cypriots, such as farmers and landowners, to ensure that civilian activities
in the buffer zone do not disrupt stability and security. An important factor in those
efforts is a system of permits that dates back to the 1970s. Under that system, farmers
receive permits from UNFICYP authorizing the use of land in the buffer zone
whenever it does not interfere with security or law and order concerns. UNFICYP
military and police patrols monitor compliance with the permit system.
22. The review team found that the UNFICYP permit system is labour-intensive and
suffers from various shortcomings, including limited support from the authorities.
UNFICYP does not have access to cadastral records in a form that allows it to confirm
title deeds presented by individuals applying for permits, and lacks the means to
enforce compliance without the intervention of the relevant local law enforcement
agencies. In the absence of formal endorsement by the authorities, many in the buffer
zone do not feel compelled to comply with UNFICYP requirements. UNFICYP
estimated that the level of compliance at present is around 40 per cent of all civilian
activities in the buffer zone. During the visit of the review team, UNFICYP received
assurances, at the highest political level of the Government of Cypru s, that its
authority to regulate civilian activities in the buffer zone is recognized. The officials
also committed to support the Force’s efforts to ensure that the permit system works
effectively and that the authority of UNFICYP to manage civilian acti vity in the buffer
zone is respected.
23. The review team took note that the considerable increase in civilian activity in
the buffer zone has led to a rise in civilian disputes that have the potential to cause
tensions. As a result, the review team found that UNFICYP plays an increasingly
important role, liaising and engaging with local counterparts in an effort to resolve
actual and emerging conflicts. To enable the Force to perform that role more
effectively, the review team recommends that each Sector Civilian Activity Integrated
Office be headed by one international Civil Affairs Officer, to be redeployed from
UNFICYP headquarters. That would raise the profile of the integrated offices,
strengthen their capacity in the sectors to mediate civilian dispu tes through
community engagement and provide continuity with regard to engagement, including
better outreach to women in the communities, which is critical to gaining the trust of
interlocutors.
24. The UNFICYP civil affairs component also promotes interco mmunal initiatives,
working as a “connector and convener” among civil society actors and local
community representatives. In addition, it supports the efforts of the diplomatic
17-21045

5/14

S/2017/1008

community, including the Religious Track of the Cyprus Peace Process, under the
auspices of the Embassy of Sweden, and the Embassy of Slovakia, which brings
together political parties for regular discussions. Recognizing that for several decades
intercommunal initiatives were largely focused on a small group of activists in
Nicosia, the civil affairs component has sought to strengthen cooperation between
actors in Nicosia and other areas such as Limassol, Kyrenia, Famagusta and
Deryneia/Derynia. The proposed redeployment of one international civilian staff
member to each sector, as described above, would also help to strengthen ongoing
efforts to promote intercommunal initiatives, including for women, beyond Nicosia.
25. The review team found that, as at the date of reporting, interactions between the
two communities remain scarce: while 3 million people crossed the green line in
2006, less than half that number crossed in 2016, with the majority of the crossings
likely attributable to Turkish Cypriots living in the north. Civil society actors involved
in promoting a culture of peace in Cyprus enjoy little political space or institutional
support. Against that backdrop, most interlocutors met by the review team stressed
that the modest role played by UNFICYP in support of intercommunal trust - and
confidence-building has a significant impact. The review team therefore recommends
that UNFICYP continue to facilitate intercommunal events, including small
gatherings to promote contact between Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot
organizations, and assist with larger cultural events where communi ties can mix
freely. In their interaction with the review team, women’s organizations from both
sides called for, in particular, specific events and “safe spaces” to meet as part of
community-building.
26. The civil affairs component also assists Greek Cypriots with their appeals to the
Turkish Cypriot authorities to attend services at religious sites in the north, and
facilitates crossings of Turkish Cypriots for pilgrimages and commemorations in the
south. In 2016, the Force received 139 such requests for services in the north, of
which 84 were approved; it also facilitated three major pilgrimages from the north to
the Hala Sultan Tekke mosque in the south. The pattern of approvals by the Turkish
Cypriot authorities has been uneven, and many of the successful attempts to gain
permission involved repeated UNFICYP intervention. While freedom of worship is
the primary impact of the Force’s facilitation of requests for religious services, Greek
Cypriot services that are held in villages with Turkish Cypriot residents also provide
an opportunity for interaction between both communities.
27. Pursuant to the Third Vienna Agreement of August 1975 between the leaders of
the two communities at the time, the UNFICYP civil affairs component, with support
from UNFICYP police, has facilitated deliveries of humanitarian supplies and
conducted visits to Greek Cypriots and Maronites living in the north, and visited
Turkish Cypriots in the south. Further to the decision by the Turkish Cypriot
authorities to impose customs duties on non-medical items in the humanitarian
delivery package, implemented as at 1 October 2017, UNFICYP no longer delivers
food and non-food items, although it continues to deliver medical supplies and
conduct home visits. In the coming period, UNFICYP will continue to work with
communities and authorities to ensure that sustainable ways are found to provide for
the social welfare, health and educational needs of Greek Cypriots and Maronites
living in the north, and Turkish Cypriots in the south.
28. As at 9 November 2017, the gender balance in the international civilian
component of UNFICYP was 5 men (28 per cent) and 13 women (72 per cent) in the
substantive units, and 13 men (76 per cent) and 4 women (24 per cent) in the support
and security functions. There are therefore 35 international staff in UNFICYP, of
which 17 are women (48 per cent), and 115 national staff, of which 45 are women
(39 per cent).

6/14

17-21045

S/2017/1008

Military component
29. The UNFICYP military component, commanded by a Force Commander at the
rank of Major General, comprises 888 troops, including a Force headquarters of
60 multinational staff officers and soldiers; three sectors, each commanded by a
Lieutenant Colonel; and Force troops consisting of a Mobile Force Reserve, a military
police unit, engineers and a military aviation unit. The Force maintains 5 camps, 10
permanent observation posts and 3 patrol bases.
30. Of the authorized military strength of 888 personnel, 28 positions were
established under Security Council resolution 2263 (2016) to support military
planning efforts in anticipation of a possible settlement. With planning for a
settlement no longer requiring extensive Force resources, the review team
recommends that 20 of those positions be repatriated. The remaining eight positions
would need to be retained for monitoring requirements at the Deryneia/Derynia and
Lefka-Aplici/Lefke-Aplıç crossing points, which are expected to be opened in the
coming months.
31. The UNFICYP military component employs a combination of static observation
posts and mobile patrols. Mobile patrols along the 180 -kilometre buffer zone are
conducted on foot, in vehicles and by helicopter, and are coordinated and sup ported
by the Force headquarters and troops. The review team found that the daily patrols
conducted by the Force, including jointly with UNFICYP police, have a significant
preventive effect. The review team therefore recommends that patrolling should
continue in all sectors at current levels. At the same time, by eliminating some
redundancies and optimizing joint patrolling by the UNFICYP military and police
components, 25 positions from the Force across the three sectors can be saved, 10 of
which could be used to strengthen the military observation and liaison structure (see
para. 39), and the other 15 repatriated. The proposed limited reduction does not affect
the current operational tempo, nor the flexibility to constitute a modest sector -level
reserve force if required.
32. In 2008, to support its patrolling, UNFICYP installed six closed -circuit
television cameras in the Nicosia area of the buffer zone, becoming the first United
Nations peacekeeping operation to use 24-hour camera surveillance to monitor a
conflict area. The cameras serve as an important preventive and observation tool,
including for collecting and preserving evidence. Therefore, the review team
recommends that, with due consideration to local sensitivities and regulations,
UNFICYP take a phased, low-profile, low-cost and high-impact approach to adopting
new technologies, with the first phases dedicated to improving and augmenting the
current system in the Nicosia area of the buffer zone, including night -vision
capabilities. The Force should then explore ways to leverage technology to increase
its effectiveness in monitoring other sensitive areas of the buffer zone, focusing on
emerging technologies such as movement sensors and possibly micro -unmanned
aerial systems.
33. The UNFICYP Mobile Force Reserve is an important deterrent, and in fact the
only one that the Force has at its disposal, including for deployment during large scale civilian activities, such as demonstrations in or near the buffer zone. It
comprises a headquarters element, three platoons and a protected mobility element of
nine armoured personnel vehicles. The platoons are trained and have a military public
order management capability to use within the buffer zone, as determined by the Force
Commander. The Reserve maintains one platoon to move on short notice at all times
and has the capacity to rapidly deploy a second platoon. The third platoon carries out
security duties at the United Nations Protected Area and fulfils other security
requirements as required. At present the three platoons rotate between the Reserve
and security functions.
17-21045

7/14

S/2017/1008

34. In order to enhance effectiveness, the review team recommends that the Mobile
Force Reserve be reconfigured as two dedicated and fully resourced platoons focused
solely on the mobile reserve functions, together with the required small headquarters
and support element. It is recommended that the newly reconfigured Reserve be
provided by a single troop-contributing country to ensure consistent training and
procedures as well as effective command and control. The third platoon should be
specifically dedicated to conducting security tasks in the United Nations Protected
Area. The review team is of the opinion that this solution provides an enhanced and
cost-effective security solution compared to any civilian contract option.
35. The complex nature of the environment throughout the buffer zone, especially
within the fragile urban environment of Nicosia, demands a mobility solution for the
Mobile Force Reserve that provides a balance between protection and agility. The
review team found that the present armoured personnel carriers are no longer suitable;
they have not been used in operations for many years. A more appropriate and
operationally effective mobility solution would be a mixed fleet of troop-carrying
trucks and armoured vehicles that could be used to match the circumstances
associated with any deployment. The review team therefore recommends that the nine
armoured personnel carriers and associated weaponry be repatriated, together wit h
the 11 military personnel presently used to man them. Instead, a mixed fleet of troop carrying trucks and armoured vehicles, as described above, should be established to
support the requirements of the Reserve. In that way, the effectiveness of the Reser ve
would be increased while at the same time efficiencies could be achieved.
36. The review team found that the aviation capability in UNFICYP provides an
important capability that ensures the Force’s ability to perform mandated tasks.
Specifically, the UNFICYP aviation unit enables the Force to identify violations by
air in both sensitive areas and areas that are inaccessible owing to the terrain. It
therefore enhances the preventive function of UNFICYP patrols. The aviation unit
also provides a limited but critical capacity for air-based casualty evacuation as well
as a way to deploy force elements rapidly across the buffer zone. In that way, the
deterrent function of UNFICYP is strengthened. In addition, the aviation unit serves
to reaffirm the presence of UNFICYP within the buffer zone. The review team
therefore recommends that the aviation unit be retained.
37. The UNFICYP military component also includes a military observer and liaison
structure of 36 officers dedicated to conducting continual liaison with military
counterparts on both sides of the island. That includes two Majors, who serve as
dedicated liaison officers with the headquarters of the respective opposing forces.
Each sector also has a dedicated liaison structure for engagement at the secto r level.
At the command level, the Force Commander liaises with the Commanders of the
opposing forces and the UNFICYP Chief of Staff with his respective counterparts in
the opposing forces.
38. The review team found that the UNFICYP military observer and liaison
structure plays a critical role in de-escalating incidents that occur along the buffer
zone, through effective liaison with the opposing forces and community engagement
within each Sector Civilian Activity Integrated Office. The review team therefo re
recommends that the strength of the military observer and liaison group be increased
to 46 unarmed officers to enhance interaction and liaison with counterparts in the
opposing forces as well as community engagement within the UNFICYP integrated
offices structure.
39. The proposed increase would include an additional Deputy Chief of Staff/Chief
Liaison Officer position at Force headquarters to ensure better command and control
arrangements for the military observer and liaison group. The Deputy Chief of
Staff/Chief Liaison Officer, to be deployed for two years to ensure continuity, would
8/14

17-21045

S/2017/1008

oversee the enhanced military observer and liaison structure at the sector level, which
would be augmented by three additional officers per sector, each responsible for
liaison with the National Guard, the Turkish forces/Turkish Cypriot security forces
and within each sector-level integrated office, respectively. To ensure continuity in
the engagement with their counterparts, those additional nine positions would have a
tour of duty of at least 12 months, unlike the usual 6 -month rotation period of some
of the contingents in the sectors. The proposed increase in the strength of the military
observer and liaison group would be achieved from within existing resources, using
posts freed up by the limited reconfiguration of the military component as described
in paragraph 31. It would therefore increase effectiveness without a loss in efficiency.
40. The Ledra Palace Hotel, located in sector 2 near the Green Line in Nicosia, is
utilized as the sector 2 headquarters and as operational centres for the UNFICYP civil
affairs and police components. In addition, the hotel presently serves as
accommodation for 195 UNFICYP military personnel. Using the upper floor of that
ageing building has been deemed unsafe owing to fire hazards, and would require
major renovation of its core infrastructure. Responsibility for that significant
investment rests with the host nation under the terms of the status -of-forces
agreement, but little progress has been made to date. It has therefore become
imperative to relocate the troops, while continuing daily operations from the ground
floor of the hotel. The ground floor would also continue to be used for intercommunal
events and other functions.
41. The review team identified the United Nations Protected Area as the preferred
site for the relocation of the accommodation for the military personnel from the Ledra
Palace Hotel. Co-location with other UNFICYP personnel in the United Nations
Protected Area offers opportunities to repatriate 22 military support personnel. In
addition, the review team identified, in sector 1 and at four camp locations, 18 military
support positions that can be repatriated.
42. The UNFICYP military component also contributes to demining activities by
assisting with the coordination and prioritization of demining tasks and liaising with
the opposing forces on demining issues. The review team found, however, that
conditions for the demining of the four remaining minefields in the buff er zone are
not currently in place. It therefore recommends that, within UNFICYP, only the
personnel of the United Nations Mine Action Service continue to focus on mine
action, in order to preserve the gains made to date and identify opportunities for futu re
engagement.
43. The UNFICYP military component currently has a women’s participation rate
of approximately 6 per cent. The review team recommends that efforts be undertaken
vis-à-vis troop-contributing countries to achieve a rate of 15 per cent particip ation of
women in the military component of UNFICYP within the next 18 months. An
increase in uniformed women would, inter alia, assist in the Force’s community
engagement with local women.
Police component
44. The UNFICYP police component is headed by a Senior Police Adviser and
comprises 69 police officers and 1 civilian support staff member. Ten UNFICYP
police officers are currently deployed at Force headquarters; the remaining 59 are
deployed at eight locations in the buffer zone. Eighteen police offi cers are deployed
in sector 1, 15 in sector 2 and 26 in sector 4. That includes between five and seven
officers with command responsibilities in each sector. The UNFICYP police
component has the highest ratio of women police officers in any United Nations
peacekeeping operation: 29, or 42 per cent, of the 69 police officers are women,
including the Senior Police Adviser.
17-21045

9/14

S/2017/1008

45. UNFICYP police conduct daily patrols and hold meetings with local community
leaders and representatives in order to contribute to the maintenance of law and order
in the buffer zone. On average, UNFICYP police conduct more than 8,000 patrols a
year, including joint patrols with the military in order to monitor the situation and
mediate incidents that have the potential to raise tensions between the opposing forces,
between civilians and between the military and civilians. In addition, three UNFICYP
police officers are assigned to the Civilian Activity Integrated Office at Force
headquarters, and two are assigned to each of the three Sect or Civilian Activity
Integrated Offices. As part of that integrated structure, UNFICYP police officers
engage primarily with the police authorities on both sides of the island to help regulate
civilian activities in the buffer zone and resolve disputes. Over the past six years,
UNFICYP police have handled an average of 3,000 incidents in the buffer zone a year,
the majority of which have occurred in sectors 1 and 4. The review team recommends
that additional UNFICYP police officers be deployed to the sector s for patrolling and
liaison by reducing police personnel at both Force and sector headquarters. Among the
additional police officers to be deployed to the sectors, two should be assigned to each
Sector Civilian Activity Integrated Office. The second of those officers could also,
time permitting, be available to conduct joint patrols with the military in order to
maximize impact within the limited resources available, thereby increasing the
effectiveness and impact of UNFICYP activities in the sectors.
46. In Pyla, the only bicommunal village in the buffer zone, UNFICYP police
directly support the maintenance of law and order by the two sides. While Cyprus
police and Turkish Cypriot police are allowed in the village, they are not authorized
to carry weapons or wear their uniforms, their vehicles are required to be unmarked
and they are not permitted to establish a permanent police station in the village. In
view of those restrictions, UNFICYP police, who operate the only police station in
the village, escort and facilitate investigations and operations by the Cyprus police
and Turkish Cypriot police, who handle cases related to the Greek Cypriot and the
Turkish Cypriot communities in Pyla, respectively. Since Pyla has reportedly seen a
significant rise in criminal activity over the past years, UNFICYP police address an
increasing number of issues affecting both communities, in consultation with the two
mukhtars of Pyla who represent the two communities. The review team found that the
liaison role of UNFICYP police vis-à-vis the Cyprus police and Turkish Cypriot
police in Pyla is essential, owing to the absence of direct contact between them. The
presence of UNFICYP police in Pyla, together with UNFICYP military and civil
affairs officers, has significantly contributed to reducing tensions and resolving
disputes on various issues.
47. UNFICYP police also provide impartial liaison between the Cyprus police and
the Turkish Cypriot police in order to assist in the development of anti -crime
strategies and to facilitate the investigation of crimes and criminal matters inside and
across the buffer zone. In that regard, UNFICYP continues to facilitate the work of
the Joint Communications Room, which allows for information to be shared on
crimes, criminal matters and humanitarian cases, in parallel with its parent body, the
Technical Committee on Crime and Criminal Matters. The Joint Communications
Room consists of two members from each side who work in the same office, located
in the buffer zone near the Ayios Dometios/Metehan crossing point in Nicosia, every
day. The review team found that the Joint Communications Room, which is supported
by two UNFICYP police officers, is a unique example of cooperation between the
two sides, who, within that framework, exchange informat ion covering a wide range
of criminal matters. The rapid increase in the number of exchanges of information
and requests handled by the Joint Communications Room since its establishment
(from 88 in 2009 to 265 as at the time of reporting), and the fact tha t close to 50 per
cent of the requests originate from each side, suggest that bicommunal structures have

10/14

17-21045

S/2017/1008

the potential to work effectively and to flourish, with support from UNFICYP and the
goodwill of the sides.
Force coordination and support
48. Structured and regular coordination of the activities of UNFICYP across all
components presently takes place only within the Sector Civilian Activity Integrated
Offices and at Force headquarters. The flow of information within the components
comes together in a formal way only at the level of my Special Representative. The
review team found that this was already insufficient and would become even more so
if and when the new structure, providing for enhanced liaison across all components
and at all levels, was implemented. The review team, therefore, recommends the
establishment of a Joint Operations Centre and a Joint Mission Analysis Centre, as is
the case in other missions. As in other multicomponent missions, the Joint Operations
Centre would provide integrated situational awareness and facilitate operational
activities undertaken by individual mission components. The Joint Mission Analysis
Centre would provide integrated analysis based, inter alia, on information collected
from all components, including through standard and ad hoc strategic reports. The
Joint Operations Centre would ensure effective information-sharing among all
mission components and other relevant stakeholders, while the Joint Mission Analysis
Centre would provide multisource integrated analysis and predictive assessments for
the benefit of the Force’s senior management. The review team finds that a Joint
Operations Centre and a Joint Mission Analysis Centre would be indispensable in
view of the proposed new emphasis on liaison and community e ngagement, and
would, to some extent, make up for the lack of a full-fledged political office in
UNFICYP. The review team is of the opinion that UNFICYP should be able to create
at least a Joint Operations Centre-like structure from existing resources, but sees a
need for an additional senior civilian staff member to head the Joint Mission Analysis
Centre.
49. Owing to its lengthy existence and largely predictable operational tempo and
workload, the Force has been subjected to consistent budget and staffing reductions
over recent years, which have mainly affected its support component. To a large
extent, the Force has been able to absorb those reductions, but its ability to react to
unforeseen requirements or unprogrammed activities, including full implement ation
of major change initiatives, has been seriously curtailed. In addition, risks have been
identified in relation to resource management and compliance owing to limited
international support staff. Reductions in uniformed personnel should therefore not
be linked directly to commensurate reductions in operational and staffing
requirements, particularly since the proposed reductions to the strength of the Force
mostly affect military support personnel.

V. Observations and recommendations
50. The review team, on the basis of the documentation provided and the evidence
obtained during the review process, including through exchanges with UNFICYP
staff as well as with relevant stakeholders, found that UNFICYP operates in an
environment characterized by constant but contained military incidents along the
ceasefire lines, combined with a vastly increased level of civilian activity in the buffer
zone.
51. Most interlocutors with whom the review team engaged attributed the
containment of military incidents to the preventive and deterrent role of UNFICYP.
The ability of UNFICYP to resolve any such incidents quickly and prevent them from
escalating was especially valued, as the two sides have no direct contact with each

17-21045

11/14

S/2017/1008

other and rely on the Force to clear up misunderstandings and pass on messages. I
therefore concur with the recommendation of the review team that the preventive and
deterrent role of UNFICYP should be maintained for the time being. While the actual
impact of such a role is very difficult to ascertain, the risk associated with any drastic
reduction of the Force is not justified under the present circumstances. That being
said, I note that the review team has identified an opportunity for a limited reduction
in the military strength of the Force, mainly with respect to the military support
elements. In line with the findings of the review team as detailed in the present report,
I therefore recommend that the actual military strength of UNFICYP be reduced to
802 troops. That need not be reflected in a reduction of the authorized strength; in
fact, as the additional troops authorized by the Security Council in its resolution 2263
(2016) would be repatriated or redeployed within UNFICYP, if the authorized
strength were to remain at 860, it would allow some flexibility to increase deployment
should the need arise, for example in support of eventually resumed settlement talks.
52. The vastly increased level of civilian activity in the buffer zone has al ready led
to an increase in situations with potentially serious security implications, for example
when Cypriots farm land in the buffer zone that they do not own or rent from others,
especially if the actual owners are from the other community, or when fa rming takes
place too close to the ceasefire line of the Turkish forces. The work of UNFICYP to
resolve such situations is valuable and de facto recognized as such by the two sides,
but hindered by challenges to the Force’s authority in the buffer zone.
53. The main method for UNFICYP to resolve incidents, whether military or
civilian, and situations with a potential to become incidents, is through liaison and
early engagement with the two sides. Since incidents in the buffer zone have increased
and are likely to continue to do so in the future, I support the review team’s
recommendation that the UNFICYP capability for liaison and engagement be
strengthened across all components to maintain stability and calm, thereby
contributing effectively to conditions conducive to a resumption of settlement talks.
Liaison is already viewed by UNFICYP as a cross-component task, as it is carried out
by the civilian, police and military components of the Force. I concur with the review
team that liaison and engagement could be strengthened quantitatively by devoting
more human resources to that task, and qualitatively by redeploying resources from
Force headquarters to the sectors, tightening oversight and better coordinating the
efforts of the different components.
54. Specifically, accomplishing those recommendations would entail: transferring
international Civil Affairs Officers to the sectors to head the existing Sector Civilian
Activity Integrated Offices and increase its police and military staffing; making more
UNFICYP police officers available for patrolling, liaison and engagement tasks in the
sectors by thinning out headquarters staffing, while preserving intact the present
valuable UNFICYP police engagement in the Joint Communications Room and in
Pyla; and expanding the existing military observer and liaison structure and providing
it with greater oversight and continuity. I also concur with the review team that the
quantitatively and qualitatively strengthened liaison and engagement capability of
UNFICYP, which involves all mission components at the headquarters and Sector
level, needs to be coordinated by a single integrated structure. I therefore support the
recommendation to establish a Joint Operations Centre and a Joint Mission Analysis
Centre in UNFICYP, and one additional senior civilian staff post for a Joint Mission
Analysis Centre, which would also help address the gap in political analysis resulting
from the absence of a political office in the Force.
55. UNFICYP also supports some, rather modest, bicommunal activities. That is
done, again, mainly by engaging with civil society actors, helping them to bring
members of the two communities together. The Force’s efforts to connect civil society
groups from the two communities are highly appreciated by the non -governmental
12/14

17-21045

S/2017/1008

organizations with which the review team interacted, including those focusing on
women’s issues, and are supported by the two sides. I welcome the intention of
UNFICYP to expand those efforts from Nicosia into other areas, which would be
aided by the transfer of international Civil Affairs Officers from Force headquarters
to the sectors.
56. An expansion of the observation, liaison and engagement activities of
UNFICYP requires for its success the cooperation of the two sides. In its exchanges
with the authorities, the review team found that the political will for that cooperation
exists on both sides, which is highly appreciated. In the long run, I hope that the two
sides will come together to resolve some of their differences directly; a good example
of that exists already in the Joint Communications Room, which brings police officers
and experts from the two sides directly together, under UNFICYP auspices, to work
on criminal matters.
57. In conclusion, I recommend maintaining the preventive and deterrence
capabilities of UNFICYP, with minor reductions, while at the same time expanding
its observation, liaison and engagement capabilities. UNFICYP would therefore
remain, for the time being, an infantry-based peacekeeping operation, but it would
have a strengthened observation and liaison component. That represents a further step
in the direction already taken after the review of UNFICYP of 2004. It would make
the Force more effective in maintaining calm in the buffer zone and preventing
tensions from escalating, thereby helping to create conditions conducive to a
resumption of settlement talks. At the same time, the efficiencies identified by the
review team would, once fully implemented, allow for measurable savings in the
UNFICYP budget.
58. I wish to thank Mr. Weisbrod-Weber and his review team for their findings and
recommendations. I also wish to express my appreciation to the authorities on both
sides of the island, the leadership and staff of UNFICYP and the United Nations
headquarters staff involved for the support extended to the UNFICYP review process.

17-21045

13/14

S/2017/1008

14/14

17-21045
