TWENTY-FOURTH

YEAR

th
MEETING:

NEW

9 DECEMBER

1969

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . _. . . . . . . . , . . . . .

1

. . . . . . . . .. . . .. . . . .. . . . .. . . . .. .. . .. .. ..

1

Complaints by Senegal:
(a) Letter dated 27 November
1969 from the Permanent Representative of
Senegal addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/9513);
(b) Letter dated 7 December 1969 from the Permanent Representative of Senegal
. . ,. .. .. . ..
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/9541)

1

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/

Adoption

of the agenda

1520)

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted jn 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

-

FIFTEEN

HUNDRED

Held in New York
President: Mr. V. J. MWAANGA

AND TWENTIETH

on Tuesday, 9 December 1969, at 10.30 a.m.

(Zambia).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Hungary, Nepal,
PalWan, Paraguay, Senegal, Spain, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and Zambia.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 520)
1. Adoption

MEETING

of the agenda.

2. Complaints by Senegal:
(1~) Letter dated 27 November 1969 from the Permanent Representative of Senegal addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/95 13);
(bj Letter dated 7 December 1969 from the Permanent
Representative of Senegal addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/9541).
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Complaints by Senegal:
fa) Letter dated 27 November 1969 from the Permanent
Representative of Senegal addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/9513);
(bil Letter dated 7 December 1969 from the Permanent
Representative of Senegal addressed to the President of
,the Security Council (S/9541)
1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the usual practice of the Council and with the provisional rules of
prooedure, and with the decision taken at the 1516th
meeting, I propose now, with the consent of the Council, to
invil:e the representatives of Portugal and Guinea to take
seats at the Council table in order to participate- in our
discussion, without the right to vote.
At the invitation of the President, Mr, F: B. de Miranda
(Portugal) and Mr. A. To& (Guinea) took places at the
Council table.
2. ‘The PRESIDENT: In accordance with further decisions
taken at previous meetings and in accordance with the usual
praotice of the, Council and of the provisional rules of
prooedure, I propose, if I hear no objection, to invite the
representatives
of Morocco, Liberia, Madagascar, Sierra
Leone, Tunisia, Mali, Saudi Arabia, Yemen, Syria, the
United Arab Republic and Mauritania to take part in our
discussion without the right to vote. Accordmgly, I shall

invite those representatives to take seats at the side of the
Council chamber, it being understood that they will be
invited to take a seat at the Council table when it comes
their turn to take the floor.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Y, Nekrouf
(Morocco), Mr. B. Rabetafika (Madagascar), Mr. l? B.
Savage (Sierra Leone), Mr. G. Sow (Mali), Mr. MI S. Alattar
(Yemen) and Mr. A. El-Attrash (Syria) took the places
reserved for them.
3. The PRESIDENT: Before we proceed to the vote on
the question before us, I wish to announce, on behalf of the
sponsors of draft resolution S/9542/Rev.l, dated 8 Decem
ber 1969, that there has been a minor amendment to the
text. In paragraph 1 of the draft resolution before the
Council the word “colonial” after the word “Portuguese”
has been deleted, so that the sentence now reads “Strongly
condemns the Portuguese authorities . . .“.
4. As members of the Council will recall, the general
debate on this question was concluded yesterday evening.
Several members have asked to speak to explain their vote
before the Council proceeds to take a vote on the revised
draft resolution submitted by Algeria, Nepal, Pakistan and
Zambia [S/9542/Rev. 11.
5. The members of the Council will also recall that I gave
an undertaking to the representative of Portugal, when he
took the floor on aspoint of order, that I would permit him
to make a brief statement before the Council proceeds to
the vote. In keeping with this undertaking, I now give the
floor to the representative of Portugal.
6. Mr. MIRANDA (Portugal): I shall not take up much
time, but there are a few observations which I cannot but
place on record before the Council proceeds to a vote.
7. The representative of Senegal asked me on Monday
[1518th meeting] to furnish proof in support of my
statement to the effect that Senegalese troops have partici.
pated in attacks against Portuguese Guinea. MY delegation
is surprised that such a demand should have come from the
Senegalese side, for Senegal itself has furnished no proofs in
support of its own complaints. If his statements are to be
regarded as proofs, SOmust ours.
8. But what type of proof can be furnished bY us here in
thjs (!ouncjl chamber? To say that the Senegalese troops
wore green shirts and shorts and steel helmets, that they
carried automatic and K98K Mauser rifles and Borsigtype
machine-guns, that Senegalese planes were Broussard and

C-47 type and marked with a trapeze surmounted by a
yellow circle within which there was a star of five points
painted green-all this would still be a statement made by
us, not proofs, Our previous experience in this Council with
regard to evidence has not been reassuring by any means.
On the last occasion, in May 1965, when Senegal brought
to the Council a complaint against Portugal and we
demanded proofs, we were roundly told that Senegal had
no nee,d to furnish proofs because, we were told, the
Security Council is not a court of law. This is clear from the
records. What was held good for Senegal should now be
held good for us: our word must be held at least as good as
that of Senegal, Or, are we to be discriminated against on
this point also?

tional law is violence organized in third countries and
launched across frontiers in order to force a country to
change its internal policy.
13. Resolutions of the General Assembly have alsobeen
quoted. Need I say that resolutions of the General
Assembly are no more than recommendations, which
Member States can accept or reject in their sovereign right
and in the exercise of their sovereign judgement? On the
other hand, no resolution of the General Assembly, not
even of the Security Council, can legitimize violence as a
political instrument.
14. With sophistical arguments it has been sought to deny
us our right of self-defence. We do not see anything in the
Charter to justify a double standard in the interpretation of
its Article 5 1 so as to discriminate against Portugal. In this
connexion, I must point out emphatically that Portugal was
admitted as a State Member of the United Nations with all
its territories as defined in the Portuguese Constitution. It
does not lie within the competence of the United Nations
to question the territorial integrity of the Portuguese State.
If that were not so, Portugal would not have joined the
United Nations.

9. However, if proofs are desired, we have always been
ready for a bilateral investigation.
10. We have also been asked to furnish names of the dead
and wounded on our side caused by attacks coming from
Senegal. We do not think this is going to help as evidence.
Nevertheless, since we have been asked, we give the names.
During the month of November, the following persons were
injured as a result of attacks launched,from Senegal, some
of them seriously: Malan Sisse, Albert0 Costa, Hussa Djalo,
Cunhete Bissau, Abilio Neves, Focna Sambu, Daio Cealde,
all adults; Cali Tande, 7 years old, and Mussa Seisi, 13 years
old. In addition, one person was killed; his name is Mamadu
Sumari Gila. Also during the month of November, three
women were injured at IngorB; their names are Fanta
Inktaba, Nafissatu Fati and Mulafi Nissi.

15. I turn now to the Senegalese complaint contained in
document S/9541, My delegation repudiates forthwith and
categorically the allegation that an intention to shell
Ziguinchor has been announced by us. We have neither
announced anything of the sort nor do we entertain any
such intention.
16. As for the incident alleged to have taken place at
Samine on 7 December, we have made strenuous efforts to
obtain information. Owing. to the differences in time and
the distances involved, we have had great difficulty.
Nevertheless, the information that we have obtained does
not indicate that our security forces were involved in any
incident such as that described in the Senegalese complaint.
And, indeed, it would be inconceivable that our security
forces, under strict orders to respect Senegaleseterritory at
all times, should have violated it exactly when the Security
Council is considering a Senegalesecomplaint againstus.

11. In the course of the debate some speakers have tried
to put into my mouth words I did nqt use. They have said
that I had admitted the contents of the original Senegalese
complaint. In order to keep the record straight, I shall
quote from the record of the 15 16th meeting:
“It is a possibility which my delegation does not wish
to exclude a priori. Given the nature of the operation, it
could have happened incidentally, but certainly not by
design, If it did happen, the normal procedure would be
to have the matter investigated by a mixed commission.

17. On the other hand, we have noted that according to aa
dispatch dated 8 December, the
alleged incident wasmentioned here in the Security Council
even before anything wasknown about it in Dakar.

I‘ . * .

Agence fiance-Presse

“We should particularly regret any loss of Senegalese
life, or injury to Senegalese citizens, as the result of any
action of our forces.” [151&h meeting, paras. 127

18. According to our information, a fracas did occur at
Samine involving the local populations who are, frankly,
exasperated by the conditions created there by armed
elements organized to attack Portuguese Guinea and whose
base is at Samine. It appears that there are also rival groups
among those armed elements. Since the alleged incident
took place on Senegalese territory, we advance this infop
mation with a certain amount of reserve.

arzd 129.1

I wish to repeat: “We should particularly regret”. I think it
is quite clear that I made no admission.
12. Some speakers have also attributed to me the use of
such expressions as “reprisals”, “retaliations” and “pursuit”, I wish to stress that at no time have I used those
expressions or any other expression of equivalent connotation. All along I have emphasized our right of self-defence
against armed attacks from outside against our territory. I
emphasize this right again, Our right of self-defence is a
natural right, inalienable, fully in conformity with the
principles of international law and clearly upheld by the
Charter. What is contrary to the Charter and to interna-

19. In any case, the truth will come to light only by
investigation in loco. This is what my delegation has always
proposed as a proof of our good faith and honest
intentions.
20. Mr. BOYE (Senegal) (translated #vm fiench):
1 am
sure that the members of the Security Council will take
2

note of the infOI?natiOn and the answer just given by the
representative of Portugal. He has, in fact, again dodged the
issue and refused to say anything and we realize why he has
done so.

May 1965 respectively. In our present debate, we cannot
fail to fake into account these two resolutions as precedents.
28. In the course of this debate, one of our most eminent
colleagues expressedan idea which my delegation wishesto
endorse, becauseit accurately representswhat we think. At
the Council’s meeting on 5 December, the representative of
France, Mr. Berard, said:

21. In any event, the statements he has just made were
only for the benefit of those who want, at all costs, to find
attenuating circumstances for the representative of Portugal. But do they realize the seriousness of the situation,
which is a direct threat to international peace and security?
Even though certain individuals may not Iike Senegal, hey
must admit it has one great virtue-it is peace-loving;
everyone, moreover, is aware of the moderation it displays.

my delegation requests that the Council should
adopt a resolution which may be deemed satisfactory by
Senegal and which will help to bring a lasting solution to
the problems Senegal has laid before us.” /1517tk
“

I

22. The representative of Portugal will be able to delude
only those who are inciting him to delude them so that
they may then have a clear conscience. In any event I wish
to reject all the insinuations of the representative of
Portugal and everything he has said so far, I repeat that the
Security Council, in which we have always placed our trust,
must immediately take a firm decision on Portugal, if the
worst is to be avoided,

.

.

meeting, pam. 13.1

29. Having seen the revised text of the draft resolution in
document S/9542/Rev.l and the oral amendment of which
the President informed us this morning, and for the reasons
I have just advanced, my delegation will vote in favour of
the text, in the hope that the resolution of this Council
will, asMr. Berard has said, contribute to the fulfilment of
the hopes the Council has expressed.

23. The PRESIDENT: I now propose to give the floor to
those representatives who have asked to speak in explanation. of vote, before the voting.

30. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of
Paraguay for the kind words addressedto me.

24. Mr. SOLANO LOPEZ (Paraguay) (translated from
Spanish): Mr, President, may I, first of all, extend to you

31. Mr. LIU Chieh (China): Mr.President, allow me first
to offer you the congratulations and good wishes of my
delegation in the discharge of your important responsibilities and also to join in the tributes to your predecessors,
Lord Caradon and AmbassadorYost.

the warmest congratulations of my delegation on your
assumption of the Presidency of the Security Council. Your
abilities and your diplomatic skill are the best guarantee for
the happy conclusion of our discussions. At the same time,
and through you, we should like to express our gratitude to
those who immediately preceded you in your important
post: Lord Caradon and Mr. Yost, who were Presidents of
the Security Council in October and November respectively
andl who, as usual, did excellent work.

32. In the light of the debate in the last few days, it is
clear that the facts of the Senegalese complaint against
Portugal are not in dispute. The case, however, as has
already been pointed out by other speakers,is more than a
frontier incident. It must be considered against the background of colonialism. If it weremerely a frontier incident,
it could have been amicably settled by direct negotiations
between the parties involved.

25. In the debate we are now having because of the
cornplaints lodged by Senegal against Portugal for Violations
of its sovereignty and territorial integrity, as a result of
which people have been killed and wounded and property
has been damaged, it seems to my delegation that some
facts have been neither denied nor disproved.

33. In recent years, anti-colonial sentiment has found
increasing expression in the work of the United Nations.
There is no doubt that the question of Portuguese
Territories in Africa has become a major issue of international concern. However, what the Council is immediately
concerned with is not the problem of colonialism as such,
but a specific complaint lodged by Senegal. In the view of
my delegation, the use of armed forces by the Portuguese
authorities to violate the territorial integrity of Senegal
cannot be condoned, whatever may have been the circumstances. The Council is thus in duty bound to pronounce
itself clearly and unequivocally on the Senegalese complaint. The draft resolution before us seems to meet the
requirements of the case. My delegation will, therefore,
vote for it.

26. First, the bombings which led to the complaints of
Seinegal did occur on Senegalese territory. Second, the
victims-mostly women and children-are Senegalese.Third,
the material damage which occurred wasdone to Senegalese
property. Fourth, the origin of the shells was Portuguese:
th;st is to say they came from Portuguese Guinea or Guinea
(Bissau), These circumstances establish the violation of the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Senegal. The principle of scrupulous respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States represents one of the cornerstones
on which relations between States must be based and is, of
colurse, included among the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter.

34. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of China
for his statement and for the kind words he has addressed
to me.

27. I feel bound to add that this very Council has, in the
past, considered similar acts carried out by Portugal against
Senegal, as a result of which resolutions I78 (1963) and
204 (1965) were unanimously adopted in April 1963 and

35. Mr. PHILLIPS (United States of America): I should
like to explain briefly the reasonswhy my delegation finds
3

I
/

itself unable to support the resolution
S/9542/Rev.l.

Council who have had sufficiently long memories to refer
to that time. It wasin fact, as we will remember, a month
in which there was very little for the President to do. As I
listened to those kindly comments, I recalled some words
which come, I think, from a musical comedy of long ago.
They said:

in document

36. We have, unfortunately, been faced with an unhappy
dilemma in this debate. Both Portugal and Senegal are
friends of the United States. The Senegalese representative,
on instructions from his Government, has brought serious
charges against Portugal and has presented to this Council a
full account of the incidents which have occurred on its
territory.

The House of Lords throughout the war
Did nothing in particular
And did it very well.

37. It is not my intention to castdoubt on the credibility
of either party but, asin the caseof the Zambian complaint
in August, my Government would have been readier to take
a position on the merits of the present case had we been in
possession of some impartially verified account of the
recent developments. Unfortunately, for example, we do
not have the kind of report on which we frequently rely
when it comes to complaints about the situation in the
Middle East. Indeed, such information as has been provided
to the Security Council on the current complaint appearsto
indicate that force has been used from both sides of the
border.

I think that that perhaps might be the epitaph on my
Presidency in October. I thank the members of the Council
who were good enough to make those kind references.
43. With other preoccupations it is true, I have nevertheless follow,ed this debate with the greatest care. I have
studied the statements which have been made even when1
myself had to attend the meetings of the General Assembly.
I would ask the indulgence of the Council for a moment if I
report to the Council the considerations in my mind at this
time, as I explain my vote, for I shall vote in favour of the
resolution which has been submitted to us.

38. Because the resolution makes specific findings against
Portugal, we are unable to support it under the circum.
stances described. I should like to emphasize that our
‘position on this resolution has nothing to do with our
attitude toward the fundamental question of self-determination for the Portuguese Territories. The United States
has repeatedly made clear its support for the exercise by
the people of the Portuguese Territories in Africa of their
legitimate right to self-determination. My Government has
urged the Government of Portugal to permit the free
exercise of that right throughout the African Territories
under its control, We have also urged the Government of
Portugal to consult with interested African States on a just
and peaceful resolution of the problems between them.
There is no change in that basic policy of the United States.

44. As the representative of the United States has rightly
pointed out, we are not debating today the policies of
Portugal in Africa; we are debating a specific complaint. It
should, however, be said-and I should like to make it
clear-that my Government does not support the policies of
Portugal in Africa. It follows that my Government in no
way supports the policies of Portugal in Guinea, either by.
moral, military or economic means. I can confirm again
that since the adoption of Security Council resolution
180 (1963) my Government has not supplied arms or
military equipment for use in Portuguese overseas territories. Any suggestion to the contrary is made not on
evidence but in malice.
4.5. I go on to say that, again, I agree with the statement
made by the distinguished representative of the United
States. We have long advocated that the policy to be
adopted in the Portuguese Territories should be one of
self-determination. We hope that the day will come when
Portugal will accept that aim. If it were to do so it would
immediately transform the whole situation for the better.

39. We are concerned with the continuing tension in the
area and we strongly hope that the Council will not be
faced with a repetition of the unhappy situation in which
we have found ourselves with respect to Senegal’s current
complaint.
40. Mr. BERARD (France) (translated from French): I
should like simply to explain in a few words the vote of my
delegation on this draft resolution. We shall vote in favour.

46. Having said that, I should like to pay a tribute, if I
may, to the Portuguese Government and to those who
administer the Territories to which we refer on the fact that
they maintain a policy of racial relations which is very
different from the policy adopted in parts of southern
Africa. They have set an example, indeed, in such matters,
and therefore I say that if they were to adopt a policy of
self-determination Portugal could make a contribution in
Africa comparable to its contribution to the history of the
world.

41. The representative of Portugal, in his first statement,
strongly emphasized Portugal’s right to self-defence. We in
no way challenge the right of Portugal to self-defence; we
do not challenge the right of any State to take defensive
measures within its competence, But we cannot, in this
specific circumstance, approve the firing-at least twice on
the village of Samine-by Portuguese authorities on the
territory of Senegal, an eminently peace-loving country.
That is why my delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolution.

47. But we are not dealing with a question of over-all
policy at this time. We are dealing with a specific complaint
that refers to an incident in which lives were lost and
damage was done. I have very often had the opportunity in
this Council and elsewhere to speak about the evils of
violence and of retaliation. Violence, as we have often
maintained, breeds violence.

42. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): It has occurred
to me as I listened to references to my Presidency of this
Council in October that I should thank the members of the
4

48. The argument that was ably put forward by the
representative of Portugal-I
would also say that he has a
perfect right to speak in this Council, equal to that of any
member of this Organization-is
basically one of selfdefence, and we have a duty to take it into account as it
WBS presented with maderation, restraint and respect. We
know that violence often causes the greatest suffering to
those least able to endure it, and here again we have m
example in which the people who have lost their lives, or
have suffered wounds and damage, are people-men,
women and childron-who
can have taken no part in
military activity.

negotiation and investigation, in accordance with Articles
33 and 34 of the Charter. Without going into,matters of
substanw now, my delegation would have hoped hat the
Parties concerned could have conducted talks to determine
the facts and provide for a possible payment of compensa.
tion, since the delegation of Portugal wasnot opposed to
this and was prepared to accept some degree of responsibibty, had the facts been clearly determined, and to pay
adequate reparations.
55. MY interpretation, which is purely procedural on this
matter, is based on the fact thBt, in my delegation’s
opinion, the primary responsibility of the Council, when
confronted with a situation such as the present one, is also
to ensure the maintenance of peace and to avoid a
repetition of events which might disturb it. Accordingly,
my delegation cannot support the draft resolution, At any
rate we should like to make an appeal that any repetition of
such incidents, which produce so many victims, should be
avoided,

49. I should like to make one other reference, if I may, to
one of the most remarkable speeches we have heard during
this debate: that OF the President of this Council speaking,
at the 15 19th meeting, on behalf of his country. I should
like to say that we llave carefully noted what he said in that
speech and we greatly respect his statement.
50. But what we have to do is to form a judgement on the
basis of the reports put before us, which were categorically
detailed. No need for us to search out or to deny the
reports put before us by the representative of Portugal. We
are dealing with the reports put before us by the representative of Senegal, They are put to us in a way that is
convincing and carries conviction. We are satisfied that his
reports are in good faith. There may perhaps be a
distinction-and he might agree with us-between the two
ticidlents. We have a fuller report on the first incident than
on tllle second, naturally. The first report was presented to
us in complete detail, the second was of necessity a report
drawn up in haste, and there may be further details to be
provided. But the reports are put to us in such a way that
we do not doubt either the good faith or the accuracy of
the representative of Senegal for whom we all have such.a
high personal respect. These reports are not denied. I think
it is well that special attention should be drawn to that. The
reports are before us, and it is essential that we should deal
with, them urgently-as the representative of Senegal has
impressed upon us-because what we must mainly concern
ourselves about is the future.

56. The PRESIDENT: As there are no further speakers,
we shall now proceed to vote on the revised draft resolution
contained in document S/9542/Rev.l, bearing in mind that
in paragraph 1 the word “colonial” has been deleted.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Algeria, China, Colombia, Finland, France,
Hungary, Nepal, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Zambia.
Against: None.
Abstaining: Spain, United States of America.
The draft resolution was adopted by 13 votes to none,
with 2 abstentions. 1

57. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Portugal has
asked for the floor to make a brief statement, and I now
call upon him.

51. Twice before the representative of Senegal has come
to make his complaints here. He now comes a third time,
and I would regard the draft resolution before us as having
its rnost important bearing in relation to the future and the
demland that never again should we in this Council have to
deal with a complaint such as this.

58. Mr. MIRANDA (Portugal): My delegation regretsthat
the resolution that has just been approved is entirely
one-sided. It takes no account whatsoever of POrtUgal'S
side.
59. Civilian lives have been lost and .damagehas been done
in Portuguese Guinea, but nothing of this is reflected in the
present resolution. In fact, it does not reflect at all the
reality of the situation created for Portuguese Guinea by
violence org~n~ed in and launched from Senegal. It accepts
as facts allegations that have not been proved, and could
only be proved by means of an investigation in loco, asmY
delegation has suggested.

52. For these reasons, and recognizing that there must be
the greatest care to give equal treatment, equal hearing and
a fair judgement to any case which is brought before the
Council, my Government will support the draft resolution
that is before us.
53. Mr. PINIES (Spain) (translated from Spanish):MY
cou,ntry is a friend of Portugal and Senegal and maintains
excellent relations with them, and it regrets that there were
victiims in the events reported to this Council and submitted
to us for consideration. At this time my delegation should
like to express its condolences to the families of the
victims,

60. My delegation cannot help also observing that the
draft resolution wasintroduced even before we had had an
opportunity to answer the allegations contained h documerit S/954]. We have since denied those allegations.
Nevertheless, they have b;en accepted as proved in the
resolution that hasjust been adopted.

54. We are against violence and we would have wished that
the parties had sought a solution through such means as

1 Seeresolution 273 (1969).

5

61. All this raises in our mind serious doubts as to the
usefulness of our continuing to maintain the attitude we
have so far adopted towards the Council.

66. If, in a family which wants to maintain traditions of
intellectual honesty, wisdom, good reputation and strictness, one of the members commits an offence, the oth.er
members of the family must be the first publicly to
castigate him. Thereafter the family will continue to enjoy
the confidence, friendship and respect of everyone, for it
will never be accusedof partiality or complicity.

62. Meanwhile, my delegation places firm reservations on
the resolution contained in document S/9542/Rev.l.
63. Mr. BOYE (Senegal) (translated .tivm French):

The
debate on the complaints of Senegal against Portugal has
ended with the adoption by a large majority of the draft
resolution strongly condemning in unambiguous language
the Portuguese authorities for the shelling of the village of
&mine which, on 25 November 1969, caused one death
and seriously wounded eight persons, struck the building of
the Senegalese gendarmerie and completely destroyed two
houses in the village of Samine, and on 7 December 1969
caused five deaths and seriously wounded one woman.

67. Portugal has committed serious offences against Senegal, which is a peace-loving country, and no one here can
objectively deny this. The unprecedented condemnation of
Portugal by the Security Council should cause the friends
of Portugal to ask that country firmly to put an end to its
incursions into, and shelling of, Senegalese territory. Otherwise, we should be compelled to come again before this
Council to ask it to take more stringent measures, such as
the sanctions provided for in the Charter.

64. On this occasion I should like, on beh&f of my
Government, to thank most sincerely all the delegations
which lived up to their responsibilities and gave Senegal
their unequivocal support in its moment of trial by taking
part in the adoption of a firm resolution against Portugal.

68. The PRESIDENT: There are no further speakers on
my list. If no other speaker wishes to take the floor, I shall
adjourn the meeting. In accordance with the provisions of
the resolution adopted this morning, the Couricil will
remain seized of this question.

65. I also thank the friends who are not members of the
Security Council, but who wished to come here and state
clearly that they were in solidarity with Senegal.

Dfe meetingroseat1.2,10p.m.

6
Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S.

0.50

(or equivalent

in other currencies)

82285-December

1972-2,050
