78

General Assembly-Twenty-sixth Session

of living of the masses in developing countries should
be a central objective of the Second United Nations
Development Decade. Improvement in the quality
and distribution of social services, particularly in
the fields of education, health, agriculture, housing,
social welfare and social defence, should be recognized as an integral part of the over-all development
effort.
(f) Increased utilization of science and technology will greatly help social progress and development. Equally important is its equitable sharing by
the developed and developing countries. The Advisory Committee on the Application of Science and
Technology to Development should study the im~lementation of the provisions of the present resolution
and of the Declaration on Social Progress and Development on the question of science and technology
in relation to social development.
(g) The unfavourable terms of trade, including
the instability of prices of primary commodities
which constitute the bulk of exports of many developing countries, are undermining the efforts of these
countries to improve their social situation. These
terms have been further aggravated by the recent
disquieting developments in international economic
relations and, in particular, by the instability of the
international monetary system. The Economic and
Social Council, in its consideration of the monetary
and financial situation, should pay special attention
to the influence of the current crisis on social progress in different countries, particularly in developing
countries, and mention it in its report to the General
Assembly.
(h) The outflow of qualified personnel from developing countries to developed countries seriously
hampers economic and social development in developing countries.
(i) Broad popular participation, not only in the
implementation of development programmes but also
in the formulation of policies and plans and other
forms of decision-making, should be regarded as
both an objective and a means of development.
(j) Due attention should be paid to the needs
and aspirations of the younger generation. Effective
policy measures designed to involve fully the
younger generation in the promotion of social progress and development should be undertaken.
(k) Adequate measures should be taken to remove discriminatory practices against women in all
spheres. Greater attention should be paid to women's education, vocational training and guidance so
as to ensure their full integration and participation
in all aspects of economic and social life.
( l) Adequate attention should be given to multidisciplinary community services in the field of family
and child welfare, particularly in situations of rapid
urbanization and social change affecting family
levels of living and especially the welfare of preschool children.
9. Calls upon Governments and the United Nations
bodies and specialized agencies concerned to co-operate
with the Secretary-General in the preparation of the
next report on the world social situation;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to submit the
next report on the world social situation to the General
Assembly at its thirtieth session, through the Economic and Social Council, for consideration in conjunction with the mid-term over-all review and ap-

praisal of the Second United Nations Development
Decade and to evaluate and analyse trends relating to
social development-their causes and manifestations
and the experiences thereon-throughout the world,
including the situation in colonial, dependent and o~cupied Territories, within the framework of the umfied approach to development, ?earing in ~ind . the
provisions of the present resolution, the deliberations
on this item at the current session of the General Assembly, the fiftieth session of the E~onomic and Soc~al
Council and the twenty-second session of the Commission for Social Development, and the provisions of the
Declaration on Social Progress and Development.
1991 st plenary meeting,
22 November 1971.
2783 (XXVI). Report of the Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2106 (XX) of 21 December 1965 in which it adopted and opened for signature
and ratification the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination and
invited eligible States under article 17 of that Convention to sign and ratify it without delay,
Stressing the significance of the coming into force of
the International Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination and of the bringing
into being of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, and requesting all States parties to
the Convention to give full co-operation to that Committee in order that it may fulfil iits mandate under the
Convention,
Noting the recommendations contained in Economic
and Social Council resolution 1588 (L) of 21 May
1971,
Having received the report of the Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination,4 established
under the International Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, on the second
year of its activities,
Expressing its satisfaction at the ratification of or
accession to the Convention by 55 States and at the
intention expressed by various other States to ratify or
accede to the Convention in the near future,
l. Urges all States which are not yet parties to the
International Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination to ratify or accede to
the Convention as soon as possible and requests them
to report to the General Assembly on the measures
taken by them to this effect, on any obstacles that may
have been encountered and on any interim measures
that have been taken to comply strictly with the principles set out in the United Nations Declaration on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination and
in the Convention;
2. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination
on the second year of its activities, submitted under
article 9 of the Convention;
3. Draws the attention of all States to the contents
of that report;
4 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-sixth
Session, Supplement No. 18 (A/8418).

79

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

4. Commends the Committee on the Elimination of
Racial Discrimination for its efforts to obtain extensive
reports from States parties, as provided in article 9,
paragraph 1, of the Convention, as well as information
concerning Trust and Non-Self-Governing Territories
relating to matters referred to in article 15;
5. Expresses the view that the work of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination
would be facilitated :if the reports submitted by States
parties conformed with the guidelines laid down by the
Committee for that purpose and if the Committee
invited States parties to be present at its meetings when
their reports are examined;
6. Recognizes that the General Assembly's consideration of the reports of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination would be facilitated by
the inclusion of the criteria used by the Committee when
it examines in greater depth the substance of the reports
from States parties submitted under article 9 of the
Convention;
7. Draws the attention of the Trusteeship Council
and of the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on
the Grant:ing of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples to the report of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination and requests them to take
appropriate action within their terms of reference in
their respective spheres of activity, as expressed m the
relevant parts of the report;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination the records of the discussion on its report at the
twenty-sixth session of the General Assembly.

2001st plenary meeting,
6 December 1971.
2784 (XXVI). Elimination of all forms of racial
discrimination

The General Assembly,
Firmly convinced that all forms of racial discrimination are a total negation of the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and that they
militate against human progress, peace and justice,
Fully aware that apartheid and all other forms of
racial discrimination are instruments of colonialism and
imperialism as well as of economic explo:itation,
Reiterating its conviction that any doctrine of exclusiveness based on racial differentiation or ethnic or
religious superiority is scientifically false, morally condemnable and sooially unjust,
Reiterating also its firm determination to bring about
the total and unconditional elimination of racial discrimination in all its forms,
Having designated the year 1971 as the International
Year for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination,
Convinced that the International Year for Action to
Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination should be
observed as the opening year of an ever-growing struggle
against racial discrimination in all its forms and manifestations and for the purpose of promoting international
solidarity with all those struggling against racism,
Considering that by arousing world public opinion
and promoting action against racism the International
Year for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Dis-

crimination would contribute to the expansion of national and international efforts towards ensuring the
rapid and total eradication of racial discrimination in
all its forms,
Believing in the urgent need for eliminating racial
discrimination through continuous and vigorous national
action and collective international measures in order
to alleviate the suffering of millions of people the world
over and to ensure them the dignity and equality
inherent in all human beings,

I
1. Requests the President of the General Assembly
to forward the message annexed to the present resolution directly to the heads of State or Government of
each State;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report based on the information and comments received
from Governments, in accordance with the message sent
to heads of State or Government, to the Commission on
Human Rights at its twenty-eighth session;
3. Invites the Economic and Social Council to
request the Commission on Human Rights, bearing in
mind the provisions of paragraph 2 above, to submit
suggestions with a view to launching continued international action to combat racism on the basis of a
"Decade for vigorous and continued mobilization
against racism and racial discrimination in all its
forms";

II
l. Reaffirms that apartheid is a crime against humanity;

2. Declares that racial discrimination in all its
forms is a criminal affront to the conscience and dignity of mankind;
3. Emphatically reaffirms its recognition and vigorous support of the legitimacy of the struggles of all oppressed peoples everywhere, and in particular in southern Africa, against colonial, racial and alien domination
or foreign occupation towards the achievement of
their inalienable rights to equality and freedom, in accordance with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, and calls for increased and
continued moral and material support to all peoples
struggling for their liberation, self-determination and
the elimination of all forms of racial discrimination;
4. Invites the Economic and Social Council to request the Commission on Human Rights to study and
make recommendations for the further elaboration of
international instruments to deal with crimes against
humanity, particularly those arising from the policies
of apartheid;
5. Condemns those countries which, by their political, economic and military collaboration with the
Government of South Africa, encourage and incite that
Government to persist in its racist policy;
6. Strongly condemns all Governments that continue to supply arms to the Pretoria regime in violation
of the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly
and the Security Council;

III
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of
the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimi-
