S/PV.7830

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7830th meeting

Friday, 9 December 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Spain)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Kandeel
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Bessho
Mrs. Adnin
Ms. Schwalger
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Power
Mr. Rosselli
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
Letter dated 1 December 2016 from the Permanent Representatives of France,
Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand, Spain, Ukraine, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of America and Uruguay to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2016/1034)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-42718 (E)
*1642718*

S/PV.7830

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now give
the floor to those members of the Council who wish to
make statements.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China is
opposed to the Security Council discussing the situation
of human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. The Charter of the United Nations stipulates in
no uncertain terms that the primary responsibility of
the Security Council is the maintenance of international
peace and security. The Security Council is not a
forum for discussing human rights issues, still less
for the politicization of such issues. Given the current
context, in which international peace and security are
facing a plethora of dire challenges, the Council should
scrupulously honour its responsibility and focus on
issues related to international peace and security with
undivided attention.
China consistently stands for the decnuclearization
of the Korean peninsula and insists that it be kept
peaceful and stable and that solutions be sought
through dialogue and consultation. We shall not allow
the peninsula to be torn asunder or riven with turmoil
in any circumstances. Our position is in line with the
common interests of the international community
and all parties, and should be the common goal of
everyone’s efforts.
The discussion of the situation of human rights
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is
contrary and detrimental to that goal and of no benefit
whatsoever. The current situation in the peninsula is
complex, sensitive and dire. China hopes that Council
members and other parties concerned will focus on the
big picture, meet each other half way, do more to ease
tensions on the peninsula, and avoid any rhetoric or
action that could provoke or escalate tensions.
The top priority for the moment is to resume
dialogue and negotiations among the parties as soon as
possible, reopen the Six-Party Talks, jointly safeguard
the process of denuclearizing the peninsula and make
a genuine effort to ensure stability and peace on the
peninsula. China will push for dialogue and consultation
so as to resolve the relevant issues on the peninsula
within the framework of the Six-Party Talks, in order
to make a positive and constructive contribution to
stability and peace on the peninsula at an early date.
2/21

09/12/2016

Ms. Power (United States of America): In February
2014, the United Nations Human Rights Council
commission of inquiry released its now famous report
on human rights in North Korea (A/HRC/25/63),
methodically documenting the widespread and
systematic human rights violations carried out by the
Government of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. In December 2014, Australia led the Council
in holding its first meeting to discuss the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s human rights situation as
a threat to international peace and security (S/PV.7353).
In December 2015, we held our second meeting on this
issue (see S/PV.7575).
I think it goes without saying that there has been no
improvement in the lives of the North Korean people.
Just two days ago, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees issued a report about
the thousands of families torn apart because of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s repression
and the instability it provokes in the region.
This is only one piece of the crisis, of course, as
has been noted. This year has seen an increasingly
aggressive Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
with a record number of missile launches and two
nuclear tests. This behaviour affirms what we have
long stated — when Governments flagrantly violate the
human rights of their own people, they almost always
show similar disdain for the international norms that
help to ensure our shared security. It stretches credulity,
really, to suggest — as I know some Council members
will today — that the brutal governance practiced by
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea regime is
neutral on international peace and security. We know
that nobody is saying that it is good for international
peace and security, but the idea that it is neutral — that
it is somehow a stable form of governance — is just
clearly not true.
It is inherently destabilizing when a regime carries
out the kinds of horrors that this regime perpetrates
against its own people, and given the other aspects of
the threat to peace and security posed by its nuclear
and ballistic missile programmes, that nexus should
worry us all. It really belongs on our agenda here in
the Security Council. The situation in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea is on the Council’s seizures
list, and that is where it belongs.
Therefore, with the delegations of eight other
Security Council members, we requested this meeting
16-42718

09/12/2016

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

today. We strongly support the adoption of the agenda,
and we very much look forward to the discussion.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): On the issue under discussion
today, the Angolan delegation wishes to express its full
support for the statement made by the representative
of China.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I shall say more following
the adoption of the agenda, but wish to make a brief
statement before we vote on the adoption of the
agenda itself.
In December 2014 and again in December 2015,
under the agenda item “The situation in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea”, the Security Council held
meetings on the situation in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, which focused on its widespread
and systematic human rights violations. Given the
fact that there has been no tangible improvement in
the human rights situation in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea since the publication of the 2014
report of the commission of inquiry (A/HRC/25/63),
and given the destabilizing impact on the region and the
maintenance of international peace and security of the
human rights violations perpetrated by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea authorities, the reasons for
the Council to hold a meeting on the situation in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea persist. We
therefore support the adoption of the agenda.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I call the
attention of Council members to document S/2016/1034,
which contains a letter dated 1 December 2016 from the
Permanent Representatives of France, Japan, Malaysia,
New Zealand, Spain, Ukraine, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of
America and Uruguay to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council.
In view of the request contained in document
S/2016/1034 and the comments made by members of
the Security Council, I propose to put the provisional
agenda to the vote. Accordingly, I shall put it to the
vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
France, Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand, Spain,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and
Uruguay

S/PV.7830

Against:
Angola, China, Egypt, Russian Federation and
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
Abstaining:
Senegal
The President (spoke in Spanish): There were
9 votes in favour, 5 votes against and 1 abstention. The
provisional agenda has been adopted.
The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea
Letter dated 1 December 2016 from the
Permanent Representatives of France, Japan,
Malaysia, New Zealand, Spain, Ukraine, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, the United States of America and
Uruguay to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2016/1034)
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now give
the floor to members of the Council who wish to make
statements following the voting.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): As it did last year, my delegation voted against
the discussion by the Security Council of the human
rights situation in the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea.
We have often expressed our opposition to the
Security Council’s inclusion of human rights issues
on its agenda. We believe that they do not fall within
the Council’s purview and should be considered in
specialized bodies, first and foremost the United
Nations Human Rights Council. The Security Council
should concentrate on issues that represent a true
threat to international peace and security. Regularly
burdening the Council’s agenda with issues that are
not within its remit, such as today’s item, inevitably
weakens the Council’s focus and force and undermines
the effectiveness of its work.
If we consider the potential benefits of today’s
meeting, we may draw the conclusion from many years
of experience in United Nations human rights bodies
that wholesale criticism or the use of labels has never
led to positive results, which can be achieved only by
fostering trust and interaction among countries. Once
again, we must note that today’s discussion is another
step in the opposite direction.

16-427183/21

S/PV.7830

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

At this stage, the main goal of the Security Council
should be to create conditions as soon as possible for
the resumption of negotiations on the nuclear issue on
the Korean peninsula. At the same time, our priorities
should be to seek a peaceful resolution to the current
problems. The current complex situation should not
be a pretext for increasing foreign military capacity.
We call on all sides to ease tensions, step back from
militaristic rhetoric and restart the political process as
soon as possible to overcome this impasse.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela voted against the convening of today’s
meeting to review the human rights situation in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea because we
believe that it is an initiative that shows the Security
Council’s growing interference in issues outside its
specific competency with respect to the maintenance
of international peace and security. Its competency is
clearly set forth in the Charter of the United Nations,
which is the legal instrument that specifies the functions
of the various United Nations bodies in a careful and
precise manner.
The issue before us today on the human rights
situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
is not within the competency of the Security Council.
Human rights issues must be addressed both by the
General Assembly and by the Human Rights Council,
a subsidiary organ of the Assembly located in Geneva,
which was specifically established to discuss human
rights issues and is duly empowered for that purpose.
We therefore call for focusing on the Universal Periodic
Review mechanism as the best way of dealing with
human rights issues.
At present, the international community is facing
the great and complex challenges that require action and
specific and timely attention with respect to protracted
conflicts owing to geopolitical and economic interests
of certain Powers, which are undermining the Council’s
effectiveness as well as its credibility with the public.
The issue of terrorism and its spread, the Middle East
and the question of Palestine should be active priorities
for the Council, yet the Council has shown remarkable
inaction on those topics.
Venezuela reiterates its principled position on
rejecting the treatment of human rights issues for
politically motivated purposes or in a selective, partial
or biased manner with the sole purpose of putting
4/21

09/12/2016

pressure on certain countries. Approaching human
rights issues through politicization and selectivity,
targeting certain countries, has proved to be ineffective
and counterproductive, since it only exacerbates
confrontation and undermines the Organization’s
and its subsidiary bodies’ objectives, which is to use
diplomacy to peacefully resolve conflicts. With these
measures, the path to peace is undermined by the
creation of an artificial differentiation between good
and bad countries that does not foster a harmonious
international climate or a dialogue in situations of great
fragility such as that of the Korean peninsula.
Accordingly, it is essential that we continue
exploring ways to promote respectful, constructive and
transparent dialogue with Governments such as that of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, as dialogue
and cooperation are the only means for making progress
in all areas. Only a week after the unanimous adoption
of resolution 2321 (2016), where we unified our position
with respect to nuclear and ballistic-missile activities
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, we have
taken an approach today that, by focusing on human
rights issues in our consideration of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, does help to create
conditions conducive to resuming the way towards a
sustainable political solution of the nuclear issue.
In conclusion, we wish to reiterate that the Security
Council must strictly fulfil its obligations and review
issues that are directly related to international peace
and security. Today’s debate, which is both outside the
Security Council’s natural competencies and distinctly
different from the usual way of addressing the situation
of the Korean peninsula, could become an element that
upsets the pursuit of the Council’s priority objectives for
the peninsula. Against the backdrop of military tensions
and the need to promote and support initiatives aimed
at denuclearizing the Korean peninsula, diplomatic and
political negotiations are the path that the parties must
follow if they are to achieve a lasting solution.
The President (spoke in Spanish): Since we have
adopted the provisional agenda, I will now suspend
the meeting. We will resume the meeting after a brief
break in order to continue consideration of the item on
our agenda.
The meeting was suspended at 10.25 a.m. and
resumed at 10.30 a.m.
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
16-42718

09/12/2016

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

S/PV.7830

procedure, I invite the representative of the Republic of
Korea to participate in this meeting.

an exploitative economic system and widespread
discrimination based on social status.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Andrew
Gilmour, Assistant Secretary-General for Human
Rights and Head of the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights, to participate in this meeting.

Two days ago, the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights issued a report that assessed the
different ways in which families have been separated
since the 1950-1953 Korean War. The report found that
involuntary separation is not just the consequence of the
war but also the result of structural forms of exclusion,
impunity and disempowerment. Furthermore, the
country is experiencing a humanitarian emergency.
Approximately 70 per cent of the population of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea — 18 million
people — are considered food insecure. A quarter
of the population has inadequate access to health
services. A fifth of the population lacks access to
clean water and proper sanitation. The impact on
children, whose developing bodies are vulnerable to
lasting damage, is simply ruinous. Stunted growth is a
rampant phenomenon.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to warmly welcome the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Jan Eliasson, to whom I now give the floor.
The Deputy Secretary-General: I welcome this
Security Council meeting on the human rights situation
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. This is
a matter of great concern that demands our attention.
As members may recall, the magnitude and scale
of abuses suffered by the people of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea were documented by the
commission of inquiry in 2014. The Commission noted
that the violations, “reveal a State that does not have
any parallel in the contemporary world” (A/HRC/25/63,
para. 80). The Commission’s recommendations were
instrumental in reframing the United Nations efforts
to improve the country’s human rights situation. The
commission of inquiry concluded that crimes against
humanity have been committed and rightly called
for accountability.
The Security Council carried this process further
last week by adopting resolution 2321 (2016). That was
the first time that the Council specifically requested
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to respect
and ensure the “welfare and inherent dignity” of people
in its territory, in paragraph 45 of that resolution. The
General Assembly, in its resolutions on this issue have
repeatedly encouraged the Security Council to ensure
accountability, including by considering to refer the
situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
to the International Criminal Court.
The patterns of grave violations of human rights
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea have
repeatedly been established. The authorities have
given no effective commitment to remedy the situation.
People inside the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea are unable to make their voices heard because
of the restrictions and the risks that they face if they
exercise their rights. The most vulnerable continue to
suffer from a cruel network of political prison camps,

Those persistent humanitarian needs are exacerbated
by recurring natural disasters, such as the floods
that devastated the northern part of the country in
September and affected 600,000 people. In line with
the no-one-left-behind principle of the Sustainable
Development Goals, it is imperative to decouple
geopolitical considerations from United Nations
humanitarian and development support to people
in need. Resolution 2321 (2016) underlines that the
measures imposed were not intended to have adverse
humanitarian consequences for the civilian population.
I urge members of the Council to ensure that
the already critical humanitarian situation does not
deteriorate further owing to such measures. Funding
for relief activities in the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea is essential, in particular to ensure that
vulnerabilities do not increase in the face of stricter
sanctions. Assistance has steadily declined regretfully
over the past decade, preventing humanitarian agencies
from responding effectively to the needs of the most
affected. Approximately $145 million are required to
address the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
critical humanitarian needs. I count on Member States
to support those life-saving activities.
History teaches us that serious human rights
violations are warning signs of instability and
conflict. The abduction of foreign nationals, enforced
disappearances and people fleeing desperate situations
all demonstrate the links between human rights,

16-427185/21

S/PV.7830

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

humanitarian crises and international peace and security.
Any attempt to achieve lasting peace and stability
demands justice and redress for victims inside and
outside the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. It is
very difficult to obtain up-to-date and comprehensive
information about human rights developments in that
country. The information we have, however, reveals a
continuing pattern of serious human rights violations,
and we see very few, if any, signs of improvement. The
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has obligations
under international law. We call on its Government to
abide by them. But the international community also
has collective responsibilities — first to protect the
country’s population from the most serious violations
of international humanitarian law and human rights;
secondly to live up to the principle and norm of the
responsibility to protect; and thirdly to consider the
wider implications of the human rights situation for
regional stability.
The United Nations has taken a number of steps
recently to address the human rights situation in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. The new
Special Rapporteur presented his report (A/71/367)
to the General Assembly in October, and during the
same month, the Secretary-General also issued his
report (A/71/439) to that body. The Third Committee
has agreed on a draft resolution (A/C.3/71/L.23) that
will be adopted by the General Assembly next month.
In response, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea has maintained its strong objections to countryspecific resolutions and mandates. While expressing
hope for dialogue and cooperation on human rights,
the representative of the Permanent Mission of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has said it will
“take all appropriate measures vis-à-vis the hostile
acts against the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea that become increasingly aggressive under
the pretext of human rights”.
During his 10 years in office, Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon has made extensive efforts to promote peace
and reconciliation, as well as development and respect
of human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea. We must remain committed to pursuing
peaceful, diplomatic and political paths forward
towards dealing with this complex and dangerous
situation. The United Nations will continue to work
towards ensuring a genuine and lasting improvement
of the human rights and humanitarian situation in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. We stand ready
6/21

09/12/2016

to help in all possible ways. That could include human
rights dialogues, visits to the country with sufficient
access to assess conditions on the ground, cooperation
initiatives and people-to-people contacts.
To conclude, let us use all the tools at our
disposal — the Human Rights Council, the General
Assembly, the Security Council and United Nations and
other international entities — to take action to build a
better future for the people of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Deputy Secretary-General for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Gilmour.
Mr. Gilmour: As the Deputy Secretary-General
has just described, one year has passed since the
situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea was last discussed by this body
(see S/PV.7575). Our concern expressed back then
has only deepened. There has been no improvement
in the truly appalling human rights violations in
the country. The nature and scale of the violations
occurring in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea thoroughly underscore the link between human
rights and peace and security. The commission of
inquiry found that numerous crimes against humanity
had been committed — and they continue — including
extermination,
murder,
enslavement,
torture,
imprisonment, rape, forced abortions and other sexual
violence, persecution on political, religious, racial and
gender grounds, the forcible transfer of populations, the
enforced disappearance of persons and the inhumane
act of knowingly causing prolonged starvation.
The Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights (OHCHR) continues its efforts to help ensure
accountability for violations, while seeking every
opportunity to engage with the Government. Although
monitoring the human rights situation in the country
remains a challenge, the testimonies of people who
have left the country and information gathered through
other sources indicate that the pattern of human rights
violations documented by the commission of inquiry
are continuing. Major political events, such as the
seventh Congress of the Workers’ Party of Korea in
May and the Supreme People’s Assembly in June this
year seemingly failed to create an opening for any new
policies that protect human rights.
16-42718

09/12/2016

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

In the past 12 months, OHCHR has conducted
more than 110 interviews with persons who had left
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. A major
issue that emerged during these interviews was the
treatment of people in the custody of law enforcement
agencies. All of those who had been detained stated
that they were subject to, or else personally witnessed,
practices that clearly contravened international human
rights standards. Violations included torture and illtreatment, which is routinely used during detention,
investigation and imprisonment. Cases were reported
of solitary confinement for several days in a cell so
small that the detainee was unable even to sit down.
Other violations included poor detention conditions;
inadequate access to food, water and sanitation; lack
of judicial review; lack of access to lawyers and family
members; and other violations. Suspects are rarely
allowed to present evidence that contests the charge
against them. These violations reflect the larger context
in which the criminal justice system fails to protect the
rights of individuals. The system is characterized by
significant oversight by the Workers’ Party of Korea,
while the role played by the judiciary and lawyers is
very limited.
The procedures surrounding the persecution
of individuals deemed to have committed political
crimes is even more secretly guarded. While the
Government continues to deny even the existence of
these prison camps, many citizens of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea are aware of their existence.
Observation from the outside, including through satellite
images, has confirmed their continued operation. No
independent international human rights monitors have
ever been able to access one of these camps.
The freedom of expression, association and
peaceful assembly remain almost entirely restricted.
Despite a reported increase in ownership and use of
mobile phones and Internet services, all mass media
remains under Government control and access to foreign
media is prohibited. Harsh restrictions on freedom
of movement continue to affect citizens, who are not
allowed to travel abroad or even within the country
without permission. The restrictions at the border area
have reportedly been increasingly tightened making it
even more difficult for individuals to leave the country.
Those who seek to leave are at risk of trafficking and
refoulement in contravention of the 1951 Convention
relating to the Status of Refugees. Women, in particular,
are at risk of sexual abuse, detention and ill-treatment

S/PV.7830

following refoulement. There is no known independent
civil society movement whatsoever. Nationals of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea working
outside the country live in substandard conditions
and are subject to severe surveillance and oversight,
while the Government appropriates most of the income
they generate.
Turning to economic and social rights, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea also faces
significant challenges in fulfilling this important area
of the rights of its citizens, despite the authorities’
stated commitment to improve the living conditions of
the population. The country continues to be affected
by chronic food shortages, which have resulted in
protracted undernutrition, affecting in particular
children, pregnant and nursing women, and older
persons. The public distribution system of food is not
functioning, except for a few privileged classes. Most
citizens depend on private, mostly illegal, commercial
activities to fulfil basic needs. Frequent mobilization for
public work, such as the 200-day campaign before the
Workers’ Party Congress in May, reportedly impacted
negatively on the ability of residents to engage in
commercial activities. Residents of the north-eastern
provinces who were affected by the typhoon and flood in
late August are likely to remain particularly vulnerable
to food insecurity this winter. Discrimination in access
to employment, education and other services based on
a person’s family background, or songbun, continues to
be reported.
The heightened security tensions have direct
consequences on human rights. For example, the
people-to-people contact between the two Koreas, also
recommended by the commission of inquiry, ceased
after the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
nuclear test in January. Reunions of separated families
have not taken place since October 2015. The report
released by OHCHR two days ago, highlights the plight
of tens of thousands families who have been separated
across the border during and since the Korean War
without possibility of reconnecting with relatives on
the other side.
There has also been no progress in resolving the
issue of international abductions of 516 individuals
who were abducted from the Republic of Korea after
the armistice. Likewise, no satisfactory answers have
been given to establish the fate of individuals abducted
from Japan and other countries.

16-427187/21

S/PV.7830

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Following the adoption in March this year of
Human Rights Council resolution 31/18, the High
Commissioner appointed two independent experts in
support of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of
human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Ms. Sonja Biserko and Ms. Sara Hossain, to focus
on issues of accountability, in particular where such
violations amount to crimes against humanity. The two
experts have just concluded a mission to the Republic
of Korea and Japan, and have also sought to engage the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to share the
Government’s views and information. Their report will
be included as an annex to the Special Rapporteur’s
report to the Human Rights Council in March 2017. The
new Special Rapporteur, Mr. Quintana, is exploring
the possibility for dialogue with Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea authorities while recognizing that
accountability must be part of such engagement.
We remain committed to continuing engaging
with the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
improve the human rights situation inside the country.
In a positive development, in 2016, the Government
submitted reports to the Committee on the Rights
of the Child and the Committee on the Elimination
of Discrimination against Women. Our Office has
continued to offer technical assistance to the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to help the Government
implement its human rights obligations.
Failure to hold perpetrators of gross human rights
violations accountable, some of which amount to
crimes against humanity, will be a disappointment for
the victims and will sow the seeds of further instability
and tension. Accountability is vital and we hope the
Security Council will remain seized of this matter.
The General Assembly has again in its resolution
this year encouraged the Security Council to take
appropriate action to ensure accountability, including
through consideration of a referral of the situation
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to the
International Criminal Court.
Improvement in human rights in the country will
not only protect the livelihoods and dignity of people
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, but
also promote long-term security and stability in the
region and beyond. Conversely, escalated security
tensions will further isolate the country and leave the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea population as
usual to bear the terrible consequences at yet further
expense of their human rights.
8/21

09/12/2016

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Gilmour for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to Council members.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to start by thanking
Deputy Secretary-General Mr. Jan Eliasson for his
forceful remarks. I am also grateful for the clear and
thorough briefing by Mr. Andrew Gilmour, Assistant
Secretary-General for Human Rights and Head of the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights.
The report of the commission of inquiry on human
rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea of
February 2014 (A/HRC/25/63) sheds light on the critical
human rights situation on the ground. Regrettably, there
has been no sign that the situation has improved since
the report was released. Under such circumstances,
today, the Security Council has rightly decided to
have a briefing under the agenda “The situation in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea” for the third
consecutive year.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
conducted two nuclear tests and launched more than
20 ballistic missiles this year, despite the fact that
three-quarters of its population are in need of some
form of humanitarian assistance and that the total
humanitarian funding requirement of the United
Nations and other non-governmental organizations
reaches $145 million. Even as the people in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea suffer from
great unmet needs, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea authorities pursue nuclear weapons and ballistic
missiles at the sacrifice of the fundamental human
rights and welfare of their own people.
Japan, along with every other Security Council
member, condemns the current state of affairs. The
authorities of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea should respect and ensure the welfare and
inherent dignity of their citizens. That message was
conveyed in resolution 2321 (2016), which the Council
adopted unanimously on 30 November. The same
concern was also expressed in the Third Committee’s
draft resolution on the situation of human rights in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (A/C.3/71/L.23),
which was adopted by consensus in October. As the
High Commissioner for Human Rights pointed out in
his briefing last year, and as has been confirmed by the
briefers today, there is a clear linkage between human
rights violations in the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea and the instability of the region. Addressing
16-42718

09/12/2016

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

the root causes of the threat to international peace and
security falls undoubtedly within the mandate of the
Security Council.
The abduction of foreign nationals by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is a case where
human rights violations and threats to international
peace and security clearly overlap. As the report of
the commission of inquiry on human rights in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea states:
“Since 1950, the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea has engaged in the systematic abduction,
denial of repatriation and subsequent enforced
disappearance of persons from other countries
on a large scale and as a matter of State policy.”
(A/HRC/25/63, para. 64)
Hundreds of nationals from the Republic of Korea,
Japan and other countries have been abducted and
disappeared. Abduction committed by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea undermines the sovereignty
of the countries concerned and casts fear over the
lives and safety of their citizens. At the same time, the
issue is a grave human rights violation as abductees’
invaluable futures have been stolen and their bonds with
their families have been severed. Even now in the harsh
situation of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
many abductees are being deprived of freedom and are
awaiting rescue. As abductees and their families grow
older, the issue can avoid no further delay.
Regrettably, there is no indication that the
authorities of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea have moved to improve the human rights
situation on the ground. Therefore, the efforts of the
international community to ensure accountability are
needed. In March 2017, the Human Rights Council will
receive a report from the Group of Independent Experts
on Accountability for Human Rights Violations in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, as set out by
the Human Rights Council in resolution A/HRC/31/18.
I would also like to recall that General Assembly
resolution 70/172 encourages the Security Council to
take appropriate action to ensure accountability.
With that said, I would like to stress that such
efforts do not aim to isolate the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea from the international community. I
trust that the United Nations human rights mechanisms
always have their doors open to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea for dialogue. We sincerely hope that
at the end of the day, the Democratic People’s Republic

S/PV.7830

of Korea alters its course towards the improvement of
human rights and invests its limited resources in the
improvement of the welfare and fundamental rights
of its citizens instead of in the development of nuclear
weapons and ballistic missiles. We also hope that the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea comes back
to the table of credible dialogue with the international
community in order to resolve our various concerns.
We believe that such a shift will lead to greater stability
in the region.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): At the outset,
let me welcome Deputy Secretary-General, Mr. Jan
Eliasson, and Assistant Secretary-General for Human
Rights, Mr. Andrew Gilmour, back to the Council and
thank them for their briefings. In case this is my final
opportunity in this Chamber, allow me to commend and
congratulate Mr. Eliasson personally for everything
that he has done through his distinguished career on
human rights and other aspects of the Charter of the
United Nations.
We have heard some members argue today that
we should not be focusing on human rights in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea — that this
is not a matter for the Council. I have to respectfully
disagree. When a regime chooses to spend its resources
on reckless nuclear policies and not on its people, peace
and security are threatened. When a State violates the
sovereignty of its neighbours and abducts their citizens,
regional stability is jeopardized. When a regime shuts
off its people from the world, denying them their
most basic rights, the Charter of the United Nations
is ignored. So it is entirely right that we are holding
this session today. Human rights violations are like
the canary in the coal mine, warning us of threats to
international peace and security.
I want to focus my statement on a very specific
human rights concern in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea: the use of forced labour. The word
“concern” does not do the issue justice. Forced labour in
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is a travesty
and a tragedy that has led to the deaths of hundreds of
thousands of North Koreans. In truth, my words cannot
convey the horror so let me use those of Hyuk Kim,
who was held in the Jungeori Labour Camp. He said,
“At Jungiori, there was no sense of being human ... You
do the labour you were ordered to do. No thinking.
No free will. Just fear.”

16-427189/21

S/PV.7830

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

His testimony speaks of unimaginable hunger and
cruelty. He would supplement his meager diet with rats
eaten raw because, as he stated: “If you tried to cook
the rats, the guards would smell the meat or fire, catch
you and beat you mercilessly.”
Such cruelty has been experienced by so many
North Koreans. That cruelty has served only one
purpose: to generate income for the regime. The regime
has chosen to spend that income on its illicit nuclear
and ballistic missile programmes, which violate so
many resolutions of this Council. That is only one part
of the story. Beyond North Korea’s borders, there lies
another travesty, another tragedy. That is the tragedy
of tens of thousands of North Koreans forced to work
abroad to raise money for the regime in circumvention
of United Nations sanctions. It is estimated that that
practice raises as much $2 billion in foreign currency
each year. That money is made by putting North Korean
in unscrupulous mines, factories and construction sites,
often at great risk and often without any protection. For
those workers, being abroad offers no escape from the
cruelty that I described earlier. They live their lives
under constant surveillance by their gang masters, to
whom they lose most of their meager pay. They work
up to 20 hours per day without sufficient food. They
are forcibly separated from their loved ones, unsure of
when or whether they will see them again.
We should call this what it really is. Whether inside
or outside the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
it is modern slavery. The Government of the United
Kingdom is committed to ridding the world of such
a scourge. It is a personal priority of British Prime
Minister, Ms. Theresa May, and the United Kingdom
is galvanzing international efforts to bring an end to
modern slavery globally. We cannot underestimate
the scale of the challenge in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. To date, the regime has refused
to engage in any meaningful dialogue with the
international community on human rights. The Special
Rapporteur and international observers are still denied
full and unhindered access to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. The previous Foreign Minister
said in March that the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea would no longer participate in international
discussions on the issue. That is a shameful rejection
of the international norms and principles that underpin
the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human
Rights. It is also a rejection of the views of the majority
of United Nations Members. Over 100 countries
10/21

09/12/2016

spoke loudly and clearly when the Third Committee
adopted draft resolution A/C.3/71/L.23, calling on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to respect the
rights of its people.
Today, let us all urge the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to re-engage with the international
community and start a process of dialogue — one
that leads to credible, concrete steps to improve the
human rights of its own people. The United Kingdom
believes in such a dialogue. It is why we continue to
have diplomatic relations. It is why we build people
to people links through the sponsorship of education
and humanitarian projects. Moreover, it is why our
Embassy in Pyongyang will continue to deliver strong
messages on human rights directly to the regime. We
will not let up in our efforts to convey the international
community’s concern. We urge the Government of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to take action.
The Council must follow suit.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I thank Deputy Secretary­
General Jan Eliasson and Assistant Secretary-General
Andrew Gilmour for their sound introductions to
our debate.
My delegation believes that gross and flagrant
human rights violations are the flip side of the nuclear
ambitions and aggressive policy of Pyongyang, and
therefore represent a threat to international peace and
security. In that light, I recall paragraph 45 of resolution
2321 (2016), unanimously adopted on 30 November
in response to the fifth nuclear test conducted by
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. In that
paragraph, the Council reiterates its deep concern at
the grave hardship that the people in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea are subjected to, and
condemns the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
for pursing nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles
instead of the welfare of its people.
The latest report of the Secretary-General
(A/71/439) clearly indicates that there has been no
tangible improvement in the human rights situation in
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea since the
report of the commission of inquiry (A/HRC/25/63)
was published in 2014. Therefore, the human rights
and humanitarian situation must remain high on the
international agenda and be regularly discussed,
including in all three principal organs of the United
Nations that deal with human rights, namely, the
16-42718

09/12/2016

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Human Rights Council, the General Assembly and the
Security Council.
Ukraine welcomes the steps undertaken by the
international community in the past few years to
convince the Government in Pyongyang to change its
course of widespread and systematic human rights
violations. We strongly support the conclusions and
recommendations of the commission of inquiry on
human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, as well as the establishment of the High
Commission for Human Rights office in Seoul one year
ago for monitoring and reporting on the situation on the
ground. And yet, no tangible progress on the issue can
be reported so far.
The last time the Council considered the situation
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea was on
10 December 2015 (see S/PV.7575). Since then, that
matter has been raised in the Human Rights Council and
the General Assembly. Has the human rights situation
improved? The long but not exhaustive list of violations
that cause immeasurable suffering to the people in
North Korea, and remain a fact of life over there,
include torture and other cruel, inhuman and degrading
treatments or punishments; rape, extrajudicial and
arbitrary detention and public executions; the absence
of due process and the rule of law, the imposition of
the death penalty for political and religious reasons;
and collective punishments that have lasted as long as
three generations.
We share the sense of importance and urgency
for North Korea to engage with the international
human rights system, including by ensuring safe and
unfettered access to the territory of the country for
United Nations monitoring mechanisms, in particular
the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, as well
as for the Group of Independent Experts on Issues of
Accountability for Human Rights Violations, including
crimes against humanity.
Can the international community tolerate the
continuation of flagrant human rights violations
in the twenty-first century? The answer seems
obvious. Ukraine therefore supports the decision of
the Third Committee on the need to take appropriate
action to ensure accountability, including through
the consideration of referral of the situation in
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to the
International Criminal Court and of the further

S/PV.7830

development of sanctions in order to target effectively
those who appear to be most responsible for human
rights violations.
This year has been unprecedented in terms of
increased tensions on the Korean peninsula, due to
the extremely irresponsible and provocative policy
of Pyongyang. We express our grave concern over
the impact of diverting resources to advance nuclear
weapons and ballistic missiles programmes on the
humanitarian situation in the country. The evolving
militarization has already adversely affected and
continues to undermine the socioeconomic situation. It
has produced a downward spiral and steady deterioration
in which the quality of the lives of ordinary citizens, who
regularly suffer from food shortages and even hunger.
What justification can there be for wasting
precious and limited resources on military programmes
at the expense of the livelihood of the people who are
literally held hostage by the grand ambitions of a few
power- and attention-hungry individuals? Would any
adequate Government choose a path of recklessly
endangering international peace and security over its
direct responsibility to ensure that its own people do
not suffer from malnutrition?
It is important that the international community
acts decisively and jointly to find the balance between
promoting dialogue with Pyongyang and pressing for
accountability, due to its numerous blatant violations
of international law. Left unaccountable, totalitarian
regimes perceive themselves as invincible and challenge
their neighbours and international order. If the Council
is serious about conflict prevention, it should act early
and swiftly. Peace and stability in the region depend
on it.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I wish to
begin by thanking Deputy Secretary-General Mr. Jan
Eliasson and Assistant Secretary-General Mr. Andrew
Gilmour for their briefings. Let me also take this
opportunity to express to Mr. Jan Eliasson the deep
gratitude of France for his exemplary work on all fronts,
beginning with human rights, which serves as a source
of inspiration and admiration.
First and foremost, I wish to welcome the decision
taken once again by the Security Council to allow those
briefings to be delivered under a stand-alone item on the
agenda. The situation, which remains one of the most
serious in the world, warrants the full attention and
mobilization of the Security Council. It is the Council’s

16-4271811/21

S/PV.7830

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

responsibility, inasmuch as some of those crimes may
constitute crimes against humanity. Given the gravity
and systematic nature of those violations, they are the
expression of an absolute totalitarianism that flies in
the face of the rule of law.
The report of the international commission of
inquiry of February 2014 shed light on
“the gravity, scale and nature of these violations
[that] reveal a State that does not have any parallel in
the contemporary world” (A/HRC/25/63, para. 80).
The North Korean regime has chosen to give
priority to repression and to developing its nuclear and
ballistic capacities to the detriment of the economic
development and welfare of its people. In that sense,
it poses a threat to the region and, further afield, a
threat to international peace and security. That is yet
another reason for the Security Council to be seized of
the situation.
The briefings that we have just heard demonstrates
that the situation has remained unchanged since
the commission of inquiry’s report was published,
with mass executions, tens of thousands of political
prisoners, the systematic use of torture, slavery,
famine, abductions, the displacement of populations,
trafficking in human beings and women in particular,
and finally the restriction of access to essential services,
due to the fact that the resources of the State have been
diverted for military purposes. That is, of course, not
an exhaustive list. Let me focus on three points.
First, there is a right to freedom of opinion
and expression, the exercise of which enables us to
determine whether other rights are being respected. In
North Korea, crimes are committed under the guise of
censorship and the prohibition of any form of critical
expression. The witnesses of that tragedy are reduced
to silence. There is a lack of human rights advocates,
a lack of free press and a lack of international media.
The High Commissioner for Human Rights no longer
has access to the territory. The entire population is
subject to controlled education and alienated, or even
imprisoned and killed, in its own land.
Accordingly, we must welcome the holding of this
meeting of the Security Council; the existence of an
office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights in
Seoul, designed to follow the situation in North Korea;
the annual General Assembly resolution; and the
organization of events at the United Nations. All of that
12/21

09/12/2016

can help to maintain the vigilance of the international
community, despite the authorities’ attempt to stifle it.
Secondly, I would like to discuss the fate of the
victims of enforced disappearances and the families
that have awaited news of their loved ones for years.
The tragedy of enforced disappearance, which France
is keen to combat, is out of all proportion in North
Korea. It also extends to other countries, especially
Japan, whose authorities are still waiting for the
enquiries promised by the North Korean authorities
to be conducted. We encourage all States whose
nationals have been abducted by the regime to ratify
the International Convention for the Protection of All
Persons from Enforced Disappearance, which was
adopted 10 years ago. The Convention, the Working
Group and the Committee on Enforced Disappearances
provide States with the technical assistance necessary
to combat this scourge.
France also supports the strong plea made by the
High Commissioner for Human Rights the day before
yesterday, 7 December, in response to the suffering of
these families, some of which have been separated for
more than 60 years, since the Korean War.
Thirdly, I wish also to draw attention to the situation
of North Korean workers abroad, who are the modern
slaves of a regime that diverts the majority of their
income to fund its nuclear and ballistic programmes, in
violation of the international commitments undertaken
by North Korea, in particular with respect to Security
Council resolutions. These workers, who are scattered
across a number of countries, live in conditions that
clearly violate international human rights standards. We
must work together to put an end to the use of these men
and women in service of a cause that seriously endangers
international and regional security and undermines
their most fundamental rights and freedoms.
The Pyongyang regime must shoulder its
responsibilities, which are clear: put an end to violations,
release political prisoners, and provide justice and
reparations. Here I wish to reaffirm the importance of
the fight against impunity and to welcome the work of
the group of independent experts on impunity, whose
recommendations we will read attentively. All options
must be collectively explored, including the referral of
the situation to the International Criminal Court and
sanctions imposed for reasons related to human rights.
Following his visit to Seoul in late November, the
Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights
16-42718

09/12/2016

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea made a
plea for “a people-focused approach in dealing with the
situation in North Korea”.
Let me conclude by drawing the Council’s attention
to those who, risking their lives, crossed borders to
bear witness to the daily oppression that is crushing
the people of North Korea. The Council must spare no
effort to find the ways and means necessary to ensure
that concrete change finally occurs, for the sake of the
security and well-being of these people, these men,
women and children who daily are subject to violations
and live in fear.
Mr. Kandeel (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): My
country listened closely to the briefings on the situation
of human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea and would like to make the following remarks.
The Charter of the United Nations has given a
mandate to the Security Council to address cases
that pose a threat to international peace and security
exclusively, while other organs have been charged with
addressing human rights situations in States, taking
an approach that is based on respect and free from
politicization, slander or the use of the lofty principles
of human rights as a tool for selective targeting in the
service of narrow political interests.
My country would therefore like to express its
dismay at the way in which some are insisting on
portraying human rights violations in a certain country
as one of the root causes of conflict and claiming that
such cases and situations fall under the mandate of the
Security Council. In this regard, we wish to note that we
reject any link between the two issues, which represent
an overlap between the main pillars of the work of the
United Nations.
The promotion of the situation of human rights
in all countries of the world depends on an approach
that is based on honest and constructive dialogue,
international cooperation and the exchange of best
practices, including through technical cooperation.
The Human Rights Council, especially through the
Universal Periodic Review, is an international forum
that allows all States to exchange views and relevant
concerns in order to achieve the common goal of
promoting and protecting human rights in all countries
under review.
Egypt rejects any consideration of the situation
of human rights by the Security Council because we

S/PV.7830

believe in the need to reject politicization, partiality,
subjectivity and double standards. All human rights
issues must be addressed fairly and honestly, and they
should not be used as a means to interfere selectively in
the internal affairs of States, in line with Article 2 of the
Charter of the United Nations and in order to preserve
the credibility of the international bodies mandated
to address human rights as forums for international
cooperation and dialogue instead of confrontation.
On the other hand, and taking into consideration the
aforementioned, Egypt would like to express sympathy
in connection with the issue of Japanese abductees. We
stress the need to find effective means to address the
concerns of the Japanese Government in this regard
at the bilateral level and in international, bilateral and
multilateral forums. We encourage the two parties to
engage in a constructive dialogue to reach an immediate
and satisfactory solution to this issue.
In closing, we stress the need for the political will
necessary to respect the Charter and the prerogatives
of the organs of the United Nations. Current conflicts
around the world, continued occupation and protracted
conflicts, the proliferation of terrorism and weapons of
mass destruction, the increasing number of refugees
and the problem of illegal migration all highlight the
need for the Security Council to focus exclusively on its
important role of maintaining international peace and
security instead of encroaching on the prerogatives of
other United Nations organs.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I wish to
thank all Council members that supported the holding
of this meeting in order to address a grave crisis. I
thank also Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson, whom
we will miss, and assistant Secretary-General Gilmour
for their appropriately bleak briefings.
This is the third time that the Council is meeting
to discuss human rights in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. We first took up the issue in 2014, on
the grounds that the widespread and systematic human
rights violations being committed by the North Korean
Government posed a threat to international peace and
security. Unfortunately for the people of North Korea,
the deplorable human rights situation in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea remains unchanged. As
the Commission of Inquiry on Human Rights in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea put it in its 2014
report, the situation still to this day “does not have any
parallel in the contemporary world”.

16-4271813/21

S/PV.7830

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

As we have seen in other parts of the world, when
Governments flagrantly violate the human rights of their
own people, they almost always show similar disdain
for the international norms that help ensure our shared
security. We see the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea regime grow its illicit weapons programme
rather than growing its own children. According to the
World Health Organization, one in every four children
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea suffers
from stunted growth as a result of chronic malnutrition,
and yet, while children in North Korea go hungry, the
regime continues to channel the overwhelming majority
of its resources into building up a weapons programme
that the Council has repeatedly told it to stop.
Let me give another example of how these two
issues are linked. Last April, the United States hosted
a meeting at the United Nations at which defectors
shared their experiences. One of the speakers was Kim
Hye-sook, who had been sent to the Bukchang political
prison at the young age of 13, where all prisoners,
including children, were forced to work 16- to 20-hour
days in the coal mines. Many died in the camp, she said,
including her husband and brother. Some were literally
worked to death. The prison guards did not care.
Ms. Kim, who spent 14 of her 28 years on this Earth
in the camp, recalled that in the eyes of the guards the
victims were “not even worth one ton of coal”.
Such harrowing conditions would be worthy
of condemnation in any circumstance, but they are
relevant to the discussion of international peace
and security because, as we all know, coal exports
account for one third of the total export revenue of
the Democratic People’s Republic — revenue that,
according to resolutions adopted by this Council, is
supposed to go to helping the North Korean people.
However, that regime uses the revenue from working
its people to death in these coal mines to build more
nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles. This is one of
the many reasons why the sanctions resolution 2321
(2016), adopted by the Security Council last week, is
the first ever to state explicitly that the North Korean
Government must respect and ensure the welfare and
inherent dignity of people in its territory.
So in 2016, let us end the debate on whether the
human rights violations in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea constitute a threat to international
peace and security. This debate distracts us from
focusing on the catastrophic human rights situation in
the that country and what we can do to change it.
14/21

09/12/2016

Today I would like to highlight one of the most
devastating consequences of the actions of the
Democratic People’s Republic: the families that have
been torn apart by the regime’s abuses. In October, I
traveled to the Republic of Korea and Japan, where
I had the chance to meet directly with some of the
affected families. The pain of separation was the
common thread that ran through every one of my
conversations. In South Korea I visited the Hanawon
Resettlement Center, which tries to prepare recently
arrived defectors from North Korea for their immersion
into a completely different world, as well a school in
Seoul for young defectors.
One young woman I met in Hanawon spoke of how
she had told no one — not even her parents — about
her intention to flee North Korea. Yet even though her
parents knew nothing of her plans, local officals went
on to blame them anyway, hounding the family until
they were forced to flee their home and go into hiding.
Another young defector in Seoul told me that her
widowed mother, who also knew nothing in advance of
her daughter’s plans to flee, had been forced to move
seven times by North Korean officials as punishment
for what her daughter had done. She said her mother was
so afraid of being uprooted again that she had stopped
going outside unless she absolutely had to. Both of these
young women, like so many others I met, expressed
profound guilt — imagine that, guilt — for having
added to their families’ already crushing hardships and
for leaving without saying goodbye.
Almost all asked that I not write down their names
for fear that speaking out would lead to even more
reprisals by the regime against their loved ones. In Japan,
I met with the mother and brother of one of the Japanese
citizens abducted by North Korean agents. Megumi
Yokota was just 13 years old when North Korean agents
abducted her in Japan’s ­Niigata prefecture in 1977. Her
mother told me that nearly 40 years later, not a day goes
by when she does not feel the overwhelming pain of
being separated from her daughter: a pain made worse
by not knowing her daughter’s fate.
As a mother myself, I cannot fathom the anguish
of having my daughter taken away and not being able
to find out what happened to her. It is every parent’s
worst nightmare, and it is a nightmare being lived daily
by many families around the world. There are so many
families in Japan and the Republic of Korea who have
been forced to endure a similar nightmare as a result of
the actions of the Democratic People’s Republic: they
16-42718

09/12/2016

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

wake up every day yearning to see a father or brother, a
mother or daughter to whom they may not have spoken
in years or even decades, and who, they worry, may be
suffering terribly inside North Korea. Many fear they
will never get to see them again. It is a pain that ripples
across generations and is felt to this day.
Immediately after this meeting today, the United
States will co-host an event on this issue, together with
the Republic of Korea, Japan and the United Kingdom,
in Conference Room 1, where we will have a chance to
hear directly from two people who are living through
this searing separation. I urge other Council members
to come and hear them speak.
Some may look at the severity of the North
Korea’s oppression and the decades it has persisted
and conclude that there is little we can do to change it.
But that would be a mistake, for there is so much we
can do. We can continue to shine a light on the abuses
the regime commits, as we are doing here today. It is
crucial that we keep holding meetings in the Security
Council on the human rights situation in the North
Korea every year for as long as this human rights crisis
and its destabilizing effects persist.
We can continue to press for accountability for
the perpetrators and architects of those abuses. This is
what the United States did on 6 July, when we released
a report identifying 15 North Korean officials and 8
entities as responsible for or associated with human
rights abuses and censorship. Our message to those
officials and to all mid-level officers, including prison
camp managers and guards, interrogators and defectorchasers, is clear. We are methodically documenting their
abuses, and their impunity will not last forever. When
the days comes that they are publicly held accountable,
we will be ready. In the meantime, we will continue to
collect evidence of their abuses and add names to the
growing list.
We can also seek sanctions for the individuals
and entities responsible for such abuses, as the United
States Department of the Treasury did in July by
adding 11 senior officials and 5 entities to the list of
nationals and blocked persons specially designated
by the United States. I would like to read the names
of those 11 individuals now. They are Kim Jong-un;
Choe Pu Il, Minister of People’s Security; Ri Song
Chol, Councillor in the Ministry of People’s Security;
Kang Song Nam, Bureau Director in the Ministry of
State Security; Cho Yo’n-chun, First Vice Director

S/PV.7830

of the Organization and Guidance Department; Kim
Kyong-Un, First Vice Director of the Organization
and Guidance Department; Kim Ki Nam, Director of
the Propaganda and Agitation Department; Ri Jae-il,
First Vice Director of the Propaganda and Agitation
Department; Choe Chang Pang, Bureau Director in
the Ministry of People’s Security; Cho Il U of the
Reconnaissance General Bureau; and O Chong Kuk of
the Reconnaissance General Bureau.
The Security Council also has important role to
play, not just by continuing to hold meetings like this
one on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
but also by considering the recommendation by the
commission of inquiry that the situation in North
Korea be referred to the International Criminal Court.
We must also consider other appropriate options on
accountability, as Member States urged the Council to
do just a few weeks ago in a draft resolution on human
rights in North Korea that was adopted by consensus in
the Third Committee (A/C.3/71/L.23).
There is a great deal that individual Member States
can do as well, including providing support for the
United Nations Human Rights Office in Seoul, which
is methodically gathering evidence of North Korea’s
human rights violations. Member States can also meet
their obligations under the Security Council sanctions
resolution, particularly the new restrictions on coal
exports, given what we know about the harrowing
conditions in the Government-run mines. Member
States can stop repatriating the people who managed to
escape North Korea, knowing the likelihood that those
who are returned will be sent to the gulags.
These are steps that we can take; they are within
our control. We could save so many lives simply by not
repatriating people who make it across an international
border, believing that they are finally going to be free
of those harrowing conditions. The people of North
Korea have so little power to change the nightmarish
conditions in which they live, and they risk so much by
trying. Do they speak up about not having enough to eat?
They go to the prison camps. Do they try to organize
neighbours or co-workers to change the dreadful living
or labour conditions? They go to the prison camps. Do
they flee for a better life and get caught? They go to the
prison camps.
Yet we, who risk so little by speaking up on
behalf of people who suffer so much, have so many
ways in which we can help change the situation in the

16-4271815/21

S/PV.7830

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. Do we not owe
it to those people trapped in North Korea to at least try?
Would we not want others to do the same if we were in
their place?
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank the Deputy Secretary-General,
Jan Eliasson, and the Assistant Secretary-General for
Human Rights, Andrew Gilmour, for their briefings.
Uruguay does not recognize limitations as to where
human rights should be discussed. The protection
of human rights is one of the pillars of the United
Nations and a cross-cutting issue within the entire
system. Clearly, there is a close link between human
rights violations and the rise of conflict and how
those conflicts turn into threats to international peace
and security.
Uruguay, as a country that defends, promotes and
protects human rights and fundamental freedoms,
would like to express its dismay at the human rights
situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
especially with regard to the violations of the rights
to life, the freedom of expression, privacy, access to
information, the freedom of peaceful assembly and
association and the freedom of movement — and the list
goes on. The human rights situation in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea is of particular importance
in the current context of heightened tensions at the
regional level, which not only endanger stability on the
Korean peninsula, but also threaten international peace
and security. Uruguay is aware that the situation is not
unique to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
as there are many other countries where Governments
constantly violate the human rights of their people; but
those countries are not necessarily on the agenda of the
Council nor are there General Assembly resolutions
regarding the abuses in those countries.
We acknowledge that there have been the faintest
positive signs that the Government of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea has showed itself to be
receptive to certain activities carried out by specialized
agencies in the promotion, protection and monitoring
of human rights, such as the cooperation of the North
Korean Government with the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights.
This year, the Third Committee considered and
commented on the report of the Special Rapporteur
on the human rights situation in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea (A/71/402). In so doing,
16/21

09/12/2016

the international community sent a clear message of
condemnation of the situation. Uruguay sees no other
option other than that of the path of dialogue, negotiation
and political commitment. Once more, we insist on the
resumption of the Six-Party Talks, the forum that, in
our view, is most conducive to finding a solution to the
problems on the Korean peninsula.
Mrs. Schwalger (New Zealand): New Zealand
shares the concerns outlined by Deputy SecretaryGeneral Eliasson and Assistant Secretary-General
Gilmour, as well as those expressed by other Council
members, about the severity and systematic nature of
human rights violations in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. Sadly, we have seen no discernible
improvement since the Council last discussed this
agenda item. Some of the most serious human rights
violations of our time, including murder, enslavement,
torture, imprisonment, rape, forced abortion, other
sexual violence and starvation continue to be reported.
It is no surprise that the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea regime works so hard to restrict an independent
assessment of the situation.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
leadership maintains tight control over its
population — control grounded in terror instilled by
egregious and widespread human rights violations.
It is a regime that executes its citizens, without due
process, for acts as minor as watching or distributing
foreign media. Torture and ill-treatment at detention
facilities, including in its extensive prison camp
system, are routine, as we have heard this morning.
Harsh restrictions remain on the freedom of movement
by ordinary North Koreans.
The continuation of such gross violations of human
rights demonstrates that the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea authorities do not feel bound by
the rules of the international system. Pyongyang’s
weapons-of-mass-destruction programme exemplifies
that attitude. We must not stand by and let that
rejection of internationally accepted norms, under
the guise of this being a so-called internal matter, go
uncontested. To do so would be to fail the people of
North Korea. To do so would be to fail the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s neighbours, which are
faced with a heightened security threat resulting from
Pyongyang’s reckless development of weapons of mass
destruction — a programme advanced on the back of
the suffering of its people. And, to do so would be to
16-42718

09/12/2016

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

fail ourselves, given the regime’s continued defiance of
the Council’s resolutions.
As the Council stressed in resolution 2321 (2016),
there is an urgent need for the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to respect and ensure the inherent
dignity of people within its territory. As noted by others
this morning, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
nationals are being sent abroad by their authorities
to work under conditions that reportedly amount to
forced labour. That is one of the ways in which the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is able to
subvert United Nations sanctions and fund its weaponsof-mass-destruction programme. New Zealand finds
the diversion of domestic funds towards weapons of
mass destruction, and away from desperately needed
humanitarian support, simply deplorable.
Despite the time that has passed since the release of
the commission of inquiry’s report (A/HRC/25/63), the
urgency of its recommendations has not diminished.
We must ensure that our picture of the situation in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea remains up-todate. In that regard, we welcome the important work
being undertaken by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights in Seoul.
We also welcome the appointment of a new Special
Rapporteur on the human rights situation, Tomás
Quintana, who recently completed his first visit to the
region. The Special Rapporteur has emphasized the
importance of efforts to both engage the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and pursue accountability.
Those are not mutually exclusive goals.
Engagement is important in order to ensure that we
improve the human rights situation in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. In that regard, there
have been some small positive developments, such as
improvements in the rights of persons with disabilities.
We should also be prepared to support practical options
for pursuing accountability against those within the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea system who
bear primary responsibility for the worst crimes that
have been committed.
New Zealand reiterates its call on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to take immediate steps
to bring an end to all human rights violations and to
meaningfully cooperate with the Special Rapporteur
and other international human rights mechanisms. We
urge the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
review its policies, remove constraints on the United

S/PV.7830

Nations and other international organizations, and
ensure that meaningful assistance is provided that can
make a practical difference to the lives of its citizens.
New Zealand also encourages the international
community, particularly those States with an established
relationship with the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, to engage the Pyongyang authorities on human
rights issues where possible, and to encourage its
cooperation and participation in human rights dialogue.
We must make our concerns known and be clear that we
expect tangible improvement.
Finally, we call on the Council to remain seized of
the human rights situation in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, given its clear link to Pyongyang’s
weapons-of-mass-destruction programme and the
continued absence of meaningful engagement or any
discernible progress by the authorities in addressing
the Council’s concerns.
Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I wish to thank the Deputy
Secretary-General, Mr. Jan Eliasson, and the Assistant
Secretary-General for Human Rights, Mr. Andrew
Gilmour, for their briefings today.
At the outset, I wish to reiterate my delegation’s
principled position that issues of concern should be
addressed through constructive engagement, dialogue
and consultations. We believe that as a responsible
member of the international community, and
particularly as a member of the Security Council, we
have an obligation not to shy away from discussions on
issues that may be considered delicate or complex. It
is with that consideration that we have supported the
proposal for the Council to have a discussion on the
matter before us.
We note the constructive engagement undertaken
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea with
the various human rights mechanisms. That has
been evidenced by its continued participation in the
universal periodic review and acceptance of a number
of recommendations made therein. We believe that
full implementation of the accepted recommendations
would contribute positively to the enjoyment of human
rights and socioeconomic development of the people
of the Democratic People’s Republic, as highlighted
by Assistant Secretary-General Gilmour. We are also
encouraged by its submission of its combined second,
third and fourth reports to the Committee on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against

16-4271817/21

S/PV.7830

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Women and its combined fifth and sixth reports, earlier
this year, to the Committee on the Rights of the Child.
The United Nations country team has also worked
with the Government of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to complete a strategic framework
for the 2017-2021 period. We understand that the
five programming principles — a human rightsbased approach, gender equality, environmental
sustainability, results-based management and capacity
development — have been integrated into the framework
and tailored to the country context. We nevertheless
encourage the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to consider accommodating the requests of the
commission of inquiry and the Special Rapporteur
to visit the country. These visits, we believe, would
allow them to have a proper assessment of the human
rights situation in the country. The visits would also
further ensure the credibility of the outcome reports
and allay fears of politicization and dispel allegations
of partiality. We further believe that such engagement
would provide an avenue for the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to convey its view and position on
the human rights situation in the country, including on
the issue of obstruction. Malaysia further encourages
the Government of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to also engage in technical cooperation activities
in the field of human rights with the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights and his Office
with a view to improving the human rights situation in
the country.
The year 2016 has seen the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea take the dangerous and provocative
steps of undertaking nuclear tests and an unprecedented
number of ballistic missile launches. Those are not
steps that contribute to confidence-building in the
region, nor are they constructive towards engagement
and dialogue. Malaysia voted in favour of resolution
2321 (2016), which the Council recently adopted.
Malaysia’s vote was an unequivocal reaffirmation of its
belief that the illicit development and procurement of
weapons of mass destruction and related technologies
and capabilities by any State is unacceptable and
cannot be tolerated by the international community.
In that regard, Malaysia encourages the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to step up cooperation
and engagement with the Council, other partners and
stakeholders, including the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006), with a view to
addressing non-proliferation concerns.
18/21

09/12/2016

Malaysia remains convinced that the interests of the
international community vis-à-vis international peace
and security would be best served by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s immediate return to the
negotiating table. Malaysia calls on the Democratic
People’s Republic to recommit itself to peaceful
dialogue and negotiations under the framework of the
Six-Party Talks. Malaysia believes that all efforts should
aim at reaffirming the commitment to maintaining
regional peace and security and establishing a peaceful
environment in the Korean peninsula. We also continue
to emphasize the importance for both the Republic of
Korea and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
to honour the terms of the 25 August 2015 agreement
in order to continue making progress in inter-Korean
relations, as well as to maintain peace and security in
the Korean peninsula.
Malaysia is further of the view that the ASEAN
Regional Forum, premised on confidence-building
measures, preventive diplomacy and peaceful resolution
of conflict, remains available as a possible mechanism
for concerned and interested parties to constructively
engage with the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
at the intergovernmental level on the situation in the
Korean peninsula.
My delegation wishes to conclude by reiterating
Malaysia’s readiness to engage constructively with all
Council members, the United Nations, other partners
and stakeholders, as well as with the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, on this issue.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the
outset, let me too thank Deputy Secretary-General,
Mr. Jan Eliasson, and the Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Human Rights, Mr. Andrew Gilmour, for
their briefings.
The delegation of Senegal believes that it is
incumbent upon each State to be responsible for the
protection and promotion of the rights of its citizens,
thereby contributing to strengthening international
peace and security. Senegal is convinced that the
exercise of human rights is essential to human dignity,
and that is why my country has made the protection
and promotion of fundamental rights and freedoms
for individuals a cardinal principle — with respect, of
course, for the diversity of our human societies. We are
of the view that it is necessary to create conditions for
strengthened international cooperation in the area of
16-42718

09/12/2016

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

S/PV.7830

human rights, emphasizing their universal, indivisible
and interdependent nature.

and protection of its citizens, is the principal cause of
their desperation.

Therefore, as an independent and sovereign State,
we believe that it is important that we engage with
solidarity in all issues, including those related to human
rights, on the basis of mutual respect and through
constructive dialogue. It is in that spirit that we have
implemented appropriate mechanisms to promote and
protect human rights throughout the world, which is
an ongoing challenge that constitutes one of the pillars
of our Organization. Indeed, the mechanisms that
have been set up by the United Nations — especially
the Human Rights Council, the Universal Periodic
Review and the bodies created under international
instruments — while not perfect, are pertinent and
complementary tools for dealing with human rights
issues, as can be seen in the relevant reports of the
Secretary-General.

The citizens of North Korea want to flee their
country. They seek liberty, dignity and respect and are
willing to risk their own lives to that end. They are even
prepared to risk summary execution. Some 80 per cent
of those who manage to get out are women, and they are
very often captured by human trafficking networks that
force them into prostitution or to marry abroad.

Having said that, we take special note of the
Human Rights Council’s report on the human rights
situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. We encourage that country to cooperate more
with the relevant mechanisms for the promotion of
human rights, especially the Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea and the commission of inquriy on
human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, established by the Human Rights Council in its
resolution 22/13.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Spain.
I, too, wish to thank the Deputy Secretary-General,
Mr. Jan Eliasson, and the Assistant Secretary-General,
Mr. Andrew Gilmour.
Any gross and systematic violation of human
rights is a threat to international peace and security.
Regrettably, this type of situation has been occurring
too often in too many places in the world, and the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is no exception.
That is why Spain continues to support the ongoing
examination of this matter by the Security Council. I
will not dwell on the details, but naturally I am surprised
that a Government that is capable of modernizing its
arsenal at any cost should allow its people to suffer
continuous famines. I am even more surprised that
the State itself, which is responsible for the security

It is important to recall that progress has been made,
such as the issuance of reports on the implementation
of As we have seen in the report of the Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women and the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
But much more needs to be done.
The Security Council has not remained indifferent
to the suffering of the people of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. In resolution 2321 (2016), which was
adopted just a few weeks ago and is the latest to impose
sanctions against the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, is a good example of that. But we must pursue our
work and remain aware that condemning human rights
violations is undoubtedly necessary but not sufficient.
Pressure must also be accompanied by dialogue. In that
spirit, I wish to highlight four elements that the Spanish
Mission considered to be key.
First, the Committee pursuant to resolution
1718 (2006), which has played a significant role as a
pressuring mechanism, has also been able to adopt
a banking channel to fund United Nations agencies
operating in that country.
Secondly, we must provide necessary support to
United Nations agencies working in the country. In that
regard, I highlight the work that the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, which was opened
last year in Seoul, must undertake and is undertaking.
Thirdly, we must offer the necessary support to
civil society.
Fourthly, there is a need to send a very clear
message against impunity, but that cannot happen if
there is only one participant in the dialogue. The first
step must therefore be to enable to the long-blocked
visit of the Special Rapporteur and other human rights
mechanisms to the country.
Moreover, we must insist that the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea shed light on the hundreds

16-4271819/21

S/PV.7830

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

of abductions, most of them of Japanese citizens, whose
whereabouts have not yet been identified. We can
achieve peace and stability in the region only when the
Pyongyang regime shoulders its responsibility for that
violation of the sovereignty of neighbouring States.
The situation in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea is extremely complex and requires
a multidimensional approach. It is our hope that this
meeting will serve to ensure that the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea responds to the cocnerns
that have been expressed today and finally ends its
internal human rights violations.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
On behalf of Deputy Secretary-General Jan
Eliasson, I wish to offer his thanks to Council
members for their work and his apologies for having
had to leave the Chamber. The Deputy SecretaryGeneral is performing his duties as Acting SecretaryGeneral today.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Republic of Korea.
Mr. Cho Tae-yul (Republic of Korea): I commend
your leadership, Sir, in convening today’s meeting on
the human rights situation in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. My delegation is grateful to be a part
of this important meeting. I also thank Deputy SecretaryGeneral Jan Eliasson and Assistant Secretary-General
Andrew Gilmour for their enlightening briefings, which
reminded us once again of the reason why we must take
up the issue of human rights in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea in this chamber.
On a more personal note, it is with a heavy heart
that I make my first statement to the Security Council
as the new Permanent Representative of the Republic of
Korea on an issue that has such serious implications for
the future of our divided nation.
Since 2014, when the commission of inquiry
first shed light on the dire and unprecedented human
rights situation in the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, the international community — including
the Council — has moved swiftly to seek its early
resolution. Concrete steps have also been taken to save
North Koreans from the pain and horror that plague
their lives each and every day. Those steps, to name
just a few, include the establishment of the Office of
the High Commissioner for Human Rights in Seoul
20/21

09/12/2016

last year and the group of independent experts on
accountability this year.
Regrettably, however, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea has continued to turn a blind eye
to international calls for improving its human rights
record. Countless instances of torture, execution and
arbitrary detention are still being committed, and people
disappear overnight into political prison camps devoid
of any semblance of judicial due process. Evidence of
systematic and widespread human rights violations
is also found among the 60,000 or so North Korean
workers abroad, who are suffering from what amounts
to forced labour. Even as I speak, a large number of
North Koreans are risking their lives to cross the border
in search of freedom and happiness. The people of in
North Korea are destined to live miserable lives from
the very moment of their birth, trapped in the State
machinery that systematically tramples on their basic
human rights.
As was rightly pointed out in draft resolution
A/C.3/71/L.23, adopted by the Third Committee of the
General Assembly last month, the gravity of the problem
lies in the fact that such systematic, widespread,
and gross human rights violations are committed by
institutions under the effective control of its leadership.
The leadership in Pyongyang shamelessly employs a
reign of terror merely for the sake of the survival of
his regime.
Moreover, he has poured his country’s already
scarce resources into developing nuclear weapons and
missiles,w hile completely ignoring the impoverished
livelihoods of his people. In fact, this year alone the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has squandered
an estimated $200 million on two nuclear tests and
24 missile launches. In September, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea went so far as to conduct
its fifth nuclear test near a region severely hit by the
worst flooding in decades, which had taken took place
only a couple of days before. How can we comprehend
such brazen and shameless behaviour by a regime
that is begging for international aid for flood-damage
recovery, yet spending a far greater amount of money
on the development of weapons of mass destruction?
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
reckless pursuit of developing nuclear weapons is not
only a serious threat to international peace and security,
but also a grave human rights problem that threatens
the very survival of its people,who are already at risk.
16-42718

09/12/2016

The situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

That is the reason why the human rights situation in
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea stands
apart from those in other places of the world and why
the Security Council has an important role to play in
seeking its resolution.
The history of over a half-century of division on
the Korean peninsula is also the history of the agony
and misery of 130,000 separated families in both parts
of the divide. Seven decades after the division of our
nation, we are witnessing yet another sad chapter
of family separation being written in the history of
the Korean peninsula. A case in point is the heartwrenching story of the 30,000 North Korean refugees
who have now settled in the South. As the price for their
newly found freedom in the South, they are living a life
of agony, longing day and night for reunion with the
beloved ones they left behind in the North.
The North Korean leader may have a firm belief
that it is only nuclear weapons and missiles that can
ensure the survival of his regime, but that is a delusion.
No regime can sustain itself as long as there are those
at home who are ready to risk their lives to escape the
reign of terror. Concrete and sincere steps must be taken
without further delay so that those people — wherever

S/PV.7830

they may reside — can carry on a normal, dignified
life. Until the day comes when we see such a change in
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s behaviour,
we must continue to exert pressure on that country.
If we stop working together on this united front, it
would be tantamount to abetting the most systematic,
widespread and gross human rights violations on the
globe. As William Gladstone once said, “justice delayed
is justice denied.”
I cannot recall without pain the story that I heard
from a North Korean woman just before I left Seoul last
month. A teenage cellmate of hers back in the prison
camp in North Korea was crushed to death as others
in the cell jumped on her to catch and eat a rat that had
fallen into her bowl of soup. I was stunned and rendered
speechless as that woman, with tears in her eyes and
anger in her face, recounted this haunting story. And
yet that is just one of too many.
The North Korean leader must realize before it
is too late that time is not on his side. He must listen
attentively to the solemn voice of reason resonating in
the Chamber today, and that is that darkness can never
overcome the light.
The meeting rose at noon.

16-4271821/21
