S/PV.8175

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8175th meeting

Tuesday, 6 February 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Alotaibi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kuwait)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Alemu
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Allen
Ms. Tachco

Agenda
Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)
Working methods of the Security Council
Letter dated 24 January 2018 from the Permanent Representative of Kuwait to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2018/66)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-03316 (E)
*1803316*

S/PV.8175

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Implementation of the note by the President of the
Security Council (S/2017/507)
Working methods of the Security Council
Letter dated 24 January 2018 from the
Permanent Representative of Kuwait
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2018/66)
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance with
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure,
I invite the representatives of Algeria, Argentina,
Australia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belgium,
Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Egypt,
Estonia, Finland, Germany, Guatemala, Hungary,
India, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Italy,
Japan, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Maldives, Mexico,
Morocco, New Zealand, Norway, Pakistan, Portugal,
Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Slovakia, South Africa,
Switzerland, Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine, Uruguay and
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Ian Martin,
Executive Director of Security Council Report, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I should like to draw the attention of Council
members to document S/2018/66, which contains the
text of a letter dated 24 January 2018 from the Permanent
Representative of Kuwait to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept note on the item under consideration.
I would like to welcome to this meeting Ambassador
Ma Zhaoxu, Permanent Representative of the People’s
Republic of China to the United Nations.
I now give the floor to Mr. Martin.
Mr. Martin: I congratulate you, Mr. President,
on this prompt fulfilment of the commitment Kuwait
made as a candidate to highlight the improvement of
the working methods of the Security Council.
2/64

06/02/2018

It is a privilege for Security Council Report to
be invited to brief the Council for the first time. The
declared mission of our organization is to advance
the transparency and effectiveness of the Security
Council. For a little over 12 years now, a small team,
first headed by a former Permanent Representative who
had served on the Council, Ambassador Colin Keating
of New Zealand, has been able to report publicly and
independently on the activities of the Council and its
subsidiary bodies, thanks to the cooperation we have
received from all its members. That has included
following closely both the Council’s discussion of its
working methods and their evolution in practice, and
the four research reports on working methods we
have published over the years, we hope, have made a
contribution to institutional memory. The adoption
of last year’s note by the President S/2017/507, which
represents a further achievement of the sustained
efforts of Japan during its successive terms chairing the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions, provided a trigger for the most
recent of our reports.
Some recent developments in the Council’s practice
that are now codified in note 507 certainly seem to us
to be advances in transparency and effectiveness. The
move to earlier election of non-permanent members
was of course a decision of the General Assembly, but
the subsequent decision of the Council to invite newly
elected members to earlier observation of Council
meetings has been a significant contribution to their
ability to prepare for membership. The commitment
to earlier designation of the chairs of subsidiary
bodies allows for the more effective handover of
those responsibilities. The undertaking of informal
consultations regarding those appointments jointly by
two members — understood to be one elected and one
permanent member — rather than designation by the
permanent members alone, represented a compromise
in negotiations, but some improved recognition of
the voice of elected members in the allocation of
their responsibilities. Security Council Report seeks
to make its own contribution to the preparation of
elected members by offering its knowledge and
experience — including on working methods — to any
and all of them.
Note 507 declares, in its first paragraph, that the
members of the Council are committed to implementing
the measures in its annex. Yet as one of the Council’s
then members observed in the last such open debate,
18-03316

06/02/2018

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

S/PV. 8175

agreements may be reached but then are simply not
implemented. I want therefore to focus on some areas
of stated agreement that, in the opinion of Security
Council Report, would, if implemented, contribute
significantly to the effectiveness of the Council.

one round of discussions with all members; and that
penholders should provide a reasonably sufficient time
for consideration by all members. Moreover, there
should be informal consultation in an early manner
with the broader membership.

Previous open debates display repeated concern
regarding the operation of the penholder system. It is
a relatively recent practice, which Security Council
Report has witnessed becoming entrenched during our
short lifetime, and Member States that have returned
to the Council after a decade or more of absence have
noted the closing down of space for initiatives of elected
members. The joint statement of six elected members
from six regions in the October 2015 open debate (see
S/PV.7539) noted that the system has

This might seem an obvious statement of good
practice, but it is far from being the reality we have
often observed. As one of the then members described
it in the Council’s last open debate,

“diminished the opportunity for wider Council
engagement, especially by the elected members”
and “cuts across the principle of collective
responsibility that underpins the Charter.”
(S/PV.7539, p. 8)
Since 2014, notes of the President have
institutionalized penholdership as a recognized, if
informal arrangement, yet without any process for the
Council itself to designate or review its allocation.
Note 507 reiterates that any member of the Council
may be a penholder, and also that more than one
member may act as co-penholder. But in practice three
permanent members remain today sole penholders on
the overwhelming majority of country situations on the
Council’s agenda. Initiatives by elected members — on
the humanitarian aspects of the Syrian conflict, on
the protection of medical personnel — have shown
what they can achieve, but remain all too rare.
Co-penholdership would surely be a way of drawing
more fully on those who chair the relevant sanctions
committee, or have regional or other strong expertise
on a country situation.
Closely linked to the penholder system is the
manner of negotiations, which Security Council
Report observes closely and reports on. The quality
of negotiations and their outcomes are of supreme
importance to the effectiveness of the Council.
The latest note 507 addresses this more fully than
its predecessors. It stresses that drafting should be
carried out in an inclusive manner that will allow the
participation of all members; that penholders should
engage in timely consultation with all members with
openness and flexibility; that there should be at least

“[p]enholders routinely take zero drafts straight
to meetings of so-called experts. This precludes
any real effort at building genuine consensus
on the key policy questions to be considered.
Non-penholders have to choose between accepting
a text largely as presented, or risk being accused
of torpedoing important documents if they wish to
make substantive policy proposals. Those practices
are neither effective, sustainable nor respectful
of the perspectives of other Council members.”
(S/PV.7740, p.9)
The year 2016 saw the greatest-ever number of
non-consensual resolutions in the post-Cold War
period, and in some cases this explicitly reflected not
just political differences but unhappiness with the
negotiating process. In 2017, other than the high number
of vetoes — the highest since 1988 — the Council
achieved greater unanimity, and it is to be hoped that
this reflected better negotiating practice.
The quality of negotiations is never more important
than when the Council is adopting or revising the
mandate of a peace operation, and in this context
troop- and police-contributing countries have a special
stake. Our most recent report tracks the long history
of efforts to improve the Council’s engagement with
such countries, which began as far back as 1994. It is
depressing to me, as a former member of the Highlevel Independent Panel on United Nations Peace
Operations, to contrast the repeated commitments
to enhanced interaction over two decades with what
our report described as a lack of effective dialogue
generating frustration on all sides and affecting
mandate implementation. Given the Council’s current
focus on strategic reviews of peace operations, and the
serious crises faced today by so many operations, there
could not be a more important time for the Council to
give effect to the commitments made again in note 507
to timely consultations, information-sharing and more
interactive and focused informal consultations among

18-033163/64

S/PV.8175

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

Council members, the Secretariat and troop- and
police-contributing countries.
Note 507 seeks to encourage, in a number of ways,
information from the Secretariat being presented in
the most helpful manner and greater interaction with
its briefers. However, during the negotiations on the
note, members were unable to agree on a reference
to situational awareness briefings — the most recent
effort to find an appropriate format for the Council to
receive early warning of situations that may require
its consideration. At a time when the Council and the
Secretary-General are focused on the prevention of
conflict, it seems important that Council members
should reach agreement among themselves and with the
Secretariat on how the Council wishes to be kept well
informed and therefore to be ready to engage promptly
on emerging threats to peace and security.
For several years now, Security Council Report
has had the privilege of accompanying almost all
Council missions and informing the wider membership
about them in real time. That experience makes us
firm believers in the value they can have, in their
impact both on interlocutors and on the Council’s own
understanding of situations it is addressing.
I have a more personal appreciation going further
back, to 1999, when as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in what was then East Timor, I
received five members of the Council on its first mission
for five years in a United Nations compound under siege
during post-ballot violence — a mission that played an
important role in obtaining Indonesia’s invitation for
international assistance to restore security.
With five missions in both 2016 and 2017, the
Council itself is clearly convinced of their value. That
could surely be enhanced not just by the standard
formulation of terms of reference and subsequent
briefing, as described in note 507, but by more strategic
prior discussion of the objectives around which the
Council can unite and subsequent discussion of the
follow-up.
There are many other aspects of working methods
that I cannot take more time to discuss. Security Council
Report made suggestions for greater synergy in the
relationship between the Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission in another of our recent reports, consistent
with but going beyond the general importance of
communication and interaction enshrined in note 507.
4/64

06/02/2018

Perhaps this is a good way to end: by emphasizing
that successive notes 507 have been valuable
codifications of existing agreements regarding Council
practice, but advances in that practice depend on the
constant creativity and initiative of members of the
Council. We have described in our most recent report
how elected members and the wider membership have
contributed to past developments, and I trust that this
open debate will give impetus to further developments
in the transparency and effectiveness of the Council.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Martin
for his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my national capacity.
At the outset, allow me to express my sincere
appreciation to all Member States that will be
participating in today’s open debate. I would also like to
welcome the valuable briefing made by Mr. Ian Martin
at the beginning of this meeting.
The development and improvement of the
working methods of the Security Council are critical
to shouldering its responsibilities in maintaining
international peace and security. Over the past
25 years, many improvements have been introduced
in its working methods, especially after the end of the
Cold War. They include communication between the
Council and non-member States, as well as between
the Council and other United Nations organs, such as
the General Assembly; the flow of information from
and to the Council; the marked increase in the number
of formal and thematic and other meetings that involve
the participation of non-governmental and civil society
organizations; and the circulation of Council documents
to non-member States before their adoption.
These improvements are critical and cannot be
underestimated. Credit for them goes to the Security
Council, especially its non-permanent members,
and to a number of groups of States that launched
many initiatives as part of the intergovernmental
negotiations on Security Council reform. Although
these improvements are important to ensuring the
transparency of the Council, they remain insufficient.
There is still room for more improvements that would
enhance the Council’s role in carrying out its tasks
and responsibilities as stated in the Charter of the
United Nations.
The participation of Member States in the
decision-making process within the Council remains
18-03316

06/02/2018

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

weak as a result of its working methods and the
lack of transparency under the pretext of ensuring
effectiveness, efficiency and quick decision-making.
However, we believe that it is important to engage all
Member States, especially States particularly affected,
and to consult with them within an agreed framework
before making any decisions, in accordance with
Articles 31 and 32 of the Charter.
While we stress the importance of implementing
Article 25 of the Charter with regard to Member States’
implementation of the Council’s resolutions, the Council
must also comply with other Articles to ensure the
transparency and credibility of its decisions, especially
when it comes to issues related directly to the security
and stability of Member States, such as imposing
sanctions and establishing peacekeeping operations.
We are aware that the General Assembly, as part
of the intergovernmental negotiations, is currently
discussing comprehensive reform of the Security
Council within the five issues set out in its decision
62/557, including improving the working methods
of the Council. However, we reaffirm the need to
address another critical issue, namely, the veto. Many
challenges remain in addressing that issue. The abuse
of the veto by some of the five permanent members on
many occasions has undermined the credibility of the
decision-making process and has prevented the Council
in some cases from carrying out its responsibilities
and from taking the necessary measures to maintain
international peace and security. Some permanent
Council members have used the right to the veto on
some occasions during past years to protect their own
national interests and the interests of their allies.
I would like to note that the State of Kuwait is
among the signatories of the code of conduct of the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group,
whereby members of the Council pledge not to vote
against any draft resolution intended to prevent crimes
against humanity, genocide and war crimes, especially
in the Security Council. We also welcome the FrenchMexican initiative, which calls for voluntarily
refraining from using the right to the veto in cases of
crimes against humanity. We hope that we will be able
to reach an agreement to restrain the use of the veto on
humanitarian issues, including the urgent delivery of
humanitarian assistance to civilians in need, medical
evacuation and the imposition of a humanitarian truce.

S/PV. 8175

The State of Kuwait, as Chair of the Informal
Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions, attaches great importance to
the role of Member States in improving the Council’s
working methods. We have chosen to organize this
open debate — the first on this topic since July 2016
(see S/PV.7740) — to allow all Member States to
express their views on the working methods and to
make concrete proposals for their improvement. We
look forward to hearing their opinions on improving
the working methods of the Council and to building on
the lauded efforts of our predecessors.
We cannot address progress in improving the
working methods of the Council without referring to the
noteworthy efforts made by the previous Chairs of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions, especially Japan, which played a
pivotal role as Chair of the Informal Working Group in
the adoption of the revised note S/2017/507 in August
2017. The note has become a useful reference for all,
especially the newly elected members. In that regard,
I would like to shed light on a number of substantial
elements of note S/2017/507 that we consider very
beneficial, especially as newly elected members.
First, under paragraph 140 of the revised note, the
Security Council invites the newly elected members of
the Council to observe all meetings of the Council and
its subsidiary bodies and the informal consultations of
the whole for a period of three months, from 1 October
immediately preceding their term of membership. The
Council also invites the Secretariat to provide all the
relevant Council communications to the newly elected
members during that period.
I would also like to bring up another important
point pertaining to the appointment of the Chairs of
the subsidiary bodies. The members of the Council are
required to consult informally with the newly elected
members on this issue. Such consultations should
be informal, undertaken in a balanced, transparent,
effective and comprehensive manner and concluded
before the month of October. These practices have
proven to be useful not only for the newly elected
members, but for the Council as a whole, allowing it to
work coherently and effectively from the beginning of
the year.
The State of Kuwait has only just begun its
membership on the Council. However, we have spared
no effort to ensure the transparency and inclusivity

18-033165/64

S/PV.8175

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

of our work. As Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004), concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Kuwait organized
the first meeting, on 26 January, in an open format,
allowing all States concerned to attend so as to increase
transparency and inclusivity.
I also welcome the convening of informal briefings,
which has become a common practice over the past
several years. Accordingly, Kuwait intends to convene
a wrap-up session at the end of this month to highlight
the main landmarks of our presidency, and I look
forward to the participation of all Member States, both
from the Council and the general membership.
While the revised text of note 507 is comprehensive
and balanced, we stress the need for the Council
to review progress periodically and ensure its full
and effective implementation. In that regard, the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions intends to assess all gaps
in the implementation of the note to ensure the full
implementation of the practices recommended therein,
and to consider proposals made by Member States
today in an attempt to ensure transparency, inclusivity
and interactive exchanges in the work of the Council.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Council.
Ms. Tachco (United States of America): I thank
Mr. Martin for his important briefing, which I believe
will give us a great road map for our work in the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions.
It is easy to get bogged down in the details of
working methods. Those details are important, without
a doubt. We want the Security Council to operate as
effectively and efficiently as it can, but we, the United
States, want to focus on just one aspect of our working
methods today, that is, we want to talk about people.
We need to commit ourselves to listen carefully to
the people around the world who are affected by our
decisions and to keep the impact of conflicts on them
foremost in our minds. If we could truly channel the
perspectives of the people living in places like South
Sudan, Syria or the Democratic Republic of the Congo
who have been traumatized by years of conflict, think
of how our responses would change. But all too often
6/64

06/02/2018

that is not how our meetings work. Instead of thinking
about actual conditions on the ground, we default to
talking in generalities that can dull the senses. We talk
in statistics that can never fully capture the suffering
that happens outside this Chamber.
That is why the information that the Council
receives from on-the-ground monitoring is essential for
conflict prevention, and we must be inclusive and allow
for a full range of voices to explain the dynamics of
conflicts and the totality of their impact on civilians,
communities and societies. It is for those reasons that
we have so frequently sought to have civil society,
human rights defenders and humanitarian experts brief
the Council.
The voices from the field are important for two
main reasons. First, the information that we receive
from humanitarian workers and human rights defenders
differs from other types of reports. In part, that is
because without their perspective our knowledge of a
conflict is incomplete. When civil society briefers join
us, we hear about cases of torture, arbitrary arrests and
crackdowns on peaceful protests. Those are human
rights issues that can deeply affect our understanding
of a conflict. In fact, such human rights violations may
be the source of a conflict, and pursuing accountability
can be key to a durable peace.
We therefore need to hear perspectives not just
from the Government elites, but from the people who
are documenting credible cases of human suffering.
Closing our eyes and ears to those voices does not
advance our interest in maintaining international peace
and security. Rather, it leads to discussions that are
detached from realities on the ground and impedes our
ability to fully deliver on our responsibilities on the
Security Council.
We need to be especially mindful of the importance
of hearing perspectives from women and girls in
conflict. Their voices are easy to overlook in official
reports, but a fundamental part of the Council’s
modern agenda is recognizing the need to include
women and girls at every stage of conflict resolution
and peacebuilding. We know that peace agreements are
more durable when women are at the table. By the same
token, we strengthen our own mandates when we take
gender perspective into account. The best way to do
that is simple: inviting women from conflict areas to
share their views with us directly.
18-03316

06/02/2018

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

Secondly, human rights reporting and monitoring
give the Council improved situational analysis and earlywarning capabilities. Both are needed if we are going
to improve the Council’s track record in preventing
conflict. The Council has already acknowledged, in
paragraph 13 of resolution 2171 (2014), that “serious
abuses and violations of international human rights or
humanitarian law, including sexual and gender-based
violence, can be an early indication of a descent into
conflict or escalation of conflict”. But that is also just
common sense. It is hard to imagine any conflict on our
agenda that did not begin with widespread human rights
abuses — often directed against women and girls. The
sooner we know that such situations are emerging, the
faster we can react.
However, the Council’s standard practice and
working methods do not fully capture that link. Once
conflict emerges, the Council immerses itself in the
details of political and peacekeeping missions, often
spending large amounts of time and resources in the
process. But if we acted decisively after receiving
warning signs of human rights violations, we could
stand a better chance of preventing conflict in the
first place.
That is where we must aim to improve, and
we certainly can improve. For example, we could
establish an annual open debate for non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) engaged in mediation and
conflict analysis to ensure that the Council is aware
of best practices. We could invite relevant NGOs to
engage with the Council ahead of mandate renewals
or the adoption of thematic resolutions, similar to
our practice of engaging with troop-contributing
countries in advance of mandate renewals. We could
more frequently invite humanitarian and human rights
organizations to speak under rule 39 of the provisional
rules of procedure, making them participants in
meetings. We could also ask them to provide more input
into briefings and reports. We can also make better
use of our video teleconferencing capabilities to hear
directly from the people affected by the situations on
our agenda.
We hope that the Council can soon begin expanding
on these ideas and seeking ways to increase our
engagement with key humanitarian, human rights and
civil society partners. Those are the voices that should
inspire all of us on the Council to act in defence of
those most vulnerable.

S/PV. 8175

That alone will not overcome our deepest political
divisions, of course, but when we are confronted with
the voices of ordinary people demanding an end to
conflict, our responses can change for the better. That
will never change, but we should structure the Council
in a way that maximizes the chances to see that our
common interest lies in preventing the outbreak of war
and addressing pressing threats. Hearing directly from
people is a powerful way to achieve that goal.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to begin by welcoming our
new colleague, Ambassador Ma Zhaoxu, Permanent
Representative of the People’s Republic of China.
Unfortunately, he is not here. Needless to say, our
greetings will be conveyed to him and we want to
congratulate him on his new appointment and wish him
every success in his work.
We would like to commend Mr. Martin for his very
interesting and in many ways very accurate briefing,
and to thank the delegation of Kuwait for organizing
today’s meeting.
For many years now the Security Council been
discussing the question of its working methods in an
open format with the broad participation of States
Members of the United Nations. Taking a periodic
inventory of our working-methods arsenal helps us to
identify the various areas where there is room for the
improvement of the Council’s working practices. We
would like to highlight last year’s update of the note
by the President of the Security Council contained in
the annex to document S/2017/507, produced under the
leadership of the Japanese delegation, which chaired the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions. It is an important compendium
of the working practices of the Security Council
and extremely helpful for both the permanent and
non-permanent members. It is significant that today’s
meeting is being presided over by the delegation that
now chairs the Informal Working Group. We are sure
that today’s meeting will help to enrich this body’s
activity with new ideas. Needless to say, that is on
the understanding that any steps to improve working
methods must be taken only by the Security Council
itself, in accordance with Article 30 of the Charter of
the United Nations.
The issue of the Council’s working methods is a
very sensitive one. The purpose of making changes
to them should be to increase the Security Council’s

18-033167/64

S/PV.8175

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

effectiveness and efficiency in implementing its task
of maintaining international peace and security.
Embracing populism, including in the context of
the never-ending efforts to increase the level of
transparency in the Council’s work, is not always
helpful. Transparency is important for ensuring that
United Nations Members and the world community
are broadly familiar with the Council’s work, but it
should not become an obstacle to frank and substantive
discussions among Council members. We have serious
reservations about the practice of considering thematic
subjects in the Council, especially those that come
under the remit of the General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council or other United Nations bodies, in
accordance with the Charter. It violates the established
division of labour and distracts the Security Council
from its priority tasks, on which it can and should take
concrete decisions. We support expanding the Council’s
coordination with a wide range of Member States and
with those that can provide it with information vital
to decision-making. For that the Council has various
appropriate mechanisms in its arsenal, including
informal Arria Formula meetings and interactive
dialogues. However, we will not tolerate turning
such meetings into propaganda performances, and we
urge that they be used specifically to raise members’
awareness on issues on the Council’s agenda.
We welcome the fact that the Kuwait presidency
has asked Member States for suggestions for further
modernizing and democratizing the Council’s work. In
our view, we should take a closer look at the distribution
of responsibilities for the informal oversight of the
Council’s various dossiers. Being a penholder is an
additional responsibility, and those carrying out that
function have to act impartially and respectfully,
keeping a constant finger on the pulse of the events in
the countries concerned. Inactivity on the part of some
penholders has often resulted in the serious deterioration
of situations and the emergence of so-called forgotten
crises. We should expand the circle of penholders and
do so particularly by using non-permanent members.
We would like to tackle this issue seriously within the
relevant working group.
The methodology for negotiating Security Council
resolutions needs improvement. Recent situations that
have arisen when work has been done in a high-pressure
atmosphere of artificial deadlines, precluding thorough
study of the relevant documents, are unacceptable. What
we end up with is half-baked documents that do not
8/64

06/02/2018

take into account the concerns of all Council members,
who should be participants in the negotiation of draft
decisions and resolutions at every stage of the work.
Another issue of concern that the Working Group should
address is attempts to arbitrarily interpret the formats
for considering regional situations. In that regard we
should be guided not by national preferences — often
phobias, actually — but by the real state of affairs
in hotspots.
As we have already noted, we should be working
constantly to improve the Council’s working methods.
However, those efforts can be genuinely effective only
when Council members reject politicized approaches
and choose concerted efforts on a basis of mutual
respect for each other’s concerns and priorities. I
would also like to mention, since the subject has come
up, that the right to the veto does not come under the
category of the Council’s working methods. It is rather
a cornerstone of the entire architecture of the Security
Council, not a privilege but an instrument pledging and
guaranteeing the Council’s ability to reach balanced
decisions, which are the only decisions that have a high
likelihood of being fulfilled as effectively as possible.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
today’s open debate, which shows how important you
consider the issue of improving the Security Council’s
working methods, both in your position as President
of the Council for this month and as Chair of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions. I would also like to thank Ian
Martin warmly for his briefing and for his recent report
on the subject in Security Council Report.
The first point I would like to emphasize is that
what is at stake behind our reflections on the Security
Council’s working methods is the effectiveness of the
United Nations organ that has primary responsibility for
issues of international peace and security, in accordance
with Article 24 of the Charter of the United Nations.
Because it is focused on the crises that are currently
disturbing the international order, more than any other
institution the Security Council must be able to adapt its
methods and functioning to changes in its environment.
In order to do that, when necessary it must be able to
reflect on its own work and examine it critically. The
Council’s work rests on a foundation based, needless
to say, on the Charter, particularly Chapter V. Apart
from that juridical basis, the Council’s rules are listed
in its provisional rules of procedure. This edifice is
18-03316

06/02/2018

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

crowned by a set of rules and best practices outlined
in the famous note by the President of the Security
Council currently contained in the annex to document
S/2017/507 — note 507.
The second point I want to emphasize is that one
of the Council’s strengths is the flexibility of its rules.
The difficult part of the work of the Informal Working
Group lies precisely in its ability to codify those
rules and good practices without depriving them of
that flexibility. The latest version of note 507 — and I
would like to pay tribute to Japan, the previous Chair
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions — records a series of
important and useful steps.
With regard to its form, the note has been simplified
and reorganized to be a clearer guide to the daily work
of the Council. France used it quite often during its
presidency in October. With regard to substance, the
note includes several new elements that reflect existing
practices or goals set by the Council. I will mention a
few points that my delegation considers to be vital.
First, there are details on preparing newly elected
members and future members for the Council. Second
are the good practices in the area of consultations,
including more regular use of different items in
accordance with the development of events, an effort
to make discussions more interactive, and enhanced
transparency through more frequent press statements.
Thirdly, there are recommendations aiming to make
briefings more operational and ensure that they meet
the expectations of the Council. Fourthly, the note sets
out specific guidelines on how texts will be discussed
before they are adopted by the Council, in particular
with regard to the role of penholders. Fifthly, there are
factors to improve the preparation, content and followup of Security Council missions. Sixth are indications
reflecting the goal of strengthening the joint work with
regional organizations, in particular the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union.
Following such comprehensive work, our
responsibility — in the first place, that of the Informal
Working Group — is to work to fully implement the
recommendations set by the Council. Much remains
to be done to benefit fully from existing guidelines
before starting new endeavours. Among the areas for
improvement, a few recurring factors should be recalled.
During consultations, our discussions must be
more direct, more interactive and more informal in

S/PV. 8175

order to foster a genuine exchange of views. At public
meetings, in particular open debates, we must do better
to enforce time limits on interventions and ensure that
they are operational in nature. Generally, we should
ensure that the Council continues its efforts to adapt
the format of its meetings to the subjects addressed.
For example, in certain cases we could avoid instances
of redundancy when public briefings are followed
by closed consultations. We should also continue to
benefit from informal meetings, in particular Arria
Formula meetings, and informal interactive dialogue.
France believes that it is essential to ensure systematic
respect for multilingualism for all Council documents
and meetings, including those of its subsidiary bodies.
In parallel to the areas for improvement I have
just mentioned, the Council should continue efforts to
improve the transparency of its work — with regard
to troop-contributing countries, in the framework of
discussions pertaining to peacekeeping, but also with
regard to the States Members of the United Nations in
general, including through public meetings and, like
today, through open debates.
Beyond the issue of transparency in the Council’s
work — and even more important — is the matter
of its representativity, and that brings me back to its
basis: the Charter of the United Nations. The Security
Council should better reflects the realiies of our world,
while strengthening its capacity and its legitimacy to
assume its responsibilities with regard to international
peace and security. Beyond the gradual but marginal
improvements I have described, reform of the Security
Council is required.
France’s position is well known. We want the
Council take into account the emergence of Powers that
have not only the ability but also the will to shoulder
their international responsibilities. France therefore
supports the candidacies of Germany, Brazil, India and
Japan as permanent members of the Security Council,
as well as a stronger presence of African countries
among permanent and elected members.
It is in the same spirit that France has proposed that
the five permanent members of the Security Council
voluntarily and collectively suspend the use of the veto
in cases of mass atrocities. The measure is voluntary
and would not require a revision of the Charter, but
rather a political commitment. It is about ensuring that
the Council continues to fulfil its responsibilities in the
area of international peace and security, and does not

18-033169/64

S/PV.8175

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

lose its legitimacy as it faces the deadliest conflicts and
the most serious actions.
In the light of the multiplication of crises and
threats, the role of the Security Council is to live up to
the responsibilities entrusted to it by the Charter. More
than ever, France is determined make its contribution.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation welcomes today’s meeting on the working
methods of the Security Council and the implementation
of note by the President S/2017/507. We also welcome
Mr. Ian Martin, Executive Director of Security Council
Report, and thank him for his interesting briefing.
We express our commitment to improving the
work of the Council in this important area, which we
believe should continue to be guided by the Charter of
the United Nations and the corresponding provisional
rules of procedure. We also believe that it is important
to gradually develop and compile working practices on
the basis of the principles of coherency, transparency,
accountability, inclusion, efficiency and predictability,
among others.
Peru thanks the members of the Council for
unanimously adopting the latest note 507, in August
2017, under the leadership of the delegation of Japan and
Ambassador Koro Bessho. We underscore the rigorous
approach taken to consider the recommendations
and contributions made by all of the Members of the
Organization. Those contributions include those made
by the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
group, of which Peru is a member and whose statement
we endorse. We would like to reiterate our commitment
to implementing its code of conduct, in particular
with regard to limiting the use of the veto in cases of
mass atrocities.
We would also like to underscore that it is important
that the Council’s working methods ensure timely
cooperation with the Secretariat in addressing risks and
emerging threats to international peace and security.
We believe that is vital in preventing the occurrence,
escalation and continuation of conflict.
We would like to take this opportunity to highlight
a number of good practices and identify areas where
we believe it is important to continue to make progress.
First, for us it has been particularly useful to
observe, three months before taking up our membership,
the consultations of the Council and its subsidiary
bodies, and to receive the corresponding documents.
10/64

06/02/2018

We believe that it is important to build on that practice
and extend it to the observation of the process of
negotiations on resolutions and presidential statements.
We would like to thank the members of the Council for
their support during the preparation process. We also
thank the Secretariat and civil society organizations.
Secondly, we acknowledge that note 507 recognizes
that all members of the Council can propose and draft
documents for adoption. We are encouraged by the
posibility of establishing co-penholderships, and we
stand ready to contribute to those responsibilities. We
welcome the fact that during the first month of our
membership on the Council there has been at least one
consultations meeting on documents that have been
adopted. We believe it is important to complement the
work of the penholders with the views of the Chairs
of various subsidiary bodies, as appropriate. The
reports of panels of experts and the field visits provide
substantive, first-hand information that is vital when
drafting resolutions or statements.
Thirdly, for the sake of transparency, Peru believes
it is important for delegations to publicly share their
positions in the Council’s informative meetings. We
support the excellent practice started by Uruguay and
believe it should be extended to the subsidiary bodies
of the Council, as appropriate. At the same time, we
recognize the usefulness of closed consultations
to complement open debates and favour greater
interaction among the Council members and with
the Secretariat. We believe that it would be useful if,
at the end of meetings, the presidency could always
provide for the press a summary of the main points
discussed, particularly when formal documents have
not been adopted.
In the same vein, we consider positive the meetings
held at the beginning of the month to present the Council’s
monthly programme of work to all Members of the
Organization. The same is true of the wrap-up sessions
at the end of the monthly programme. Furthermore, we
believe that, when proposing consideration of an urgent
item or under other business, the interested delegations
should provide information on the specific issues they
propose for discussion.
Finally, my delegation believes that the
implementation of sanctions must fully respect due
process. In that regard, it is urgent to appoint the
Ombudsperson of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1267 (1999), concerning Al-Qaida and the
18-03316

06/02/2018

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

Taliban and associated individuals and entities. It would
be advisable to assess the appropriateness of extending
such an individual to other sanctions committees.
I would like to reiterate to the Kuwaiti delegation
our support for the success of its work as Chair of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions. Peru will resolutely support
all initiatives to improve the working methods of
the Council.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): Kazakhstan commends
the Kuwaiti presidency for convening this very timely
and critical open debate, and looks forward to greater
awareness and actions with regard to its results. We
personally thank Ambassador Mansour Alotaibi, in his
capacity as Chair of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions, for
his dedication and determination to streamline and to
reform the working methods of the Security Council.
We also thank Ian Martin for his substantive briefing.
We support its content and analysis.
It is timely to review the implementation of the
revised presidential note S/2017/507 to increase the
efficiency, transparency and effectiveness of the
Council. Kazakhstan was among the first elected
members to welcome and to test the implementation
of the provisions on transitional arrangements for the
new non-permanent members in response to the call
of the broader United Nations membership to uphold
the principles of transparency and inclusiveness in
the Security Council reforms, including its subsidiary
bodies, which are crucial to the Council’s responsibility.
We believe that the proposals resulting from today’s
deliberations should be reviewed in the Working Group
so as to update the note in the subsequent months.
While elected members serve for only a two-year
term, they have an important role to play and can
take responsibility for the way in which the Council
operates without remonstrating about the veto power.
The elected 10 must raise their influence and legitimacy
as representatives elected by the General Assembly as
a universal platform and use their varied composition
to ensure reforms. It is not always the case today that
the elected 10 face constrained capabilities in making
substantive proposals on Security Council documents
and in building consensus. That undermines the
efficiency of the Council.
During Kazakhstan’s presidency, we strove for
more openness, inclusiveness and accountability

S/PV. 8175

and held as many as 21 public meetings. We ensured
the adoption of press elements following almost
every consultation in January. In that regard, today
we highlight the importance of innovations in the
drafting process, as well as of streamlining the format
of meetings, inter alia, consultations among Council
members, penholdership and interaction with the wider
United Nations membership and other stakeholders.
We note that paragraph 81 of the new note 507
specifies that penholders or co-penholders exchange
information and engage in timely consultations with
all Council members with openness and flexibility.
For each draft resolution that is not a technical rollover
or for each presidential statement, the penholder or
co-penholders need to present and to discuss the
draft resolution with members in at least one round of
informal consultations or informal meetings. Limited
time frames for consultations on proposed resolutions
do not contribute to the substance, the quality or the
general effectiveness of the Security Council.
My country believes that one of the Council’s
core capabilities to prevent conflict is closely related
to its working methods. While we recognize that
systematizing existing and new Council practices is
desirable, just documenting them may not result in
better performance. Indeed, many of the tasks that
the Council undertakes do not necessarily require
new rules and agreements but, more important, unity,
compromise, trust and confidence-building — and
therefore a change in the Council’s culture and practices.
In fact, more opportunities are needed for engaging in
the drafting process. In general, penholdership is still
not as wide a process as expected and desired by many
and a greater role for the group of elected members
is required. We therefore fully support the provisions
in the new note 507 on co-penholdership for both
permanent and elected members of the Council.
Since joining the Council last year, Kazakhstan has
been pleased to witness and to be part of the positive
trends towards better coordination and cooperation
between the Security Council and the General Assembly.
Indeed, that synergy successfully produced early
elections for non-permanent members in June 2016 and
June 2017. That was a significant and important break
from the previous practice, as time is indeed a precious
commodity in order to prepare for a seat on the Council.
It helped to address not only some administrative
concerns but also key substantive issues, inter alia,
bridging the skill gaps. We acknowledge that that also

18-0331611/64

S/PV.8175

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

became possible because of the courses so generously
provided by many stakeholders, including Finland,
China, France, the United Kingdom and other Member
States, as well as the Security Council Affairs Division,
academia and non-governmental organizations.
We are also pleased to acknowledge a more
transparent process for appointing new Chairs of
Council subsidiary bodies, with the full involvement
of the current and newly elected non-permanent
members and the wider United Nations membership,
demonstrating transparency and inclusivity to all to
create a new culture. Moreover, we hope that the joint
consultations of subsidiary bodies will continue as a
regular practice of the Council.
In that spirit, we held many more open briefings
and debates, with efficient interactions among
members and updates from senior officials, rather than
informal closed consultations, thereby fulfilling our
obligations and commitments before the wider General
Assembly membership.
Finally, Kazakhstan remains committed to
enhancing and improving the functioning of the
Council as part of a larger institutional and structural
United Nations reform process.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, allow me
to express our appreciation to the Kuwaiti presidency
for having convened today’s timely and important
debate and for the excellent briefing by Mr. Ian Martin,
Executive Director of Security Council Report. Let me
also pay tribute to all those who have contributed to
date to the improvement of the working methods of the
Security Council.
In particular, I would like to express our gratitude
for the excellent work of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions
in recent years under the dedicated chairmanship of
the Permanent Representative of Japan, Ambassador
Koro Bessho. The adoption of consecutive presidential
notes, including the most recent comprehensive note
S/2017/507, marks an important step in the steady
development of the Council’s working methods. Several
of the recently adopted provisions are of particular
importance to the elected members. We especially
welcome the provisions that adjust the working methods
for the early election of non-permanent members,
providing the latter with more time to observe the work
of the Council and enabling a smoother transition of the
chairmanships of its subsidiary organs.
12/64

06/02/2018

Allow me also to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the role of Chair of the Informal
Working Group and to wish you the greatest success
in that capacity. I would like to assure you of our
future dedication to the group’s work. We are ready
to cooperate and support efforts to implement the
provisions of the most recent note 507 and to further
improve the Council’s working methods. We look
forward to the meetings of the group.
I would also like to thank you, Mr. President,
for your intervention, in particular the elements
concerning the way forward. Poland would greatly
welcome the full implementation by the Council of the
provisions of note 507. We are committed to working to
that end. In the spirit of solidarity, we would propose
considering in addition a few ideas to further increase
the transparency, inclusiveness, effectiveness and
innovation of the working methods.
First, we would welcome developments in
response to the need for a strategic overview and a
prevention-oriented approach within the Council so
that matters that may threaten the maintenance of
international peace and security could be identified
early and addressed appropriately. We see the need
to fully utilize the potential of the Secretariat in that
respect, including the Department of Political Affairs.
Briefings on situations that may escalate would help the
Council discharge its primary responsibility effectively.
Secondly, I would like to underline the role that
the elected members of the Security Council play in
making the Council more transparent and effective.
They can bring fresh perspectives and ideas to be
developed. In that context, I would like to mention the
most recent initiative of the elected members, on a way
of enhancing the inclusiveness and effectiveness of the
Military Staff Committee.
Thirdly, since one of the areas that Poland intends
to focus on during its time on the Security Council is
strengthening respect for international law within the
context of international peace and security, we believe
it would be worthwhile to exchange views on ways to
ensure that the Council’s outcomes are connected to
applicable international law. In our opinion, it could help
to make sure that its decisions are broadly considered
and that Member States are willing to cooperate in
their implementation.
Fourthly, I would also like to underline the
importance of hearing briefers from civil society,
18-03316

06/02/2018

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

including representatives of women’s organizations, in
Council meetings. We believe that they can contribute
useful added value to our discussions.
In conclusion, I would once again like to thank
Kuwait for convening today’s meeting and reiterate
Poland’s commitment to improving the working
methods of the Council.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We would like to express our
appreciation to the Kuwaiti presidency for organizing
today’s open debate on the working methods of the
Council. We thank Mr. Ian Martin for his briefing on
the progress that has been made in improving those
working methods, and we commend Security Council
Report for the research paper it published last month,
providing useful background information. I should also
thank you, Mr. President, for inviting Ian to brief us for
this debate, since he is the best person one could think
of for the purpose. We would be remiss if we failed
to recognize the excellent work done by Japan and
Ambassador Koro Bessho, as the former Chair of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions, in reviewing and adopting the
new note of the President (S/2017/507, annex), agreed on
in August last year. The note has introduced a number
of improvements into the working methods of the
Council, which we hope will enhance its inclusiveness,
efficiency and transparency.
The world is changing fast. There are new and
emerging challenges to international peace and
security that require the Council to be better organized,
not only to keep pace with the changing times but
also to be responsive and effective in carrying out its
responsibilities. There is no question that the past year
has enabled us to better understand how things work
in the Council and what might be improved or further
consolidated as a way to ensure greater efficiency and
effectiveness. We would like to take this opportunity to
highlight some of those issues, which Mr. Martin also
raised in his briefing. I will address six items related to
the programme of work.
It is self-evident that the programme of work is
composed of items based on the reporting cycle and the
priorities of each presidency. It includes several items
that we continue to discuss although there are no new
developments in them to speak of. I believe that we
therefore need to consider what we can do to streamline
our work and prioritize issues that require the Council’s
urgent attention and response. We feel that is something

S/PV. 8175

we should look at seriously. In terms of the discussion
of thematic issues proposed by Council presidencies,
we see a growing tendency to bring up issues that are
not necessarily within the Council’s purview. While
we certainly cannot overlook the nexus between peace,
security and development, it is becoming increasingly
important to ensure that the Security Council operates
in line with the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and in full respect for the various mandates of
other United Nations bodies, based on the principle of
complementarity and subsidiarity. That has become a
bone of contention among Council members and should
be addressed.
Secondly, with regard to Council meetings,
we appreciate the efforts being made to enhance
transparency by holding more and more meetings in
the open Chamber. At the same time, putting a divided
Council on display may not necessarily be helpful with
some of the most important and sensitive issues. What
is even more critical in that regard is that members
would be unlikely to be more willing to raise issues that
are sensitive but useful in open meetings rather than in
consultations. Without totally discounting the value of
open briefings and debates, the value of holding closed
consultations in order to have frank exchanges of views
cannot be ignored. It is therefore important to strike
the right balance between enhancing transparency on
the one hand and holding candid behind-the-scenes
interactions on the other. That is also something that we
will continue to grapple with, and I hope the Informal
Working Group will reflect on it and try to come up
with useful recommendations.
Thirdly, I would like to turn my attention to reports
and other communications with the Secretariat. The
Secretary-General’s reports are very useful, especially
for elected members, who may not have other means of
gathering adequate information. The challenge is how
to ensure that those reports are more concise, timely,
relevant and to the point, in order to help members
achieve a better understanding of issues and make
meaningful contributions in discussions. We believe that
there is room for improvement in that regard. Briefings
by Special Representatives should also be concise and
to the point, highlighting the latest developments and
drawing attention to issues that may require a response
or action on the part of the Council.
The practice of bringing in briefers from other
regional organizations, such as the African Union and
its regional mechanisms, is particularly important

18-0331613/64

S/PV.8175

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

in ensuring a regional perspective. We think this
practice should be institutionalized. In the future,
perhaps, instead of listening to United Nations Special
Representatives and African Union speakers on the
same issues, they could be asked to speak on different
issues based on their respective advantages on the
ground, so as to make their contributions more relevant
to the Council’s work of the Council and use the time
more efficiently.
Another issue in this area is about communications
from the Secretary-General on the appointment of
Special Representatives and others. It is unfortunate
that elected members often first hear about such
appointments from the media. This concern has been
raised before, but while some small steps may have
been taken to address it, we hope it will now be dealt
with more seriously and rectified more effectively.
My fourth point is about outcome documents.
We all know that the issue of penholdership has
under discussion for quite some time. The idea of
co-penholdership should be seriously explored, since it
would not only enable elected members to contribute
to shaping the Council’s outcome documents in areas
where they have intimate knowledge and expertise,
but also help to improve unity and consensus among
members of the Council. Of course, the importance of
allowing adequate time for consultations on Council
resolutions and decisions has been an issue, and
penholders have a special responsibility in that regard.
Mr. Martin explained that point very eloquently, and we
could not agree with him more.
Fifthly, consultations with troop-contributing
countries (TCCs) and police-contributing countries
(PCCs) before the renewal of mandates have not really
been very productive or effective. Efforts have been
made by members of the Council to facilitate informal
interaction with TCCs, which we have found to be
much more productive and effective. This needs to be
encouraged. But the issue of how formal consultations
can be improved should be looked at seriously if these
are to be more relevant to the work of the Council
and allow TCCs to make meaningful inputs into the
mandate-renewal process. For example, the sharing of
advance copies of the reports of TCCs and PCCS prior
to informal and formal meetings could be envisaged.
Sixthly, and last but not least, I turn to the issue
of the United Nations Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council annual
14/64

06/02/2018

consultations. As Chair of the Ad Hoc Working Group
on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa, we
have the responsibility of facilitating the joint annual
meeting of the United Nations Security Council and
the African Union Peace and Security Council. In this
connection, the acknowledgement in the revised note
507 of the importance of the annual joint consultative
meeting and informal dialogue between the Security
Council and members of the African Union Peace
and Security Council is very welcome. However, we
believe that there is a need for improvement in terms
of agenda-setting and format in the conduct of the
joint consultations to ensure that frank and meaningful
exchanges of views can take place on matters relating
to peace and security in Africa.
The outcome of the joint consultations is usually
negotiated, but it does not seem to have any relevance
in terms of future reference once it has been adopted. In
fact, the outcome of the last joint consultation has so far
not been adopted. There is a need, therefore, to reflect
on this and see if it is possible to be innovative in this
regard. Of course, the other party, that is, the African
side, also has a responsibility to contribute to making
the annual event more effective and productive.
In a nutshell, these are some of the issues that
we would like to flag based on our experience in the
Council over the past year, and we hope that the group
will consider them seriously and come up with useful
recommendations to further improve the working
methods of the Council.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I would like to thank
Ian Martin for his briefing and the Kuwaiti presidency
for having scheduled this open debate. I should like also
to congratulate Kuwait on taking up the chairmanship of
the Informal Working Group of the Security Council on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions. I look
forward to a productive two years under its leadership.
I am afraid, Sir, that you have a tough act to follow,
and I should like to take this opportunity to pay tribute
to Japan as the outgoing Chair, particularly for its
stewardship of the negotiations that led to agreement
on a new note 507.
The new note 507 is a valuable resource for all
current and future members of the Council. It brings
together almost all of the Council’s myriad procedural
documents and contains a number of important changes.
In particular, I would highlight the new language on
the conduct of informal consultations, the negotiation
18-03316

06/02/2018

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

S/PV. 8175

process and cooperation with non-Council bodies,
including the Peacebuilding Commission and the
African Union, and I echo what the representative of
Ethiopia said on the value of African Union briefers to
the Council, something we called for collectively when
we were in Addis Ababa for our annual meeting.

more on preventative diplomacy. This means focusing
our time on the conflicts of today and tomorrow, not
only those of previous decades. It means being flexible
in how we handle our agenda and making the best use of
the Secretariat’s insights, including through situational
awareness briefings.

Many parts of the note reflect best practice, which
is built up gradually over the years, but it also signals
our collective ambition for a more inclusive, transparent
and effective Council that is better able to tackle the
challenges of the modern world. One of the ways in
which we can deliver this ambition is through a stronger
relationship with external partners. Last week the Cruz
report reminded us of the risks face by peacekeepers
deployed by the Council.

As the world’s threats evolve, so, too, must the
Council. We must implement note 507. We must also
challenge ourselves to continue to adapt as a Council
so that we better meet our mandate of maintaining
international peace and security.

The United Kingdom is pleased to have worked
with Pakistan to strengthen triangular cooperation
between the Council, troop- contributing countries,
police-contributing countries and the Secretariat, and
looks forward to further discussions on this crucial issue
in the forthcoming session of the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping.
The Security Council needs to work closely with
those countries whose troops and police are on the front
line when we consider our peacekeeping deployments,
and we in the United Kingdom will continue to ensure
that we do so when considering mandates.
We also need to hear more from civil society and
in particular from women. I would just note that today
marks 100 years since women first gained the right
to vote in the United Kingdom. All too often we hear
only one perspective and do not hear from those most
affected by our decisions in this Chamber. Last year just
30 representatives of civil society briefed the Council,
and under a quarter of our briefers were women. We
need to do better.
We also need to continue our efforts to make our
meetings more effective and action-oriented. This
means making sure that the briefings we receive from
the Secretariat are comprehensive by promoting more
interactivity in consultations and seeking outcomes
from our meetings. This will not be accomplished
by more change to the guidance but requires the
commitment of all of us around this table, especially
during Council members’ presidencies.
Finally, the Council needs to work harder to meet
the Secretary-General’s ambition and our own to do

May I just finish by thanking those who work so
hard to support us as a Council, including in particular
the Security Council Affairs Division and our
excellent interpreters.
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in
French): The delegation of Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the
holding of this open debate on the working methods of
the Security Council under your presidency, Sir. We
also welcome the very instructive briefing by Mr. Ian
Martin on this topic. My delegation is convinced that
our exchanges will make it possible to take an additional
step forward towards improving the working methods
of the Security Council in order to achieve greater
transparency and effectiveness in its work.
Côte d’Ivoire congratulates the members of the
Council and all other individuals and organizations on
the quality of their respective contributions, which they
have been making for some years now, to improving the
working methods of the Security Council. It commends
and expresses its appreciation to Japan in particular,
whose continuing commitment to this process has led
it to head the Informal Working Group of the Security
Council on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions on several occasions.
My delegation’s statement will focus on three
points that we deem vital to achieving the major
progress required to increase the effectiveness of the
Council’s work.
First, concerning the participation of new
non-permanent members in the work of the Security
Council before their term has begun, my delegation
welcomes the option given to newly elected members
to participate, for a three-month period prior to the
beginning of their mandate, in all Council meetings,
including its plenary consultations and those of its
subsidiary bodies. This decision is to be welcomed

18-0331615/64

S/PV.8175

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

as it allows new arrivals to understand the dynamics
involved as well as the Council’s practices, procedures
and working methods, so that they can hit the ground
running from the time they begin their term.
Secondly, my country welcomes the dialogue
among troop- and police-contributing countries, the
Security Council and the Secretariat, with a view to
enabling their points of view and concerns to be taken
into account. Such consultations also make it possible
better to prepare peacekeeping operations.
Thirdly, Security Council field missions to
conflict areas allow the Council to better grasp the real
problems being experienced in the countries visited and
to come into contact with all concerned stakeholders
and promote dialogue between them in order to help
them emerge from crisis. Such missions are also a
direct way of gathering information, making it possible
for the Council not only to assess whether progress has
been made, in order to better craft its decisions, but also
to bring pressure to bear on the parties to a conflict in
order to induce them to better fulfil their commitments,
for example in the framework of a peace agreement.
Nonetheless, my delegation would like to commend
the Council for the quality of its relations with the press
via presidential statements and press statements, which
help to disseminate information about the work of the
Council among the general public.
My delegation also encourages the operationalization
of joint missions of the Security Council and of the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union to
areas of conflict in Africa.
Let me say by way of conclusion that my delegation
wishes every success to the delegation of Kuwait in
its capacity as Chair of the Informal Working Group
of the Security Council on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions, and it reiterates its full readiness
to contribute to the work of the Group. My delegation
also thanks the Secretariat for its dedication and urges
it to ensure that all reports and other required working
documents are made available as soon as possible and
in all working languages of the Organization in order
to enable their consideration by the various delegations.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea): Mr. President,
I would like to begin by expressing to you the gratitude
of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea for having
convened this important open debate on the methods
of work of the Security Council less than a week after
16/64

06/02/2018

having assumed the presidency of the Council. I would
also like to thank the Executive Director of Security
Council Report, Mr. Ian Martin, for the praiseworthy
and lofty work he is doing at the head of the important
body he heads and for having come here to brief us on
this key issue.
We would also echo previous speakers in warmly
congratulating Japan for the role it played in the context
of adopting Note 507 on the question of the working
methods of the Security Council.
Since 2011 the Security Council has regularly
held an open debate, a practice that has now become
customary, on the item entitled “Implementation of the
note by the President of the Security Council: working
methods of the Security Council”. This practice has
been revitalized annually since it was initiated in
December 1994 by France, which organized for the first
time a debate on the Council’s working methods.
Today this practice has evolved in the light of the
two contradictory demands that are made of the Security
Council. The Council is expected to, on the one hand,
adopt decisions that ensure rapid and effective action
to maintain international peace and security, and, on
the other hand, to obtain the support of a large majority
of the membership of the United Nations so that its
decisions can be fully implemented.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea would stress
that Note 507 makes no mention of issues pertaining to
sanctions committees, which continue to be governed
by the working methods as adopted by individual
sanctions committees and the notes and statements by
the President of the Security Council listed in the note
by the President of the Security Council of 7 February
2006 (S/2006/78).
With respect to issues that are not mentioned in
this note, working methods pertaining to interaction
with troop- and police-contributing countries continue
to be governed by resolution 1353 (2001) and by the
statement of the President of the Security Council of
31 December 2015 (S/PRST/2015/26), as well as other
relevant documents of the Security Council.
Furthermore, we welcome the continuing progress
made by the Security Council since 2006, when Note
507 of the President of the Council was adopted
for the first time as a compilation of the Council’s
methods of work that clearly sets out its best practices,
without limiting the flexibility necessary to carry out
18-03316

06/02/2018

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

the Council’s work. In 2010, the Council adopted the
revised Note 507, aimed at enhancing its work.
We believe, therefore, that this debate is a clear
sign of the genuine interest of all States Members of
the United Nations in enhancing the transparency,
inclusiveness and openness of the work of the Security
Council, in order to ensure that the Council truly acts on
behalf of all Member States, in conformity with Article
24 of the Charter of the United Nations. Equatorial
Guinea is a member of the group of States that support
not only a code of conduct pertaining to the methods of
the Security Council, in response to genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes, but also the FrenchMexican initiative on the suspension of the use of the
veto in cases involving mass atrocities.
At the same time, we are convinced that the
existence of the veto is an important obstacle to the work
of the Council. The veto has on occasion prevented the
Council from making clear to all nations of the world
that there is no place for impunity.
Respect for the Charter of the United Nations is
undermined by the fact that its Article 27, paragraph
3, continues to be disregarded. It is vital that clear
procedures be established in order to ensure respect
for this Article so that it can be fully implemented.
From an impartial and objective perspective, it is clear
that the Security Council should not have to confront
insurmountable obstacles, especially internal ones, in
organizing field missions. In that respect, we welcome
the initial measures that were adopted in 2010 that were
aimed at introducing certain official guidelines relating
to the use of this important instrument of the Council.
Equatorial Guinea is in favour of continuing
discussions within the Council to develop and enhance
provisions regarding Security Council missions.
We believe that the Council should clearly define
the following important elements: mission planning
and the decision-making process on deployment;
mission composition; the timeline for the submission
of reports and the way in which they are crafted;
and the decision-making process of the Council on a
mission’s outcome.
The adoption by the Security Council of the revised
Note 507 by consensus consolidated, simplified and
restructured the original Note 507 of 2010 and all
additional independent presidential notes that have
been issued since then, including S/2016/619, which
was mentioned earlier. In addition, as highlighted in the

S/PV. 8175

press release, the revised note 507 contains some new
and important elements for improving the Council’s
effectiveness in areas such as the monthly programme of
work. We believe that improving the Council’s working
methods did not end with the adoption of revised note
507. It is an open, dynamic and continuous process
involving collective efforts. And while codifying best
practices is a useful exercise, it is not an end in itself.
The most important thing is the Security Council’s
implementation and actual practice.
A core component of the Council’s responsibility
revolves around the work of its subsidiary bodies,
which are central to the implementation of its decisions.
They carry out a wide range of tasks, ranging from
monitoring implementation and evaluating compliance
to coordination and cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations. In that regard, we fully
support efforts to make their work more streamlined
and coordinated, since a better understanding of the
work of the subsidiary bodies contributes to better
and more effective implementation of the Council’s
decisions. In that regard, there are reasons to improve
coordination among the subsidiary bodies, especially
those that deal with related issues or have a similar
geographical scope.
The note by the President contained in document
S/2014/268, on drafting resolutions, refers to three
elements — consultations with members, penholdership
and consultations with other stakeholders. On the
first element, consultations with Council members,
the note states that penholders should consult with
and ensure an exchange of information among all
Council members. That frequently does not happen.
The permanent members prepare the drafts, consult
each other and finalize the process with very little time
for discussion. When elected members wish to make
comments or suggestions, the deadline has passed and
there is no time to incorporate new suggestions, which
means that non-permanent members have only two
options — accepting a fait accompli and finding a reason
to vote in favour; or abstaining or voting against, since
sometimes they agree with the substance of the issue
but not with the language used. This process should be
much more inclusive in order to improve transparency
in deliberations among all members of the Council.
Equatorial Guinea insists that the reforms of
the working methods included in note 507, as well
as of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure,
should be permanent, so that the Council can be held

18-0331617/64

S/PV.8175

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

accountable and have predictable and transparent
standards. Equatorial Guinea endorses South Africa’s
suggestions on strategic cooperation, particularly
between the Security Council and the African Union
Peace and Security Council, and so as to promote the
rule of law in conflict and post-conflict situations.The
Security Council has also adopted various documents,
such as resolution 2033 (2012), which recognizes that
the situation of regional organizations is conducive to
understanding the nuances and complexity of conflicts
and that their proximity enables them to have a direct
influence on the prevention or resolution of conflicts in
their regions.
Among other things, resolution 2033 (2012)
outlined concrete steps to be taken by the Council to
establish a more strategic relationship with the African
Union, which would greatly strengthen regional
competencies and local approaches to conflicts. In
this regard, Equatorial Guinea pays a well-deserved
tribute to Secretary-General António Guterres for his
promotion of strengthened the relations between the
United Nations and the African Union in general, and
the African Union Commission in particular. This close
cooperation is no longer limited to conflict resolution
but now also includes sustainable development, as
reflected in the memorandum recently signed between
the United Nations and the African Union under the
auspices of Mr. Guterres and Moussa Faki Mahamat,
Chairperson of the Commission.
In accordance with Article 24 of the Charter of
the United Nations, Member States acknowledge that
in carrying out its functions, the Security Council
is acting on their behalf. The work of the Council is
therefore the collective responsibility of all Member
States, and its resolutions and presidential statements
should reflect the views expressed by Member States,
and in particular the States directly concerned or
particularly affected.
The issue of the veto is intrinsically linked to
the Council’s working methods, particularly the
decision-making mechanism. It is an anachronistic and
anti-democratic privilege that should be re-evaluated
with a view to evolving more inclusive and democratic
decision-making measures. We believe that the
much-needed reforms of the Council will allow for
greater representativeness of the various regions and
adjustments in working methods, including limiting or
removing the veto privilege. The veto should no longer
be an untouchable element. In this regard, we regret that
18/64

06/02/2018

the General Assembly has still not reached a conclusion
on expanding the permanent membership — with all
its privileges — and non-permanent memberships of
the Security Council. We urge the facilitators of the
intergovernmental negotiating process to draw on the
documents produced at the sixty-ninth, seventieth
and seventy-first sessions of the General Assembly
to produce a single document forming the basis for
negotiations on Security Council reform, which should
now be launched.
In conclusion, we welcome the initiative of electing
non-permanent members of the Security Council six
months earlier than before and allowing them to audit all
Council meetings and have access to documents three
months prior to joining the Council as actual members.
Another innovation, introduced by Kazakhstan during
its presidency in January, has been the ceremony in
which the representatives of the newly elected members
place their countries’ flags in the Council Chamber.
We congratulate Kazakhstan on this innovation, which
should be instituted as a practice to be followed each
January before the Council begins its work for the year.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank the President for
convening today’s important debate. I would also like
to thank Japan and the many preceding Chairs of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions for their efforts. The work of
the Working Group and the consolidated presidential
note 507 are extremely helpful, both to those of us who
are in the Council — particularly, perhaps, elected
members — but also to those who follow our work from
outside. I also want to thank Security Council Report
and Ian Martin for their important work and briefing.
I believe that the insightful and scrutinizing reporting
that they do on a regular basis is a very useful way of
pushing the Security Council to always try to deliver
better results.
Working methods are a means to an end, not an
end in themselves. Nonetheless, getting them right is
essential to the work of the Council. They create the
framework that enables each and every member of the
Council to be fully involved, contribute to informed
discussions and play a full and meaningful role in the
Council’s work. This is about every member having
ownership of the issues on the agenda and meeting our
respective responsibilities to our own peoples and to
the wider membership. The working methods also seek
to ensure that the conflicts on the Council’s agenda, as
well as emerging threats, are addressed with the right
18-03316

06/02/2018

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

timing, and that the formats and focuses of meetings
are tailored to ensure the best chance of a meaningful
outcome from the Council’s deliberations. Getting this
right requires leadership, with active members and an
active Secretariat constantly questioning why and how
we do things, for the sake of efficiency, transparency
and, ultimately, accountability. My comments will
focus on how the Council informs itself, on input to
the Council and on how the Council takes action
and becomes more effective — which is, of course,
the output.
Several useful tools, introduced and supported,
included by my own country, have now been codified in
the note 507. Since joining the Council last year, we have
called for a minimum outcome from all consultations in
the form of agreed messages to the wider membership
and the media. That is not only to increase transparency,
but it also helps to bring a focus to the work of the
Council. I am pleased to note that the practice now
seems to have become more and more established. It
is now also a general rule that there should be at least
one round of negotiations with all Council members
for each resolution or presidential statement. The logic
behind that rule goes without saying. It is not just a
question of courtesy. It is about getting real buy-in, and
therefore ensuring the effectiveness of our actions.
Looking ahead, there is much more that can be done
in order to further enhance transparency, accountability
and efficiency. We need to have an honest conversation
about the system of so-called penholders. If that system
is to continue, such responsibility should be evenly
distributed between both permanent, elected members
and among members from different regions. We are all
accountable for the maintenance of international peace
and security, and note 507 stresses that any member
may be a penholder. Similarly, there is no reason that
both permanent and elected members should not serve
as Chairs of the subsidiary bodies and have an equal
say in the selection of those Chairs.
Briefings and interactions with representatives
of civil society are now a mainstay of the Council’s
work. They must be continued and enhanced. Hearing
the voices of those most affected by our decisions will
broaden our understanding of the situations under
discussion, and, by including women and youth, make
us more effective.
For the sake of efficiency, we must continue to
improve our interaction in informal consultations.

S/PV. 8175

Those meetings are not primarily a way for the Council
to meet behind closed doors, but they provide an
opportunity for Council members to engage informally,
with the aim always of achieving concrete results.
Briefings to the press and the wider membership after
such meetings enhance transparency and push us all to
try to come together in a way that is both responsible
and meaningful.
The interaction with the broader membership has
to be further improved and enhanced. The Council and
its members need to talk with countries, and not only
about them. I think the same is true for briefers coming
to brief the Council, including from regions, such as
the African Union and others. That point has been
mentioned. We must think about how to make better use
of the open debates as a means for a genuine dialogue
between the Council and the broader membership.
Should we allow for open debates where Security
Council members do not speak at all, but just listen to
the broader membership in preparation for subsequent
decisions by the Council? In addition, the relationship
between the Council and the Peacebuilding Commission
should become a closer and more strategic one.
As we have discussed previously, we have to
actively operationalize the Council’s preventive role,
as foreseen in the sustaining peace resolutions, and I
would also argue in the Charter of the United Nations.
That includes the Secretary-General using mediation,
good offices and his full powers under article 99 of
the Charter, and the Council being very supportive
towards him and responding to his calls. Better and
more frequent use should be made of the situational
awareness briefings. We hope that, with the reformed
Secretariat, the input from the Secretary-General can
be more holistic as regards peace and security. Note
507 further points out the preventive role of Security
Council missions, which should be further explored,
including through the use of mini-missions by a smaller
number of Council members. I think this morning Ian
Martin raised one very concrete example of a successful
such mission from the late 1990s.
As a final point, and as a member of the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group, I
would like to touch briefly on the use of the veto. As
a collective security body, we have a duty under the
Charter of the United Nations to shoulder our primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. The veto is not a right, but a
responsibility. The use, or rather misuse, of the veto

18-0331619/64

S/PV.8175

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

to protect narrow national interests against the will of
the broad majority of the membership diminishes the
Council’s efficiency and credibility. It is only when the
Council comes together and works as a whole that we
are able to do our job.
In conclusion, improving the working methods of
the Security Council serves the purpose of creating an
environment that allows the Council to take meaningful
action in an effective, efficient, results-oriented and
accountable way. We will continue to work to ensure
that elected and non-elected members have equal means
to shoulder their responsibility under the Charter. In
that vein, the elected members recently requested that
their representatives be invited to participate in the
missions of the Military Staff Committee.
We look forward to cooperating actively with
Kuwait and other partners, both inside and outside
the Council, to continue making the Council more
efficient, transparent and accountable. We very much
look forward to hearing from the broader membership,
our constituency, about their expectations from
the Council.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): On behalf of the
Kingdom of the Netherlands, let me commend Kuwait
for convening this open debate. Let me also thank
Mr. Ian Martinfor his excellent briefing earlier today.
Discussing working methods is not a mere exercise
in style or in process. The way the Council operates
influences our impact in the field. It affects the lives
of million of people, especially those suffering from
crises and conflict.
Last year, we welcomed the adoption of the
comprehensive new note by the President of the
Security Council S/2017/507. The note is the legacy
of Ambassador Koro Bessho of Japan during his time
on the Council over the past two years. Now it is
time for us to fully implement the note. I will focus
on positive practices in three domains that we find
particularly important: prevention, accountability and
peacekeeping. And then I will add some additional
suggestions for further improvements.
On my first point, that of prevention, we welcome
the annual joint consultative meetings and informal
dialogues of the Security Council with the African
Union Peace and Security Council. They are a key tool
to better understand the situation on the ground and to
help prevent conflicts from breaking out. Better use
20/64

06/02/2018

of that tool would be an important step in addressing
regional problems, providing shared solutions and
preventing escalation.
Another important aspect in the new note 507 is
the acknowledgment of the role of civil society and
non-governmental organizations. We should enhance
interaction with those actors, for instance, by inviting
them more often as briefers in a debate, such as to
the one we are having today. The implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security, demonstrates that very clearly.
That brings me to my second point, that of
accountability. We really welcome the fact that the
Security Council’s annual reports to the General
Assembly include information on the work of its
sanctions committees and of the international tribunals.
This illustrates the point that the Council uses the
means at its disposal to promote the international rule
of law and to counter impunity.
That bring me to my third point, that of
peacekeeping. The note contains a number of measures
that can contribute to more effective peacekeeping, and,
in particular, I refer to paragraph 91. We welcome the
suggestion in the note for more interactive and focused
consultations with troop- and police-contributing
countries and other stakeholders in the meetings of the
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations.
That bring me to my additional suggestions for
improving the working methods of the Council.
First, in order to facilitate the peaceful settlement
of disputes, the Council could explicitly weigh the
means and options provided for by Chapter VI of the
Charter of the United Nations, guided by an inventory
of past experiences.
Secondly, we need to foster the mechanisms aimed
at monitoring compliance with Security Council
resolutions. In that regard, enhancing cooperation with
international legal mechanisms is essential. In that
context, we express our concern about the continuing
vacancy of the Ombudsperson for the Security Council
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999).
Thirdly, we think that the role of the Military Staff
Committee should be strengthened, especially when
it comes to the performance of missions in relation
to the mandates. In that Committee we need a more
proactive and intensified dialogue between elected and
permanent members.
18-03316

06/02/2018

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

Fourthly, as I have noted in the previous open
debates on working methods, we fully support the
French-Mexican initiative to limit the use of the veto in
case of mass atrocities. That was also jut mentioned by
our French colleague.
In conclusion, we need to fully implement the last
update of note 507. That is the best way to ensure that
the Council works effectively. Making the Security
Council more effective via better working methods is
crucial in order to uphold the principles of the Charter,
to maintain international peace and security in the
interests of the peoples of the world.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, my delegation would like to thank you,
Mr. President, and your delegation for convening such an
important open debate. We also thank Mr. Martin, of the
Security Council Report, for his informative briefing.
Although the working methods are not a substantive
agenda item, they are one of the most important
subjects that the Council has to address, since it is
an awareness and understanding of those methods
that put non-permanent members on an equal footing
with Council members as they carry out their official
duties. It also gives the general membership a better
understanding of the workings of the Council. Today
our work is still governed by the provisional rules of
procedure of the Security Council, which were adopted
in 1946. Although their provisional nature gives the
Council greater flexibility, that flexibility also gives
permanent members a disproportionate advantage over
non-permanent ones. That is why the Security Council,
through the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions, should be conducting
dialogue and negotiations aimed at adopting definitive
rules that are in line with the realities and dynamics of
the twenty-first century.
Nevertheless, despite still managing with the
provisional rules of procedure, we have come a long
way since 1993, when we established the Informal
Working Group and embarked on a productive path
of systematizing, codifying and implementing our
working methods. Almost 14 years passed between the
adoption of the first note by the President (S/2004/939)
on working methods and last year’s adoption of the note
contained in the annex to document S/2017/507. I would
like to take this opportunity to echo my colleagues in
acknowledging the work of the delegation of Japan
and of Ambassador Koro Bessho in particular, whose

S/PV. 8175

leadership saw the adoption of the largest compendium
to date on Security Council working methods.
Returning to the issue at hand, I note that over the
years, we have been able to systematize many of the
practices that govern our work. We have gone from
an oral tradition, based on common practices, to a
compendium that systematizes much of the Security
Council’s work. Among the most significant are the
early election of new members and their participation
as observers in all meetings of the Council and its
subsidiary bodies, beginning on 1 October of the
previous year, until they become full-fledged members
in January. Such practices, now codified in note 507,
ensure that elected members are better prepared
when they assume their responsibilities as members
of the Council. We would also like to highlight the
improvements in the process of electing the Chairs
of subsidiary bodies. Note 507 states that the process
must end no later than 1 October and must include the
participation of all members of the Council, making it
more democratic, just and transparent. Nevertheless,
despite these significant steps forward, there is still
room for improvement. For example, we believe that
at least one informal meeting of the Informal Working
Group should be held during the selection process.
With regard to the subsidiary bodies, we should
mention the Sanctions Committees. Sanctions have
become one of the Organization’s most frequently used
tools, and their implementation depends entirely on
the cooperation of all Member States. That is why we
must all develop a better understanding of sanctions if
we are to enhance their effectiveness. We need clear
and systematized rules on the Sanctions Committees’
working methods so that they are more accessible and
transparent. Sanctioned countries must understand the
sanctions mechanism in order to get sanctions lifted.
Nor should sanctions be an end in themselves, which is
why the underlying goals of each Sanctions Committee
must be clear. Periodic reviews must be conducted to
determine whether the sanctions are effective and if
they are hurting local populations.
With regard to the issue of penholders, note 507
outlines key elements that represent a step forward,
such as the idea that any member can be a penholder,
reaffirming that all Council members must be able
to participate in the preparation of documents,
encouraging penholders to ensure that all resolutions
that are not technical rollovers or presidential statements
go through at least one round of informal consultations,

18-0331621/64

S/PV.8175

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

06/02/2018

and ensuring that a reasonable period of time is allotted
for all documents so as to give all members the time
needed for analysis and consultations. However,
despite that progress, it is the permanent members
who are the penholders almost exclusively. The level
of participation of elected members in the adoption
of documents continues to be at the penholders’
discretion. The same applies to the amount of time that
is seen as sufficient and reasonable for considering
a document. All of these points still require greater
systematization and codification, and will surely be
debated during the next review of note 507. For the
time being, we must encourage more appointments of
elected members as penholders on specific issues and
we, as elected members, should work to achieve the
effective implementation of what has been agreed.

I would like to begin by thanking you, Mr. President,
and my colleagues for their welcome. I look forward to
working closely with everyone with the aim of jointly
safeguarding world peace and stability and delivering
on our responsibilities as mandated by the Charter of
the United Nations.

We are also concerned about efforts to include
items on the Council’s agenda that are better suited
to the mandate of other bodies in the United Nations
system, an issue that the Permanent Representative of
Ethiopia discussed much more eloquently. Moreover,
the relationship between the Council and other organs
of the system should be reviewed. It is very curious, for
example, that the last time that the Council requested
an advisory opinion from the International Court of
Justice was more than 40 years ago.

The Charter of the United Nations confers upon the
Security Council the important mandate of maintaining
international peace and security. Currently, the
global security situation remains complex, with local
conflicts breaking out and terrorism and other security
threats interweaving.

Finally, I should mention the structural reforms
that the Council needs. My delegation believes that the
veto is an anti-democratic and anachronistic privilege,
and that the lack of equitable regional representation
in the Council is one of the worst symptoms of how
far behind the times it is. The overrepresentation of the
Group of Western European and other States and the
underrepresentation of Africa, Latin America and the
Caribbean and Asia are a case in point. The countries
of Latin America and the Caribbean, along with Africa,
make up almost half of the members of the entire
Organization but only one third of the members of the
Council — none of them permanent and none with a
veto right.
In conclusion, it is essential that we launch reforms
that can lead to a Council that, along with its rules of
procedure, is commensurate with the challenges facing
the international community in the twenty-first century.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): This
is my first time addressing the Security Council in
a formal meeting in my capacity as the Permanent
Representative of China, and it is a privilege to be here.
22/64

I would like to congratulate Kuwait on its assumption
of the presidency of the Council for this month and to
assure it of China’s support and cooperation. I would
also like to thank Kazakhstan for presiding over the
Council last month and to commend Ambassador
Umarov and his team for their outstanding diplomatic
prowess and competence. China welcomes Kuwait’s
initiative in convening today’s meeting, and we thank
Mr. Ian Martin, Executive Director of Security Council
Report, for his briefing.

The Security Council, as the core of the United
Nations collective security mechanism, shoulders
the enormous responsibility of tackling international
security threats and challenges, which is a Herculean
task. In recent years, the Council has convened on
many occasions to hold open debates on its working
methods for in-depth discussions on this issue. This
is a demonstration of its steadfast commitment to
improving the Council’s working method and enhancing
its effectiveness. China has been working with other
Council members to push for further the progress in
that regard.
There has been a palpable increase in the number
of open debates of the Council. Coordination among
the Council, the General Assembly, the Economic and
Security Council and other United Nations entities
has been strengthened. Regular exchanges with the
Peacebuilding Commission and its country-specific
configurations have continued. Engagement with
relevant regional organizations has expanded. The
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions has consistently noted valid
practices of the Council, put forward recommendations
in that regard and achieved great results.
China supports continued improvement of the
Council’s working methods to better position it to
18-03316

06/02/2018

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

deliver on its mandate more efficiently and to respond
effectively to threats to international peace and security.
In this vein, I wish to make the following observations.
First of all, we should stay focused on key issues and
ensure effective execution of mandates. It is essential to
adhere to the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations, which is the fundamental guide to
the work of the Council and its subsidiary organs. The
Charter contains clear provisions on the responsibilities
of the Council and other United Nations organs.
The Council must focus its resources and energy
on addressing major and urgent issues concerning
international peace and security and improve the
impact of its action. In deliberating thematic issues, the
Council needs to coordinate with the General Assembly,
the Economic and Social Council and other United
Nations bodies so that can all play their respective roles
and avoid duplication.
Secondly, we should stay committed to democratic
consultations and collective decision-making. In the
process of decision-making, full consultations should
be conducted with a view to achieving consensus.
Efforts should be made to ensure that all members
have adequate time to examine draft resolutions
and presidential statements. We should refrain from
steamrolling divisive draft resolutions, seek the
broadest possible consensus and safeguard the Council’s
authority and unity.
Thirdly, we should enhance information exchanges
and value the views of all parties. The Council needs
to heed the views of its broad membership, the
countries concerned in particular. China supports the
Council in its effort to strengthen coordination with
regional organizations, pursuant to Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations, in order to leverage
their expertise in addressing local issues and their
unique strength with regard to geography, history
and culture. The Council should more actively engage
troop-contributing countries and enhance information
sharing through mechanisms, such as the Working
Group on Peacekeeping Operations and meetings with
troop-contributing countries. It should also weigh the
views and concerns of troop-contributing countries
during mission deployment and mandate adjustments.
The General Assembly intergovernmental negotiations
provide an important forum for Member States to discuss
Council reform. As such, its role as the main avenue of
deliberations on this issue needs to be safeguarded.

S/PV. 8175

China attaches great importance to Council reform
and supports necessary regional reform initiatives to
increase representation and the voice of developing
countries, in particular African countries as a matter
of priority, and to enhance the Council’s authority and
efficiency. China is ready to continue working with
all Members States and to be guided by the Member
State-led principle.
With regard to the five reform clusters, we strive
for patient and democratic consultations in a quest for a
package resolution with the broadest possible consensus.
I would like to reiterate that setting artificial deadlines,
steamrollering half-baked proposals or initiating textual
negotiations in the absence of requisite conditions will
only undermine the credibility of such negotiations and
is anything but helpful for membership unity and the
sound development of intergovernmental negotiations.
China supports Kuwait in its capacity as Chair of
the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions. We are ready to work with
all parties to engage in assessing innovations; support
the improvement of the Council’s working methods with
concrete action; and encourage the Council to conduct
its work in a more effective, transparent, democratic
and impartial manner and to play an important and
constructive role in maintaining international peace
and security.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I wish to remind
all speakers to limit their statements to no more than
four minutes in order to enable the Council to carry
out its work expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy
statements are kindly requested to circulate the texts
in writing and to deliver a condensed version when
speaking in the Chamber.
I wish to also inform all concerned that we will be
carrying on this open debate right through the lunch
hour, as we have a large number of speakers.
I now give the floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to also thank
Mr. Ian Martin for his briefing today and for his tireless
and ceaseless efforts to improve the working methods
of the Security Council.
I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
assuming the presidency for February. I would also like
to thank you and your colleagues for the kind words
that you have had for the work of the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural

18-0331623/64

S/PV.8175

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

Questions in the past two years and, in that connection,
for my delegation as well.
We feel that this is an important meeting and we
appreciate the fact that the Council regularly listens
to the views of the wider membership on its working
methods. I shall follow your instructions, Mr. President,
and distribute the full text of my statement and try to
be concise.
Codification and practice are mutually reinforcing
and necessary to improve the working methods of the
Security Council. While we were in the Council, Japan
tried to tackle both. Today I would like to share a few
observations from Japan’s recent Council membership.
First, we need to do things that may seem simple,
like listening to each other — to what others say in
Council meetings or consultations. We all have our
national positions and important engagements, but
unless we at least try to be in the room and listen to
each other, effective action by the Council is less likely
to be produced. In that connection, how the Council
conducts its open debates may also be further explored.
I would encourage the President, if I may, to be present
until the end of the open debate to listen to the views
of the wider membership. Presidential summaries can
also be useful.
Secondly, the drafting process of Council outcome
documents remains at the core of the Council’s working
methods. Any Council member with willingness and
ideas should be encouraged to take the initiative. The
Chairs of sanctions committees may be in a position
to contribute more on the drafting of sanctions-related
resolutions. Troop-contributing countries may be able
to contribute on mandate renewals. Co-penholding may
not solve everything, but could be explored further
in practice.
What is more important, I believe, is how the
negotiations are conducted. Penholders have the heavy
responsibility of making every effort to explore the
best possible outcome through an inclusive process
by having face-to-face negotiations, providing
sufficient time for the consideration of drafts by all
members, being receptive to inputs and suggestions,
or proactively reaching out to those outside of the
Council with expertise, such as troop-contributing
countries, the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
or regional countries.
24/64

06/02/2018

Given that, there may be cases in which urgency
on the ground necessitates a flexible, expeditious
process. We should not lose sight of the fact that what
is most important is for the Council to take the best
possible action in the timeliest manner for the sake of
international peace and security.
Much of what I have just said is referred to in
presidential note S/2017/507. We should make the
best use of the latter, and try to develop further
practices whereby we can. I have every confidence
that Kuwait will contribute to the improvement of the
Council’s working methods as the new Chair of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions.
I would like to conclude my remarks by stating that
improving working methods is not the end. Reforming
the composition of the Security Council to reflect the
geopolitical realities of the twenty-first century can be
effective in dealing with the unprecedented challenges
that we face today. Japan will continue to work with all
Member States towards that goal.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Vieira (Brazil): Brazil is a staunch advocate of
a more transparent Security Council. I therefore thank
the Government of Kuwait and commend you, Sir, for
organizing this open debate.
I will address two sets of issues: first, the working
methods within the Security Council, while focusing
on aspects related to the use of force, and, secondly, the
Council’s methods of work in its relations with other
organs and interested Member States.
We should devote more attention to the working
methods of the Council as they relate to the use of
force. Communications issued under Article 51 of the
Charter of the United Nations — that is, invoking selfdefence — and the follow-up of the relevant resolutions
authorizing the use of military force are two cases in
point. We have witnessed an increase in the number
of letters submitted to the Council seeking to justify
military action, especially in the context of counterterrorism. The current practice indicates that there
is ample room for improvement with regard to the
content, timing and circulation of Article 51 letters.
A proper follow-up of such communications is also
needed, thereby ensuring that the obligations set out in
the Charter are fulfilled.
18-03316

06/02/2018

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

It is critical that States provide sufficient
information regarding the attack based on which selfdefence is invoked so as to allow for the appraisal
of proportionality and necessity. While the Charter
demands that measures to implement self-defence
be reported immediately, it far too often happens
with delays. The flow of information directed to
non-members of the Council should also be improved.
Brazil suggests that a special section dedicated to
listing all communications received under Article 51 be
created on the Council’s website.
I now wish to draw attention to another aspect of
the working methods of the Council concerning the
use of force — that is, the exceptional circumstances
in which it authorizes military interventions. The
implementation of such resolutions must be responsibly
carried out so as not to harm those whose very
protection is invoked. Action must be judicious,
proportionate and strictly limited to the objectives of
the mandate. To that end, Brazil has suggested that the
Security Council draw inspiration from the relevant
peacekeeping and sanctions regimes in order to ensure
that such resolutions include sunset clauses, demand
adequate reporting and establish panels of experts to
monitor their implementation. We live in challenging
times in which we cannot allow for the erosion of the
authority of the Charter, especially regarding the rules
on the use of force.
Allow me now to address the working methods of
the Council with regard to other organs and interested
Member States. I will focus on dialogue with troopand police-contributing countries (TCCs/PCCs),
with the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) and with
international courts. States that have a special interest in
a substantive matter under consideration by the Council
should be allowed to take part in its consultations so
that their views are taken into account. That applies
not only to countries on the Council’s agenda, but
also to TCCs and PCCs. That interaction should be
meaningful, inclusive, active and dynamic so as to allow
an exchange of views that genuinely contributes to the
review of the mandate. That is particularly important
at a time when the number of fatalities in peacekeeping
operations is increasing owing to, among other reasons,
the gap between the expectations arising from Security
Council mandates and the delivery capacity in the field.
Deliberations of the Council would also benefit
if it exchanged views more frequently with the
countries chairing the Peacebuilding Commission’s

S/PV. 8175

configurations. That could be done informally — even
at the expert level, and in addition to the invitation
to deliver formal briefings to the Council, which
is a practice we much appreciate. In that regard,
we encourage the Secretariat to make the proper
arrangements to allow Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General and Special Envoys to brief the PBC
configurations prior to Security Council meetings so
that the Commission can fully play its advisory role
vis-à-vis the Security Council. The Council could also
consider inviting the Chairs of PBC configurations to
join some of its official missions. The Chairs of PBC
configurations maintain close contact with national
leaderships and senior United Nations officials in
the field, make frequent visits to the country and
benefit from information provided by a network of
embassies that, in some cases, is broader than those
of Security Council members. That potential could be
better explored.
I would like to make two comments regarding the
relationship with international tribunals. First, there
is no compelling reason for the annual briefing by the
President of the International Court of Justice to be
private. On the contrary, the role of the Court in the
peaceful settlement of disputes and the strengthening
of the international rule of law attests to the need to
make such meetings public. Secondly, with regard
to referrals to the International Criminal Court, it is
neither fair nor sustainable that its financial costs fall
solely on the States parties to the Rome Statute. That
issue should be addressed by the General Assembly, the
organ that holds exclusive competence to decide on the
United Nations budget.
Brazil presented a number of proposals aimed
at improving the working methods of the Council.
It remains difficult, however, to see how to achieve
breakthroughs in such an area without the expansion of
the Council’s membership. In the view of the majority
of United Nations States Members, the best way to
enhance the Council’s dynamics and to ensure that
its decisions are more legitimate and effective is the
creation of new permanent and non-permanent seats.
That would allow for countries committed to a more
transparent, efficient, accessible and accountable
Council to acquire the expertise and ability required to
help modernize it from within.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Hungary.

18-0331625/64

S/PV.8175

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

Ms. Bogyay (Hungary): I thank you, Mr. President,
for remaining in the Chamber and listening to
the non-members of the Security Council as well.
I would like to take this opportunity to say that
Hungary appreciates the intense work led by Japan
as former Chair of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions, and
that of countries currently represented on the Council,
as the wider United Nations membership benefits from
the recently adopted note by the President S/2017/507,
which not only provides the most complete summary
of the Council’s working methods thus far but also
introduces many important developments.
First of all, we congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council.
I believe that it is unique that you are affording us the
time to talk about this matter in the Security Council.
In order to join forces in trying to find ways and means
to shape a more effective Council, let me reiterate the
views of Hungary while fully supporting the statement
that will be delivered on behalf of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group.
Hungary acknowledges the efforts to achieve
greater transparency and consistency when it comes
to the relationship between the Security Council
and the General Assembly. However, we believe
that current practices and measures should be used
more effectively in some areas. The Council’s annual
report to the General Assembly should contain a more
analytical, substantive and comprehensive evaluation
of its work. The inclusion of the topic in the updated
note by the President S/2017/507 is a step forward,
but there is still room for the Council to continue to
expand consultations and cooperation to non-Council
members, in particular troop- and police-contributing
countries, and to regional organizations.
We highly appreciate the fact that the SecretaryGeneral, in his letter addressed to the President of the
Council of 2 September 2017 (S/2017/753), urged the
international community to take concerted efforts to
prevent further escalation of the crisis in Myanmar, as
we support a proactive role for the Security Council
and consider it very important. We strongly support the
proposal that the Council increase the number of public
meetings, interactive briefings, informative interactive
dialogues and Arria Formula meetings. More wrapup sessions would enhance the flow of substantive
information, and thereby assist the wider membership
to better understand the Council’s positions. We
26/64

06/02/2018

welcome the developments concerning the adoption
of the outcomes of open debates. We encourage the
Council to take into account the contributions made by
non-members.
We believe that the Council should use existing
tools to prevent mass atrocities, and take into account
the results of the 2015 review processes of peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and women and peace and security.
That would improve the Council’s response to atrocity
crimes and give it an opportunity to emerge from its
self-imposed silos.
As a member of the Accountability, Coherency and
Transparency group and one of the 114 signatories, to
date, of the code of conduct regarding Security Council
action against genocide, crimes against humanity or war
crimes, Hungary advocates for refraining voluntarily
from the use of the veto in cases of mass atrocities. We
encourage all Member States that have not yet done so
to support the initiative.
The role of the International Criminal Court is vital
to ending impunity and bringing perpetrators to justice
when national mechanisms for criminal accountability
are not available or not satisfactory. The Security
Council is given a special role under the Rome Statute,
as it can refer situations involving non-State parties
to the Court in order to hold perpetrators to account.
Given the privileged role of the Council in the Rome
Statute system, the Council should utilize its referral
power in a consistent manner to ensure accountability
and justice whenever necessary. Overall, the Council
should also aim for more clear-cut communication to
clearly convey its work to the outside world.
We would like to conclude by calling for the
fullest possible implementation of existing measures
and improved measures that further strengthen the
Council’s working methods, with a view to making sure
no drawback is possible.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Akbaruddin (India): I thank you, Sir, for
organizing today’s open debate on an issue that is of
interest and importance to the entire membership of
the United Nations. I also thank Mr. Ian Martin for
his briefing.
As the organ of the United Nations tasked with
the maintenance of international peace and security
on behalf of the comity of nations, the Security
18-03316

06/02/2018

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

Council — its work and the way it chooses to organize
it — is as a matter of interest for all. The edifice of
the working methods of the Council is erected on the
nebulous expanse of rules of procedure that remain
provisional even after 70 years and on a series of quasiformal presidential notes. Therefore, the field is rich in
terms of opportunities for making practical suggestions
for improvement. However, I will focus on the thus far
neglected but growing arena of work of the Security
Council’s subordinate sanctions-related organs.
There are 14 such sanctions committees established
under various resolutions of the Council. Drawing on
delegated authority from the Council, those committees
perform the functions of the Council in terms of
designation of individuals, entities and undertakings
deemed to be threats to international peace and
security. Cumulatively, as of 31 December 2017, those
committees have listed a total of 678 individuals
and 385 entities as subject to United Nation targeted
sanctions and restrictive measures such as assets
freezes, travel bans and arms embargoes. In terms
of numbers, those decisions far exceed the outcomes
arrived at by the Security Council in open meetings
during public sittings over the same period. That
large number of decisions flows from the universe of
sanctions committees that comprise representatives of
Council members who decide on behalf of the Council.
Those decisions are binding on Member States.
Yet each of those decisions of the sanctions
committees is taken beyond the gaze of the public,
with no explanation of the inputs that go into the
decision-making. For want of a better depiction, it
would appear that the committees form the subterranean
universe of the Council. That universe functions in
accordance with decision-making methods that are not
the same as those of a normal functioning Council.
For example, in practical terms, the decisions of the
sanctions committees can be placed on hold or blocked
by any of the 15 members of the committees. While
decision-making on Security Council resolutions is
based on clearly defined thresholds provided for in the
Charter of the United Nations and the provisional rules
of procedure, in the case of the subterranean universe,
each and every one of the Council’s members now has
an effective veto on decision-making.
What is worse is that no one except the members
of the subterranean universe is aware of the use of a
veto while deciding on a reference made to any of the
sanctions committees. Such is the effective impact

S/PV. 8175

of that anonymous veto that a proposal that has been
blocked is not even made public. In addition, no rationale
is provided for the anonymous vetoing of a submission.
Unlike in the Security Council, where vetoes are cast in
public meetings and explanations made publicly, in the
subterranean universe no such practice exists; in fact,
the principles of anonymity and unanimity reign.
That is not the only difference between the working
methods of the subterranean universe of the Council
and the official Council meetings. No one other than
the members of the Council is aware of the total
number of decisions made by the sanctions committees.
For example, in 2017, by our estimates, an additional
53 individuals and 19 entities were listed by the
sanctions committees. However, how many others were
considered but placed on hold or blocked from being
listed is neither available on the record nor made public.
The rationale for the use of the anonymous veto is never
provided to the general membership.
Even though the Permanent Representative of
Kazakhstan — your predecessor as President of the
Security Council last month, Mr. President — has
set high standards of transparency by issuing press
statements after every consultation of the Council, no
such practice exists in the subterranean universe of
the Sanctions Committees. The challenges relating to
the Sanctions Committees’ working methods have to
do not only with transparency and accountability, but
also with the diversity of the mechanisms for reviewing
decision-making in cases of differences among
members. For example, if after consultations consensus
still cannot be reached, two of the Committees provide
that the matter may be referred to the Security Council
by the member concerned; in four other Committees,
the matter may be referred to the Security Council by
the Chair; in six more Committees, the matter may be
submitted to the Security Council, without specifying
by whom; in one other Committee, the matter may be
referred to the Security Council by the Chair or by
the Committee member concerned; and in one final
Committee, we could not find any explicit option for
referring the matter to the Council. The divergences do
not end there. While 13 Sanctions Committees function
without the need for an ombudsperson to submit
recommendations for a review, one specific Sanctions
Committee provides for an Ombudsperson.
Clearly, there exists a case for the Council to
address the anomalies in the working methods of its
subterranean universe of Sanctions Committees. They

18-0331627/64

S/PV.8175

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

not only affect the efficiency and credibility of the
Council’s work but also the larger membership, which
has to implement the Council’s decisions. It is in that
spirit that my country, along with so many others, has
called for reform of the Security Council’s composition
and working methods. Until that happens, we want to
make it clear that we do not aspire to a utopia and nor do
we believe that the current situation is dystopian. Our
objective in pointing out these issues is to move beyond
the status quo to what we may term a protopia — a
state that envisages a better tomorrow than yesterday,
even if it is only a little better. We hope that this debate,
Mr. President, and what you add to the work done by
your predecessors as Chair of the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions, will lead to a protopian Council that strives
every day to make its work methods better than they
were the day before, even if only slightly.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Lauber (Switzerland): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s debate on the
working methods of the Security Council. I also thank
Mr. Ian Martin, Executive Director of the Security
Council Report, for his excellent briefing this morning.
We are grateful to him and his team for the work they
are doing in relation to our subject.
I am speaking on behalf of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency (ACT) group. As many of
those here know, we are a group of 25 Member States
from every region. Our objective is to encourage better
working methods in United Nations bodies, particularly
the Security Council.
The working methods of the Security Council have
been a subject of discussion almost since the creation
of the United Nations and the Council itself. Over the
years, there has been some progress. Most recently,
the adoption last August of the note by the President
of the Security Council (S/2017/507, annex), after a
process of revision successfully led by Japan, has given
us a coherent overview of the practices and working
methods discussed so far. But we must acknowledge that
overall progress has been slow and the implementation
of what has been agreed on has been uneven. In order
to safeguard the effectiveness and reputation of the
Council and the United Nations at large, and to gain the
support of the wider United Nations membership for
Security Council decisions, we believe it is important
28/64

06/02/2018

to implement these practices in a consistent manner
and not to backslide from previous decisions and
commitments. Today I want to highlight four areas
where ACT would like to see specific improvements.
The first has to do with enabling the 10 elected
members of the Council to be fully involved in all
of its business. We encourage all measures aimed at
involving the non-permanent members early on in the
Council’s business and ensuring continuity. In that
respect, we welcome the fact that in the past two years,
starting in October, incoming members have been
invited to observe closed Security Council meetings
and consultations. We also welcome and encourage
the elected members’ active engagement in wrap-up
sessions and interactive briefings on the monthly work
of the Council. However, more can be done to ensure
they have access to as many resources and documents
as possible at an early stage. Furthermore, coordinating
the incoming elected members with both the outgoing
members and those staying on the Council for another
year is essential to ensuring unity and coherence in the
Security Council’s work.
Secondly,
the
Council’s
drafting
and
decision-making practices need some attention.
Assuming that the penholdership system persists, the
elected members should be enabled to engage actively
on all issues, including those that are particularly
important to them and where they have particular
expertise. More penholderships could be entrusted to
elected members. Another possibility for ensuring that
could be by increasing the use of co-penholderships,
and we encourage Council members to discuss jointly
deciding on the distribution of penholderships and
co-penholderships. With regard to decision-making, the
revised note 507 underlines the importance of holding
at least one round of consultations with all Council
members on drafts before their adoption. That is crucial
to ensuring that all members have an opportunity to
engage and fulfil the responsibility that the wider
membership has entrusted to them.
Thirdly, ACT strongly believes that the rule of
law should apply within the United Nations as well as
outside it, particularly in situations in which United
Nations actions directly affect individual rights. The
United Nations in general, and the Security Council
in particular, should lead the way in that regard.
Resolution 1904 (2009), of 17 December 2009, which
established the Office of the Ombudsperson to the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989
18-03316

06/02/2018

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

(2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, was a
significant step forward in improving the fairness and
transparency of the sanctions regimes on Al-Qaida
and the Islamic State in Syria and the Levant and
enhancing the rule of law in the implementation of
Council decisions. We strongly urge the Security
Council to complete the appointment procedure for the
post of Ombudsperson, which has been vacant since
August of last year, without further delay. We also call
on it to extend the Ombudsperson’s mandate, which
has been further improved in the meantime, to other
sanctions regimes.
Fourthly, the relationship of the Council with the
membership and other bodies is an area where we have
been happy to note some positive developments over
the years. It now has regular interactions, for instance,
with the African Union Peace and Security Council
and the Peacebuilding Commission in its role as an
advisory body to the Council. We also note a trend
whereby Council members choose to speak in open
meetings more often, thereby contributing to increased
transparency. While there are situations or stages
of deliberations on certain items that require closeddoor meetings or consultations, we encourage Council
members to hold open meetings whenever possible and
to seek interaction with Member States, other bodies
and civil-society representatives who can provide
useful advice to the Council. Close interaction is also
essential if we are to avoid situations where the Security
Council finds itself adrift from the larger membership
because the use of the veto has prevented it from taking
decisions. In that regard, ACT encourages all States
to adhere to and implement the ACT code of conduct
regarding Security Council action against genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): Let me join previous
speakers in thanking you, Mr. President, for convening
this debate so early in your presidency of the Security
Council and for your chairmanship of the Informal
Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Matters.
The working methods of the Security Council need
to be transparent, understandable and clear to allow for
the adequate participation of all concerned. Apparently,

S/PV. 8175

that is not always, and not entirely, the case. That is
why we are particularly grateful to Japan, which did
us a great service by documenting the developments
and emerging practices in the revision of note by
the President S/2017/507, as adopted last August.
It now concerns the implementation of note 507, as
many speakers before me have pointed out. I would
like to make three suggestions on how to improve
implementation in concrete terms.
The first suggestion concerns the process for
developing Security Council products. We welcome
that the Council, in the new version of note 507, now
expressly encourages all its members to become
penholders. In principle, any Council member can
serve in that function. However, in practice, the list of
actual penholder countries continues to be very short.
We hope that a more inclusive practice will emerge, as
stipulated in the note.
We also share the Council’s concern, as expressed
in the new note, that more needs to be done to improve
the openness and flexibility of the drafting process.
However, the note’s proposals to that effect focus
entirely on the internal workings of the Council. They
are addressed only to its members. We would like to
invite the Council members to go further and to think
about progressive ideas to better involve the wider
United Nations membership earlier in the drafting
of proposals to ensure more buy-in and support from
non-Council Member States.
The second suggestion is about the relationship
between the Security Council and the police- and
troop-contributing countries. As the Council
increasingly mandates peacekeeping operations in
high-risk environments, more timely, interactive and
action-oriented consultations among the Council, the
contributing States and the Secretariat are needed.
In that regard, the revised note 507 contains a
number of proposals, which should be translated into
consistent practice.
My third point relates to the relationship between
the Security Council and the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC). The revised note 507 elaborates on the
relationship between the Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission as “an intergovernmental advisory body”.
It notes the Council’s intention to regularly request,
deliberate and draw upon the Commission’s specific,
strategic and targeted advice.

18-0331629/64

S/PV.8175

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

We are convinced that we should strengthen the
links between those two bodies to enhance the ability
of the United Nations to move more seamlessly from
crisis response to long-term peacebuilding. Germany
was recently elected Vice-Chair of the Peacebuilidng
Commission. We are ready to work with all interested
partners to enhance the Peacebuilding Commission’s
advisory role. For example, one idea would be to
regularly invite the Chair of the PBC and the countryspecific configurations to participate in public Security
Council meetings.
To conclude, I would like to emphasize one thought
that many speakers before me pointed out, namely, that
reforming the working methods should continue. It is
very important that, ideally, that should go hand in hand
with more fundamental reforms, such as reforming
the Council’s composition to more accurately reflect
today’s political realities. However, clearly, that is a
subject for another day and another forum.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Norway.
Ms. Stener (Norway): Let me first say that
Norway is part of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency group, and therefore of course fully
adheres to the statement made a little earlier by the
representative of Switzerland. We are very pleased
to see the steady progress achieved in the working
methods of the Security Council during the past decade.
We would like to thank Japan for its tireless and fruitful
efforts as Chair of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions of the
Security Council. We also welcome the most recent
edition of what is known as the Green Book.
To maintain momentum in that process, it is
necessary for the Security Council to continuously and
periodically conduct constructive debates on its working
methods. We would like to thank Kuwait for organizing
this tenth annual debate on the working methods of the
Security Council at the start of its membership as an
elected member of the Council. Kuwait can count on the
support and cooperation of Norway in its chairmanship
of the Informal Working Group.
We recognize the need to strike a balance between
gaining the support of the wider United Nations
membership and enabling the Council to take prompt
and effective action to maintain international peace and
security. We are convinced that the full implementation
of the agreed measures described in note S/2017/507
30/64

06/02/2018

in the daily business of the Council will be crucial to
maintaining that balance. We call on all members of
the Security Council to put those measures into effect
without delay.
In particular, we welcome the note’s reference to
the importance of annual joint consultative meetings
and informal dialogues with the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union and of the Security
Council’s intention to regularly seek the advice of the
Peacebuilding Commission.
We are encouraged by the transparency and
inclusivity that guided the process of selecting a new
Secretary-General last year, the momentum for United
Nations reform that is currently energizing the work
of the Secretariat and Member States, and the ongoing
efforts to reform the Security Council. A relevant and
strong United Nations requires an efficient, transparent
and inclusive Security Council to meet today’s
challenges to international peace and security and to
improve global governance.
I can assure the Council that Norway will contribute
to a constructive dialogue among Member States with a
view to achieving further progress.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): Allow
me first to congratulate the State of Kuwait on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
and to convey my delegation’s appreciation for the
convening of this open debate on the working methods
of the Council. Indeed, it is an interesting topic for
discussion, which is needed now more than ever in
order to examine and identify practical and efficient
methods to confront the real challenges of international
peace and security.
In view of the time limit, I will highlight the
following points, which are based on the Charter of the
United Nations and, upon their implementation, can
improve the working methods of the Council and enhance
its efficiency in fulfilling its primary responsibility.
Closed meetings and informal consultations should
be kept to a minimum and should be the exception
rather than the rule. The establishment of subsidiary
organs, mechanisms or formats by the Council should
be in accordance with the letter and the spirit of the
Charter of the United Nations. Moreover, the Council
18-03316

06/02/2018

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

has a responsibility to ensure that it functions within
the limits of its mandates. For example, some of the
activities undertaken by the Security Council Affairs
Division clearly fall beyond those outlined in note
S/2016/44 by the President of the Security Council
regarding tasks under resolution 2231 (2015), while
it resists undertaking activities assigned to it under
the same note. Despite the fact that the Council has
been repeatedly informed by us and some members
of the Council, those deficiencies continue to exist in
reports of the Secretary-General each time the Council
discusses this issue.
The annual reports of the Security Council to
the General Assembly should be more explanatory,
comprehensive and analytical. They should assess
the work of the Council, including cases in which the
Council has failed to act. They should also include the
views expressed by members during the consideration
of agenda items. In addition, we call on the Council to
elaborate on the circumstances under which it adopts
the various outcomes, be they resolutions, presidential
statements, press statements or other elements for
the press.
Pursuant to Article 15, paragraph 1, and Article
24, paragraph 3, of the Charter, the Council should
submit special reports for consideration by the
General Assembly. However, it does not do that.
The Council should ensure that its monthly
assessments are comprehensive and analytical. The
General Assembly may consider proposing parameters
for the elaboration of such assessments. The Council
should fully take into account the recommendations
of the General Assembly on matters relating to
international peace and security, consistent with
Article 11, paragraph 2, of the Charter. The Council
should cease its ongoing attempts to shift issues on the
agenda of the General Assembly or the Economic and
Social Council over to the Security Council and the
encroachment by the latter on the functions and powers
of the Assembly.
It is absolutely vital for the credibility of the
Security Council to reject the intentions to turn it into
a tool to pursue national political interests and agendas.
Unfortunately, it is happening. The intention to use the
Council only as a tool for more dangerous ends could not
have been made clearer than in the statement delivered
by the Permanent Representative of the United States

S/PV. 8175

at the meeting of the American Israel Public Affairs
Committee on 5 March 2006:
“It is critical that we use the Council to help mobilize
international public opinion. Rest assured, though,
we are not relying on the Security Council as the
only tool in our toolbox to address this problem.”
It seems that the current United States Administration
is even more enthusiastic now to follow that reckless
and failed pattern of regarding the Security Council as
its toolbox.
Two outrageous examples of such an approach
occurred in January. On 5 January, the United States
pushed for an emergency meeting (see S/PV.8152) on
an issue that flagrantly falls outside of the scope of its
mandate. On 29 January, the United States Mission set
up a show in Washington, D.C., to present the members
of the Security Council with some fabricated evidence,
such as a Saudi-supplied destroyed, yet intact, missile.
Those examples are discredit the Security Council,
especially when recalling the increasing list of Security
Council failures to take the slightest action when it
comes to genuine issues, such as the long-standing
occupation of Palestinian territory by the Israeli regime
or the most catastrophic humanitarian situation in
Yemen after almost three years of war. Those failures of
the Council, attributable to the obstructionist approach
by the United States, is a matter of disappointment and
frustration for multilateral diplomacy.
Finally, I hope this open debate will help to render the
Council more democratic, representative, transparent
and accountable in all its activities, approaches
and procedures, functioning more efficiently and
effectively, as well as focusing on its real responsibility
in maintaining international peace and security.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): First, we would like
to congratulate you, Mr. President, and your delegation
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. The matter of the working methods of
the Council remains one of the most pertinent issues
before the Council, as it relates to the manner in which
the Council seeks to resolve crises affecting the entire
globe. We therefore welcome this open debate, which
itself is in keeping with the provisions of the note
by the President S/2017/507, which calls for greater

18-0331631/64

S/PV.8175

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

involvement by non-members of the Council in its work
and for creating transparency.
From its inception, the structure of the Council has
been contested particularly because it charges 15 of the
United Nations States Members with the responsibility
to pursue and maintain peace and security on behalf
of 193. Furthermore, it allows for only five to prevent
progress on any matter, thereby securing the interests
of one at the expense of us all. Each Member State
of the United Nations has very specific contextual
circumstances, and restoring or maintaining peace in
each of our States and/or regions requires an awareness
and account of the particular complexities entailed.
Therefore, transparency and inclusiveness do not come
as a matter of courtesy, but necessity, if the Council is
to be effective.
The newest iteration of note 507, issued in 2017,
further improves the work of the Council. However, the
test is not what is in the concept note itself, but rather
the test is whether the Council is willing to implement
what is contained therein. South Africa stresses that
note 507, as well as the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, should become permanent so that
this organ can be more effective, accountable and
predicable, with well understood rules. It is our strong
belief that the more the Council shares information,
consults and accepts the views from those relevant to
a particular conflict, the more operative, accountable
and transparent it will be. Further to that, the more
responsive the Council becomes, the better placed it will
be to meet the challenges presented by a continuously
more complex world.
In that regard, my delegation would like to thank
Portugal, Argentina, Angola and Japan for their sterling
work in moving that matter forward as respective Chairs
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
other Procedural Questions. We welcome Kuwait in
assuming that role, and we pledge our full support to
Kuwait’s chairmanship of the Informal Working Group.
I would like to highlight four practical suggestions
that South Africa believes can help to develop a more
effective Security Council.
First, I would like to see the implementation
of the commitment in note 507 for more regular
consultations and coordination between the Council
and troop- and police-contributing countries. That is
specifically necessary when considering the renewal
of mandates. Such consultations are vital mechanisms
32/64

06/02/2018

to ensure peacekeeping mandates are informed by the
knowledge of realities on the ground that the troop- and
police-contributing countries have and that expectations
are realistic and well understood. Such consultations are
also important throughout the life cycle of a mission, as
well as in the planning and transition phases.
Secondly, the importance of annual joint
consultative meetings and informal dialogues with the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union (AU)
is quite essential. The Council has consistently agreed
to continue to expand consultations and cooperation
with regional and subregional organizations, including
the African Union, as set forth in note 507, undertaking
to invite relevant organizations to participate in
the Council’s public and private meetings, when
appropriate. Additionally in note 507, the Council
commits itself to continue to informally consult
with regional organizations when drafting, inter
alia, resolutions, presidential statements and press
statements, as appropriate.
The African Union and other regional bodies have
the comparative advantage of a nuanced understanding
of their own region and being able to respond quickly to
crises as they occur. We should avoid a practice where
the Council is selective in its approach and relationships
with regional bodies are merely utilized in times of
political convenience. The language in note 507 could
therefore be strengthened to emphasize the necessity of
such cooperation, in the light of Council resolutions,
such as resolution 2033 (2012), adopted subsequent to
the issuance of note 507, which provides an array of
strategies that could ensure strategic coherence. We
therefore thank Secretary-General António Guterres for
putting more energy into strengthening the relationship
between the United Nations and the AU on many fronts
in order to deal with the issues of peace and security.
Thirdly, South Africa stresses the need to continue
enhancing the relationship between the Council
and the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). In its
advisory capacity, the PBC serves as a platform that
contributes to improving coordination and enhancing
coherence among the United Nations, the AU and other
international actors in the areas of sustaining peace in
Africa and preventing the region from relapsing into
conflict. We also believe that the Council could do
more to draw on the expertise of the PBC, in particular
during the renewal of mission mandates.
18-03316

06/02/2018

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

Fourthly, in note 507 the Security Council commits
itself to seeking the views of Member States that are
parties to a conflict and/or other interested and affected
parties. That commitment should be applied uniformly.
Therefore, it is necessary for the Council, as a matter of
principle, to always consult with all the relevant parties
to a conflict before deliberating on a matter, to ensure
that it has at its disposal all the relevant facts.
In conclusion, while we fully support the
implementation of working methods that improve
the inclusivity and transparency of the work of the
Council, those incremental changes do nothing to
address the Council’s structural problems. While it
still remains that the membership of the Council and
the right to the veto are determined by long-outdated
historical circumstances, no number of changes to its
methods will prevent the interests of a few hindering
the maintenance and pursuit of peace and prosperity
for all. There needs to be a comprehensive reform of the
Security Council. The goal of African countries is to
be fully represented in all the decision-making organs
of the United Nations, in particular in the Security
Council. We must therefore stress the fundamental need
to urgently reform the Council if we are to avoid further
erosion of not only the legitimacy and credibility of this
organ, but also its ultimate effectiveness in a world that
is very different from the one that existed when the
United Nations was founded, over 70 years ago.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Argentina.
Mrs. Martinic (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina thanks the Kuwaiti presidency for convening
this open debate on a subject in which Argentina has
always been particularly interested. We also thank
Mr. Ian Martin for his valuable briefing, as well as the
Japanese delegation for the excellent work carried out
during its recent chairmanship of the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions, which led to the adoption of the very
comprehensive note by the President S/2017/507, on the
working methods of the Council.
In that regard, we agree with those who maintain that
the new agreed note is both a valuable tool for increasing
the transparency, inclusiveness and efficiency of the
Council and a balanced text that can serve as a useful
guide for the working methods of agreed measures or
best practices. Among its new elements, we highlight
its reference to the intention of Council members to

S/PV. 8175

request, examine and regularly take advantage of
specific advice from the Peacebuilding Commission.
Argentina has historically advocated the need for
constant efforts to improve transparency, inclusiveness,
openness, democratization and efficiency in the work of
the Security Council. In that vein, we are guided by the
conviction that, without impairing the effectiveness of
decision-making, the Council can, and should, be more
transparent and democratic in its relationship with the
broader membership of the United Nations.
It is worth remembering that, during its presidency
of the Security Council in February 2000, it was
Argentina that pushed for the adoption of a note by
the President of the Security Council, whereby newly
elected members were invited to participate in informal
consultations as observers during the month prior
to the start of their term as elected members of this
organ. During its 2005-2006 mandate, Argentina also
promoted and supported various initiatives aimed at
achieving greater transparency and access of Member
States to the Council.
During Argentina’s last chairmanship of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions — a position that Argentina
occupied in 2013-2014 — numerous presidential notes
were adopted, on topics such as consultations with
troop- and police-contributing countries, dialogue with
non-member countries of the Council and other bodies,
the participation of Council members in drafting
Council products and their broader responsibility for
drafting and the continuity of the work of its subsidiary
bodies, among others.
Argentina deems it essential to periodically
examine the implementation of note S/2017/507 and
other relevant notes, identify successful practices and
possible deficiencies and consider making necessary
adjustments. In that regard, Argentina urges the
Informal Working Group to continue working towards
a single, comprehensive document, so as to consolidate
and streamline all decisions on working methods.
The Council’s dialogue with bodies, be they inside
or outside the United Nations system, is essential for the
fulfilment of its functions. Among the bodies mentioned
in note S/2013/515, adopted under the Argentine
presidency, are the Peacebuilding Commission,
the International Criminal Court and humanitarian
assistance agencies. The Security Council has myriad
responsibilities and, to fulfil them, a certain amount

18-0331633/64

S/PV.8175

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

of coordination with other stakeholders is necessary.
However, Argentina discourages the Security Council,
whose function is to maintain international peace and
security, from absorbing the functions of other bodies.
Among the issues on which the Council has not
made substantive progress is the matter of due process in
the Council’s sanctions committees. Argentina favours
expanding the establishment of an Ombudsman in each
of the Council’s sanctions committees. The other issue
in that regar is the follow-up of referrals made by the
Security Council to the International Criminal Court.
The Council periodically receives the requisite reports
from the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court, in accordance with its own resolutions, but
takes no action accordingly, even in cases where the
Court reports that the cooperation required by Council
resolutions has not been provided. What both issues
have in common is their ability to affect the credibility
of the Council if they are not promptly addressed.
Finally, we reiterate that what is at stake in
improving the working methods of the Council is
the culture of decision-making in this organ and the
effectiveness of its performance. The task of reviewing
and updating, in response to the demands made by the
international community for democratization, greater
inclusion, accountability and transparency in the
Council, continues to be an important objective that my
country endorses. Argentina reaffirms and pledges its
best efforts to continue contributing to that process.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): I would also like to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this open debate. In
the deliberations on this topic, we should always bear
in mind that the Security Council acts on behalf of all
States Members of the United Nations. That is why the
working methods of the Security Council are an issue
that concerns the entire United Nations membership.

06/02/2018

accountable it will be. The more it shares information,
consults and accepts input, the more effective it will
become. Moreover, a Council that is more responsive
to the United Nations membership will be better placed
to meet the challenges of an increasingly complex
world. It would be difficult to say that we have reached
this point.
We acknowledge that some progress has been
achieved in the last few years in improving the Council’s
working methods. Much of note 507 addresses the ways
in which the Council communicates with the outside
world and the degree to which information about the
Council is available and accessible. Yet there is still
room for improvement in terms of more informative
briefings and the timely availability of draft resolutions
and presidential statements, and certainly a decrease
in the frequency of closed meetings is needed for a
meaningful interaction. Greater transparency is also
necessary in the functioning of the Security Council
subsidiary organs, which should be encouraged to
further interact with the United Nations membership.
The Council should not miss opportunities to get views
beyond those of Council member States.
Another improvement would be to better incorporate
conflict prevention into the Security Council agenda.
There is broad consensus among Member States on the
need to enhance our efforts on prevention, including
through mediation efforts. Consolidating the Security
Council’s role in prevention by making the best possible
use of the tools at its disposal to prevent conflict is
vital. To do so, the Council needs to be able to act in
an informed manner. Current experience indicates that
the Council often finds itself responding to crises in an
incremental manner, making greater use of the tools at
its disposal only as situations deteriorate.

Many challenges to the better functioning of the
Organization are a result of the lack of transparency,
accountability, effectiveness and democracy in the
Security Council. The working methods of the Council
are at the heart of those shortcomings, which have a
direct impact on the critical undertakings of the United
Nations as a whole.

The use of the veto has also proved to hamper the
most important role of the Council in a given situation,
not least in the early phases of a conflict. We believe
that better outcomes could be achieved and more
humanitarian tragedies prevented if the tools at the
Council’s disposal were utilized much earlier, without
resort to the veto as an instrument for advancing
national interests. In this manner, we see the work of
the Council as being complementary to that of the other
organs of the United Nations, with which it needs to
remain in synergy.

We remain convinced that the more transparency
the Council displays in undertaking its work, the more

Needless to say, better coordination of the Security
Council with the General Assembly, the Economic

34/64

18-03316

06/02/2018

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

S/PV. 8175

and Social Council and the Secretariat, as well as with
the Peacebuilding Commission, is crucial. Greater
interaction with regional organizations as well as
troop- and police-contributing countries would also
undoubtedly contribute to the Council’s effectiveness.

First, enhanced engagement of the Council with
the wider United Nations membership is critical. We
all have a stake in the maintenance of international
peace and security. The number and proportion of open
meetings of the Council must therefore be increased.

Finally, I would like to emphasize that we consider
the issue of working methods as one of the components
of the broader Security Council reform agenda. At the
same time, our firm belief is that updating the Council’s
methods of work cannot be a substitute for engaging
in more substantive talks on Security Council reform.
We must continue to seek a constructive solution by
identifying a common denominator to channel the
debate on the Council reform agenda. I will not go
into the details of our position on this issue here, as I
made that position clear during the intergovernmental
negotiations last week, in addition to the remarks made
by the United for Consensus group.

Similarly, meaningful participation of States with
a legitimate stake in the Council’s deliberations should
be ensured throughout the decision-making process.
This is especially true for troop-contributing countries
(TCCs) and police-contributing countries, Pakistan
being among the more consistent and leading ones.

Before I conclude, I would like to stress that we
look forward to continuing to contribute constructively
to the ongoing discussion on improving the working
methods of the Council. Increased transparency and
effectiveness will further enhance the legitimacy of
this body in the eyes of all Member States. That, in
turn, will only strengthen the Council’s role in the
maintenance of international peace and security, to the
benefit of us all.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): Let me also begin by
congratulating you on assuming the presidency of the
Council for this month. My delegation also welcomes
Kuwait’s assumption of the chairmanship of the
Informal Working Group of the Security Council on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.
We all acknowledge that to respond to the
increasingly complex, overlapping and interconnected
challenges to global peace and security, the Council
must become more accountable, inclusive, transparent
and effective, an imperative that demands and warrants
continued improvement in its working methods.
Presidential note S/2017/507, of August 2017,
addresses the Council’s practice in a holistic manner.
Our focus should remain on the effective and consistent
implementation of the measures identified in that note.
In this regard, I would like to highlight four key
points and make four key suggestions.

While we are encouraged by a separate section
in the revised note on consultations with troop- and
police- contributing countries, it is essential that the
Council’s effective partnership with TCCs be extended
beyond the mere operational aspects of a mandate
and include decision-making, policy formulation and
mandate formation as well. The implementation of note
S/2013/630 remains pertinent in this regard.
Together with the United Kingdom, my country
led informal consultations by the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping on triangular cooperation. The
recommendations flowing from these consultations will
now be considered during the upcoming meeting of the
Special Committee, and we are confident that they will
serve as a point of departure in our efforts to improve
and strengthen existing triangular mechanisms.
Secondly, the Council should be more transparent
and balanced in the working of its subsidiary organs.
Elected members should have a more equitable
representation on these organs. Additionally, they
should also play a bigger role as penholders on issues
on the Council’s agenda.
In the same vein, and as other colleagues have also
said this morning, there is no justification for limiting
the scope of the Ombudsman to only one Sanctions
Committee. The mandate of the Ombudsperson for the
Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities should be expanded to other committees.
Thirdly, we believe that the Council should rely
more on the instrument of diplomacy and pacific
settlement of disputes under Chapter VI of the United
Nations Charter. Better utilization of regional and

18-0331635/64

S/PV.8175

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

subregional organizations in accordance with Chapter
VIII of the Charter would surely help.
Increasing reliance on Chapter VII can lead to an
impasse and at times a diminished focus on diplomacy,
which is obviously not desirable. Before mandating
actions under Chapter VII of the Charter, the Council
should ensure that all recourse to peaceful means have
been exhausted and that this remains a measure of
last resort.
Fourthly, nothing undermines the credibility of the
Council more than selective implementation of its own
resolutions. The Council should therefore periodically
review the implementation of its own resolutions,
especially on long-standing issues such as the Jammu
and Kashmir dispute. Failure to enforce its own
resolutions undercuts not just the Council’s standing in
the world but also both the image and standing of the
United Nations.
During Pakistan’s most recent term in the Council,
which was just a few years ago, we reintroduced
wrap-up sessions, which have now become the norm.
Pakistan also made specific proposals on enhancing
intra-Council communication and organized Arria
Formula meetings. These steps were taken to augment
openness and transparency in the Council’s work.
We have not been alone in this endeavour. Over
the years, elected members of the Council have led
the charge in bringing improvements to its working
methods. There is in fact an inextricable link between
the nature of the membership of the Council and the need
felt to make the Council more open and transparent.
This link is called “accountability”.

06/02/2018

endorses the statement delivered by the representative
of Switzerland earlier today. Estonia, together with
Costa Rica, has been at the forefront of the ACT group
on the “T” — that is, transparency — issues. I would
like therefore to emphasize a few points on this topic.
Estonia cannot speak from first-hand experience
about the complicated daily work of the Security
Council since we have never served as a Council
member. But we truly believe in the positive impact
of open and inclusive processes. Furthermore, and
as was already expressed in the 2005 World Summit
outcome document, the main goal should be increased
ownership of the Council’s work by all countries and its
accountability to the membership.
We have closely seen the importance of effective
and substantiated communication between the Security
Council and the wider United Nations membership in
the recent process of appointing the Secretary-General.
In this regard, Estonia, acting on behalf of the ACT
group, sent letters to the Secretary-General and to the
Presidents of the General Assembly and of the Security
Council on lessons learned. Our conclusions were
recently published as document S/2017/846. Although
there is still time until the peak of the next SecretaryGeneral selection cycle, I would like to draw Council
members’ attention to a few suggestions from our
“lessons learned” document for future reference.

Ms. Lind (Estonia): I thank you very much,
Mr. President, for having organized this open
debate today. We also offer our warm thanks to
Mr. Martin for his briefing and to him and his team for
their dedication.

First, the ACT group believes that the interaction
between the Security Council and the General Assembly
needs to be improved to live up to the expectations of
the membership and the new standards of openness and
transparency. In that regard, we encourage the Security
Council to review its working methods, building on
the discussions held among Council members during
the latest selection. Secondly, the ACT group recalls
the collective responsibility of the Security Council to
reach consensus on a recommendation to the General
Assembly for the appointment of the SecretaryGeneral. In that connection, ACT believes the use of
colour-coded ballots during straw polling should be
discouraged and that the equal rights and role of all
Council members in the process should be upheld. Last
but not least, the ACT group calls for regular public
briefings by the Security Council on developments in
the nomination process and for open communication
with regard to straw poll results.

Estonia, as a member of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency (ACT) group, fully

Overall we are glad to witness that the members of
the Security Council are more often speaking in the open

The best way to enhance the democratic and
representative character of the Council is therefore to
reinforce this norm of accountability and not to support
any actions that threaten to undermine or reverse
these ideals.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Estonia.

36/64

18-03316

06/02/2018

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

Chamber and contributing to increased transparency.
We are fully aware that there are discussions and
situations that need to be dealt with behind closed
doors, but we encourage Council members to hold open
meetings whenever possible and to seek interaction
with the wider membership and other organs, as well as
with civil society.

S/PV. 8175

We welcome and encourage that good practice, as
it contributes to increased transparency and allows
members of the Council to have their views on record,
without prejudice to informal consultations whenever
the Council’s members deem that appropriate.

Mr. Duarte Lopes (Portugal): I thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this open debate. We
welcome every effort from the Security Council to push
this agenda forward. I also thank Mr. Ian Martin for
his briefing.

Thirdly, we believe that the Security Council’s
consultation with the Peacebuilding Commission and
the Economic and Social Council increases the power
of synergies and strengthens a more coordinated United
Nations response in conflict prevention, peacebuilding
and sustaining peace. The importance of such
interactions has already been recognized by the Security
Council. What is now required is to bring this approach
into full practice. We therefore encourage the Council
to regularly invite the Chairs of the Peacebuilding
Commission and of its country configurations, as well
as the President of the Economic and Social Council,
as briefers or participants in informal dialogues,
as necessary.

In recent years, some steps were taken to increase
the transparency, inclusiveness, interaction and
efficiency of the work of the Security Council. In that
regard, we commend the recent work by the members of
the Council, under the leadership of Japan, in updating
the presidential note S/2010/507. The challenge now
lies in its implementation.

Fourthly, we encourage the Council to make better
use of its subsidiary bodies, such as the sanctions
committees and the working groups, to ensure that it
captures early signs of emerging threats to peace and
security, including those closely linked to the larger
development agenda, climate change, pandemics,
illegal trafficking or organized crime.

As yet another member of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group, we associate
ourselves with the statement delivered earlier by the
Permanent Representative of Switzerland. I would like
now to briefly touch upon four aspects and suggest
some concrete improvements.

Mr. President, in the coming months, as you ably
guide the Informal Working Group as its as Chair, we
trust that the Council will agree on further progress
related to its working methods, without overburdening
the Council’s workload.

In closing, I would like to express our gratitude for
the work done by Japan in the Informal Working Group
and wish all the best to Kuwait for its chairmanship in
the next two years.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Portugal.

The first aspect concerns open debates, which
tend to be a regular feature of the Council’s monthly
programme of work. We welcome these debates as an
expression of the commitment to greater transparency
and openness to non-Council members. But open
debates are also a way to enable Member States to better
understand the measures adopted by the Council and to
enhance their commitment to the full implementation of
these measures. In this vein, we believe that whenever
an open debate is expected to have an outcome, the
Council should preferentially decide to allow at a later
stage for the outcome to reflect the input of non-Council
members, as deemed relevant by the Council.
With regard to the second aspect, we note with
appreciation that an increasing number of Council
members are expressing their views publicly at briefings.

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Lebanon.
Ms. Mudallali (Lebanon): I would like to begin
by congratulating you, Mr. President, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council and express our full
confidence in your leadership to make it a successful
month. I would also like to commend the delegation
of Kazakhstan for a fruitful presidency in January. I
would also like to thank Mr. Martin for his briefing.
When the 51 States that established the United
Nations met in San Francisco in 1945 — and my
country, Lebanon, was one of them — they determined
on behalf of the international community to
“unite their strength to maintain international
peace and security, and to ensure, by the acceptance
of principles and the institution of methods,

18-0331637/64

S/PV.8175

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

06/02/2018

that armed force shall not be used, save in the
common interest”.

affecting peace and security and leading to further
protracted conflict with massive human cost.

That was 73 years ago. While the principles endure,
the methods and architecture are due for a twenty-first
century update.

There is also a need for non-Council members to
participate in the closed sessions of the Council when
they are concerned. The Council should also devote
more meetings and field visits for the prevention of
conflict. The relationship between the Council and the
General Assembly should not be considered only in the
context of encroachment, but rather in the framework
of shared responsibility in the widest interpretation of
threats to international peace and security.

The security, economic, political and technological
environment is completely different from that of the
time of the founding of the Organization in the 1940s.
The challenges facing the international community
urgently point to the need to improve and reform the
global governance mechanisms. Lebanon has constantly
supported all endeavours aimed at reforming the United
Nations and its main organs, whether the General
Assembly, the Security Council or the Economic and
Social Council. But most importantly, Lebanon supports
the efforts of the Secretary-General, Mr. Guterres, and
will continue to engage constructively in his initiative
to reform the Secretariat.
Lebanon is a firm believer in the need to enhance
and strengthen the working methods of the Security
Council, rendering it more transparent and efficient. To
that end, my country has constantly supported the work
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions, and considers it a step in
the right direction.
As underlined in the President’s concept note
(S/2018/66, annex) on the improvements in the
Council’s working methods over the last 25 years, there
is a need to do more. Better communication and greater
involvement of Member States, especially concerned
countries, in the decision-making process on issues
related to international peace and security remain the
cornerstone of the priorities of these non-members of
the Security Council. The noticeable improvement in
the quantitative access to information should be coupled
with a qualitative and participatory approach. This will
be a solid path to ensure that the Security Council is
more accessible, transparent and accountable, hence
more democratic. Lebanon is fully confident that the
Kuwaiti chairmanship of the Working Group will prove
decisive and fruitful in that regard.
Lebanon believes that the annual report of the
Council to the General Assembly should be more
analytical, ask difficult questions, draw on lessons
learned and call for common action. We look forward
to seeing, in the coming report, the reasons behind the
crippling effect of vetoes exercised last year on matters
38/64

The prompt adoption of the Security Council’s rules
and procedures and the strengthening of coordination
with other organs, mainly the General Assembly,
remain key elements of a more effective Security
Council — one that can meet the enormous challenges
of the day.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Kadiri (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express our pride in Kuwait
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. We unconditionally support Kuwait’s
efforts in that office
(spoke in French)
I thank the Kuwaiti presidency for having
convened this open debate on the working methods
of the Security Council. We particularly welcome the
deserved institutionalization of this topic, to make it
an annual consideration by the Council. This positive
development allows us today to address such an
important issue among members and non-members of
the Council alike.
My delegation takes this opportunity to pay tribute
to the outstanding work of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions and
the adoption, on 30 August 2017, of note S/2017/507,
issued under the presidency of Egypt. This note, as
updated, provides us a current, coherent and substantive
document for reflection. We welcome the key role
of Japan at the helm of the Working Group over the
past two years. We are convinced that the Group will
make significant progress under your chairmanship,
Mr. President.
All of these elements, accompanied by ongoing
and sustained efforts, will certainly advance our goal
18-03316

06/02/2018

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

of improving and harmonizing the activities of the
Security Council by enshrining the role of the Council
as guarantor of the maintenance of international peace
and security on behalf of all Member States of the
United Nations. The Charter of the United Nations has
conferred on the Council important powers that it is
duty-bound to use effectively. We commend the Council
for efforts made to date, and we encourage further work
in this area.
Indeed, the Council broke a record this past year with
the holding of no less than 282 public meetings — that
is, 41 more than in 2014 and 45 more than 2016. It is a
testament to the growing responsibility of the Council.
Nevertheless, the review of the working methods of the
Council was only addressed twice in 2017, at the behest
of the Ukranian and Egyptian presidencies in February
and August, respectively. Five such meetings were held
in 2016.
In that context, Morocco welcomes the many
positive developments in recent years with regard to
improving the Council’s operations and bolstering its
effectiveness and inclusiveness, including the issuing
of joint letters from the Presidents of the Security
Council and the General Assembly to all Member
States listing the names of candidates for the SecretaryGeneral position; the openness and greater interaction
with non-Council-member States; more systematic
use of new technologies, notably videoconference; the
election of chairs of the Council’s subsidiary bodies
that are more accessible to non-permanent members;
and interactions with chairs of the country-specific
configurations in the Peacebuilding Commission.
Those new practices contribute to enhancing the
transparency and quality of the work of the Council and
also allows it to benefit from the diversity of positions
and views of Member States. It should be kept in mind
that improving the working methods of the Council is a
permanent and evolving process. The presidental note in
S/2017/507 is a major feat in this quest for transparency,
effectiveness and greater authority for the Council. In
that regard, it is particularly important to take into
account the current global international context in all
discussions on the working methods of the Council.
Moreover, as a troop-contributing country, the
Kingdom of Morocco can attest to the lasting effects of
the Council efforts in conflict prevention, peacekeeping
and the peaceful settlement of conflicts, particularly
in Africa. Morocco also attaches great importance to

S/PV. 8175

the development of preventive diplomacy, hand in hand
with the need for rapid and effective action to maintain
international peace and security and promote political
solutions to conflicts, and to the development of the
support that the international community extends to the
actions taken by the Council. It goes without saying that
improving the working methods of the Council through
the joint reflection of all Member States, accompanied
by the political will of the members of this executive
organ of the United Nations, will contribute to the
achievement of its goals.
Finally, we would do well to not forget that the
debate on the improvement of the working methods
of the Council is part of a united vision of the new
architecture of the United Nations, as expressed by
the Secretary-General in his reform proposals. The
Kingdom of Morocco is ready to contribute to this
important work, just as it did during the two years of its
mandate in the Council, in 2012 and 2013.
I would be remiss if I did not pay a heartfelt tribute
to the Security Council Affairs Division, which,
through its reports, analyses and its accessibility to the
Member States of the United Nations, contributes to the
improvement of the Council’s working methods.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Singapore.
Ms. Tang (Singapore): I take this opportunity
to congratulate the newly elected members of the
Security Council and to thank Kuwait for convening
today’s meeting.
I would also like to thank Japan for its efforts
over the past two years in steering the work of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions. Under Japan’s leadership, a major
update of note S/2010/507 on the working methods of
the Council was compiled and issued in August 2017
(see S/2017/507). Last week, we began a new round of
intergovernmental negotiations on the reform of the
Security Council. Today’s open debate is therefore a
timely occasion to reflect on progress made thus far
and to identify what can still be improved.
To begin, we are pleased that there has been
significant progress in transparency in recent years.
The number of public meetings has increased steadily
since 2013. The webcasting of meetings and media
interactions have given greater visibility to the
Council’s work. More information is also now available

18-0331639/64

S/PV.8175

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

through the Council’s website as well as social media.
My delegation is also grateful to the members of the
Council who have actively sought to engage and brief
the wider membership on key issues of interest.
Steps have also been taken in recent years to
improve inclusiveness. Singapore is encouraged that
Council members have made greater use of different
formats since 2015 to engage more interactively with the
General Assembly, including informal briefings, Arria
Formula meetings, Toledo-format dialogues and so on.
We also note the growing regularization of meetings by
each month’s President to introduce the new programme
of work and wrap-up sessions to reflect on the work
of the past month. Those are important opportunities
for the Council to have exchanges with other Member
States on its work.
In terms of effectiveness, the record has been
mixed. There have been many occasions over the past
three years where the Council has achieved unity on
difficult subjects and found its voice in responding to
critical developments. However, there have also been
other occasions when the Council has not managed to
reach consensus or take adequate action. Singapore’s
views on the use of the veto are well known, and I will
not repeat them here. Instead, we ask the members of the
Council, especially its permanent members, to reflect
on their role in the maintenance of international peace
and security. Robust debate must also be accompanied
by a willingness to compromise in the search for
solutions. Otherwise, this Chamber will amount to
little more than a stage on which the Security Council
postures, without meaningful impact on the ground.
These three principles are not mutually exclusive.
They are a call for the Security Council to be more
transparent, inclusive, and effective. Only then can
the Council also be more accountable to the wider
membership. In this regard, we think there are some
practical steps that the Security Council can take.
First, as highlighted by Kuwait in its concept note
for this open debate (S/2018/66, annex), more can be
done to involve concerned States or regional bodies
in issues and decisions that impact them. The Council
has stepped up informal consultations with concerned
States in recent years. We encourage the Council to
reflect on regularizing this process where possible. The
Council should also find ways to deepen its coordination
with troop- and police-contributing countries.
Our discussions on the evolution of peacekeeping,
40/64

06/02/2018

peacebuilding and the peace continuum continue to
evolve, both within and outside this Chamber. The
common anchor for all these discussions must be
adequate consideration for the practical challenges
of implementation on the ground, especially when
decisions of the Council have far-reaching impact and
the General Assembly is called upon to resource them.
Secondly, we encourage the Council to look
seriously at ways to improve the implementation of
sanctions. Australia, Finland, Germany, Greece and
Sweden made an important contribution to this process
through the high-level review of United Nations
sanctions in 2014. Last year, Egypt made another
important contribution, convening several meetings on
the practical challenges of sanctions implementation
and capturing its reflections in document S/2017/1098.
This is a concrete beginning that we should build on
and the Council should find ways to continue working
with the General Assembly to take this forward.
Thirdly, we urge the Council to continue reviewing
and strengthening the role of elected members. The
Council’s membership is not perfect. Sixty-six States
have never served on the Council, but the 10 elected
members of the Council were chosen by their peers to
represent their interests and concerns. A positive step
was taken last year to invite newly elected members to
observe meetings of the Council, subsidiary bodies and
informal consultations for the three months immediately
preceding their term of membership. More can be
done to strengthen their voice and role on the Council,
including through a review of the penholder system.
Finally, over the past year we have heard much
about performance, benchmarks and indicators of
achievement for the peacekeeping operations, special
political missions, subsidiary bodies and other
processes that are mandated by the Council. It is time
for the Council to also account for its own performance
and begin by adopting its own rules of procedure.
They constitute the only official set of rules guiding
the working methods of this important body, and
yet remain provisional after 70 years. The General
Assembly sought to ameliorate this situation somewhat
in 1952, by mandating a repertoire of the practice of
the Security Council. Sixty-six years on, the Council
should do its part.
Singapore welcomes Kuwait’s chairmanship of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions. This open debate is a positive
18-03316

06/02/2018

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

S/PV. 8175

beginning, and we look forward to continued and
meaningful engagement between the Council and the
General Assembly under Kuwait’s leadership.

Council. The four elements mentioned are, in our view,
essential to building a decision-making culture that is
in line with our collective interests.

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Colombia.

With regard to communications, Colombia
recognizes the efforts made by the various presidents
of the Security Council, especially the meetings
with the President of the General Assembly and the
organization of open and public briefings, which make
the discussions on the most pressing problems and
situations more democratic. Furthermore, with respect
to documentation, we reiterate that it is essential
that the annual reports submitted by the Council to
the General Assembly have an appropriate level of
specificity that contributes to a better understanding of
the decision-making process for the general public and
non-member delegations in order to ensure that they are
genuinely informative and not merely descriptive.

Mr. Morales López (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to begin by thanking you, Mr. President,
for convening this annual debate on the working
methods of the Security Council, which is in and of
itself a tangible demonstration of the commitment that
the most important body in maintaining international
peace and security should demonstrate to the principles
of transparency, inclusiveness, accountability and
efficiency. We are particularly grateful to Mr. Ian
Martin for his briefing.
My country is convinced that this exercise is far
from merely an administrative or technical one: this
annual review of the progress and challenges in the
working methods of the Security Council is no small
matter insofar as the Council’s ability to effectively
carry out its work has a global impact beyond the
walls of this Chamber. In this regard, we welcome the
consistent work and receptive aptitude of its current and
past members towards the concerns of the rest of the
membership and the fact that they have incorporated
practices, such as more active participation by
non-members of the Council as co-penholders of
resolutions, greater publicity of its meeting and
instances of greater transparency with respect to the
activities and documents of the Council, inter alia,
which have democratized the Council’s work and made
it and its impact more efficient, as mentioned in the
concept note by the presidency of Kuwait (S/2018/66,
annex) and the note of the presidency of 30 August 2017
(S/2017/507).
The institutional relationship and interaction
between the Security Council and the General
Assembly, especially this year when we are seeking to
adopt and implement the process of reforming the peace
and security and development pillars of the SecretaryGeneral, is undoubtedly an ongoing process that should
be subject to ongoing review and improvements.
Improving transparency, efficiency, inclusiveness
and accountability in the Council’s working methods
is essential to achieving a better alignment between the
Security Council’s decisions on peace and security and
the support these decisions receive from all Member
States, particularly those that are not part of the

Finally, I must refer to the role that the General
Assembly’s revitalization process has played within the
United Nations in ensuring that the Organization can
meet the huge challenges we place on its substantive
agenda. Thanks to the decision of the President of the
General Assembly, Colombia will have the opportunity
to co-Chair, with Croatia, the Ad Hoc Working Group
on the Revitalization of the Work of the General
Assembly. In the revitalization process, all Members
of the United Nations have provided unanimous
guidance on the way forward on the various issues that
have modernized and made the United Nations more
effective, based on the inclusive management of our
discussions. Recent evidence of this could be seen in the
process of selecting a Secretary-General, in the more
equitable regional and gender representation among
senior management, and in the greater efficiency and
democracy of some processes within the Commissions,
to mention just a few.
Therefore, I have no doubt that we have made
significant progress, but we still have a long way to go
to achieve our shared goal of a Security Council that is
aligned with the objectives established in the Charter to
work towards international peace and security.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): Allow me to
make a few brief comments in addition to the statement
of the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
group, which was delivered earlier by the representative
of Switzerland.

18-0331641/64

S/PV.8175

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

At a time when the world faces so many
challenges — from the crisis on the Korean peninsula
to the crises of the protection of civilians in Syria,
Yemen and Myanmar, among others — the need for an
effective Security Council is more obvious than ever.
The centrality of the Council in a multilateral response
to such crises cannot be overstated. Yet, time and again
we have witnessed paralysis in the Council and its
inability to carry out its functions effectively on behalf
of the entire membership with a dramatic impact on
international stability and enormous human suffering
as a result.
In this context, the use of the veto has played
a central and unfortunate role. In the recent past in
particular, the veto has repeatedly been used in stark
opposition to the spirit of the Charter of the United
Nations, preventing the Council from fulfilling its
tasks under the Charter. Examples range from a number
of resolutions on Syria to the reaffirmation of relevant
international law with respect to the situation in the
Middle East. Indeed, permanent members should play a
leading role in upholding the Council’s decisions as they
are binding on the entire membership in accordance
with Article 25 of the Charter.
We all accepted the veto when joining the United
Nations, and while many of us favour its abolition as
a matter of principle, working on an understanding on
its use is, to our mind, the more promising path. The
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group has
developed a code of conduct regarding Security Council
action against mass atrocity crimes, which includes
a commitment not to vote against Council action to
counter such crimes. To date, 114 States — large and
small — from all regions of the world have subscribed
to it, including two permanent members of the Council.
Those States are also committed to timely and decisive
Security Council action against the worst crimes under
international law if and when they serve on the Council.
This year is the first time since the elaboration of
the code of conduct that nine States that support it serve
on the Council, which constitutes a procedural majority
that could be of crucial importance for placing topics
on the Council’s agenda. We look forward to working
with those States, in particular to ensure that the code
of conduct can, over time, bring about a change in the
political culture in the Council — a change that is very
badly needed. We call on all States that have not yet
done so to join the code of conduct as soon as possible.
Liechtenstein, as a matter of policy, only supports
42/64

06/02/2018

Security Council candidatures from countries that have
joined the code of conduct.
Along similar lines, the Council should act as
an enforcer of accountability for the most serious
crimes under international law. Accountability for
atrocity crimes not only reduces impunity for such
crimes, it also helps to prevent them in the future and
thereby contributes directly to the maintenance of
international peace and security. When possible, States
in question should be offered assistance to ensure such
accountability in their national systems, with the help
of international components, when necessary.
But referrals to the International Criminal Court
(ICC) by the Council are of course also critical when all
other accountability options have failed. The SecretaryGeneral recently renewed his calls on the Council to
refer the situation in Syria to the ICC. We support
that call. The work of the ICC, in that respect, could
be greatly assisted by the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, created by
the General Assembly in 2016.
In December 2017, States parties to the Rome
Statute added a new tool to the Council’s toolbox by
activating the ICC’s jurisdiction over the crime of
aggression, which will go into effect as of 17 July
2018. That is a landmark development in the history of
international law and complementary to the prohibition
of the illegal use of force enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations. The Council should therefore use
its ICC referral powers with respect to the crime of
aggression wisely, as it has the tremendous potential
not only to hold leaders who decide to commit illegal
acts of aggression accountable, but to deter illegal warmaking in the first place.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): At the outset, allow me to
thank the Kuwaiti presidency for organizing today’s
open debate on working methods, which offers us a
public occasion to elaborate on the revised note by the
President S/2017/507, push for its implementation and
pay tribute to the remarkable progress made by the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions under the Japanese chairmanship
over the past two years.
18-03316

06/02/2018

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

The revised note 507 responds to the demand for
enhanced transparency, inclusiveness and interaction
of the Council with the rest of the United Nations
membership. It reflects the improvements already
achieved in recent years, as in the case of the new
selection process for the Chairs of the Council’s
subsidiary organs. The measures introduced for the
preparation of incoming elected members put them in
a better position to contribute to the Council’s work
from day one, thereby enhancing its effectiveness. So
much has been done. Let me mention, in that context,
our split term with the Netherlands and the work
carried out throughout the year with its team to ensure
a smooth transition, in particular in the work of the
subsidiary organs.
More can be done to achieve full implementation
of note 507 and for a bold interpretation of its
provisions. In our view, the role of the elected ten will
be crucial in that respect. We encourage the Council
to continue to make full use of all tools at its disposal,
and wish to put forward the following considerations
and suggestions. Italy believes in closer cooperation
between the Security Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) and is looking forward to seeing
the Council regularly request, deliberate and draw
upon the PBC’s specific, strategic and targeted advice,
as stated in paragraph 95 of note 507. Italy is aware of
the responsibilities as a penholder. At the same time,
we welcome co-penholdership as a practice that allows
for the wider participation of Council members in the
drafting process and can consequently bring added
value to the Council’s outcomes. During the drafting
process, we encourage the Council to engage in timely
consultations, including with the broader United
Nations membership, in particular with interested
States and regional organizations.
In that respect, in reviewing the mandates of
peacekeeping operations, due consideration should be
given to the views of the troop- and police-contributing
countries (TCCs/PCCs). The inclusive involvement of
TCCs and PCCs when renewing mandates is key to
nurturing trust between those countries and Council
members. During our term in the Council last year,
we saw first-hand that much remains to be done in that
respect. The Council should also promote and make
more regular use of informal settings, such as informal
awareness meetings to receive necessary information
prior to deliberations. Italy is also in favour of inviting
non-traditional briefers to Council meetings, in

S/PV. 8175

particular women from civil society, to allow Council
members to hear other voices before deliberating.
Finally, we believe in an enhanced role of the
Council presidency in framing the discussion in
consultations and communicating outcomes to the press.
Transparency is a very important tool for upholding the
legitimacy of this organ’s deliberations.
While we discuss working methods, we must
not shy away from debating in the same terms the
comprehensive reform of the Council, including its
structure and composition. We must aim at a modern
Council, which enjoys greater authority and legitimacy
in tune with the democratic reality of the twenty-first
century and in line with the principle of equal status
for every State Member of the United Nations. We
should then earnestly debate if an increased number of
veto powers would make the Council more responsive
to international crises, or more efficient, inclusive,
accountable and transparent. That is an open question
which, in our view, remains crucial in the current debate.
In conclusion, in that respect, Italy is ready to
engage with the rest of the membership in a constructive
dialogue leading to an early reform, through which
elected members can make a greater contribution to the
Council’s work, as well as by acting as a bridge towards
non-Council members, while reflecting their concerns
and remaining fully accountable to the scrutiny of
the wider membership. We remain committed in
that endeavour.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Chile.
Ms. Sapag Muñoz de la Peña (Chile) (spoke in
Spanish): Chile is grateful to Kuwait for convening
this debate and its work as a member of the Security
Council. We also underline the role of Kazakhstan
during the previous presidency, in particular the debate
on the maintenance of international peace and security
held on 19 January. We thank Japan for its efforts to
update note S/2010/507. We welcome Mr. Ian Martin
and commend him on the work conducted by Security
Council Report on the Council’s working methods. We
agree with the vast majority of the recommendations
that have been put forward today, and those included in
recent and previous reports. A reference was made to
Ambassador Colin Keating earlier today. I would like
to highlight that he was one of the first to draw the
Council’s attention to the importance of working with
the Peacebuilding Commission and troop-contributing

18-0331643/64

S/PV.8175

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

countries. Many have addressed that issue today.
Therefore, we will address specific issues, in addition
to those before us for consideration.
We need working methods that ensure that effective
political attention is given to the work of the Council.
We encourage Council members to demonstrate
greater discipline and restraint with regard to the list
of initiatives to be considered or adopted. Many of
them take up precious time and hinder the adoption of
solutions to the most urgent problems. Although the
veto is not a working method per se, it has an adverse
domino effect on the working methods of the Council,
and of its subsidiary bodies, in particular the sanctions
committees, as previous speakers have mentioned.
Elected members are often excluded as a matter of
custom. There should be a more inclusive process when
drafting resolutions and presidential statements, and
recommendations of the subsidiary bodies.
In that regard, we recommend the following
measures. We must strengthen the role of the 10 elected
members (E-10), as mentioned by the representative
of the Accountability, Coherence, and Transparency
group, of which Chile is a member. They should be
included as co-penholders, preferably in interegional
groups, as was the case with resolution 2286 (2016),
which was adopted in close consultation with civil
society. We must encourage greater use of wrap-up
meetings because they help the broader membership
and the interested public to monitor accountability in
the work of the Council, given the fact that they are
public and broadcast in the six official languages.
A good example was the most recent wrap-up
meeting, convened by Kazakhstan (see S/PV.8173),
during which the African members of the E-10 spoke as
one group to highlight their region’s priorities. Speaking
in one voice underscored the role of elected members
in reducing the Council’s workload. We also propose
that greater use be made of open debates by selecting
issues that require analysis from all members. In order
to determine points of convergence, the proposal was
made to encourage statements by like-minded groups
and inter-regional groups, such as the Human Security
Network, the Group of Friends of Children and Armed
Conflict and groups related to the women and peace
and security agenda, which include non-governmental
organizations, whose chairs can be consulted when
preparing concept notes.
44/64

06/02/2018

Similarly, we stress the importance of increasing
the number of Arria Formula meetings by circulating
a summary to all Member States on outcomes and
recommendations. We propose that the work of the
various subsidiary bodies be consolidated and that the
reports of the groups of experts of sanctions committees
be considered when structuring outcome documents,
in particular, with regard to mission transfers. The
transparency of the subsidiary bodies should be
bolstered by an improved and more timely use of
electronic media available. In that regard, we commend
the sanctions committees on their efforts. We stress the
importance of using press releases to highlight their
work so that they can emerge from the subterranean
universe mentioned by a previous speaker.
In conclusion, we highlight the importance of
strengthening the role of the Office of the Ombudsperson
and the prompt appointment of an ombudsperson to fill
the post that has been vacant for some time.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of New Zealand.
Mr. Hawke (New Zealand): I thank Kuwait for
convening today’s open debate and Ian Martin for
his briefing.
We all have a stake in this issue because poor
working methods can lead to poor outcomes. While we
welcome note S/2017/507 as an important codification,
it must be equally met with a change in Council culture.
In that regard, I wish to make three points.
First, the Council’s working methods should operate
to empower elected members to be fully involved
in collective decision-making. The legitimacy and
effectiveness of the Council’s decisions are maximized
when it works as 15 rather than five. We welcome recent
progress in ensuring that incoming elected members
are better prepared for membership. However, they still
face significant disadvantages. Important decisions are
sometimes negotiated without them, leaving elected
members presented with last-minute take-it-or-leave-it
proposals with no realistic opportunity to participate.
So-called penholdership can become distorted to
exclude meaningful input from elected members. At
the same time, elected members should themselves
be ambitious and enact the change in behaviour they
wish to see in the Council. We encourage greater
consideration as to whether any issues faced by the
Council would benefit from elected members working
18-03316

06/02/2018

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

more closely. For New Zealand, one such example was
working with four other elected Council members to
draft and secure the unanimous adoption of resolution
2286 (2016) on health care and armed conflict. There
are many other such examples to look to for inspiration.
Secondly, the Council’s working methods should
operate to enable meaningful engagement with troopand police-contributing countries. It is a problem that
can be addressed at least in part by taking simple
practical steps. During our Council term, we initiated
informal triangular consultations among the Council,
the Secretariat and the troop- and police-contributing
countries. Informality does not come naturally to
the United Nations but our aim was to create space
for a more fluid and timely exchange of information
and perspectives. We welcome the Council’s pledge
in revised note 507 to continue and develop informal
consultations and we look forward to them becoming
more regularized.
Thirdly, the Council’s working methods should
operate to strengthen its capacity to prevent conflict.
For the Council to act early and prevent conflict,
all Council members must be well informed of
developments and potential threats to peace and
security. The key is strengthening the Council’s
situational awareness. Where issues are fast-moving,
with competing accounts on the ground, the Secretariat
can play an important role in providing authoritative
information to Council members.
For the Council’s own legitimacy and effectiveness,
it is in all our interests that its culture and behaviour
reinforce that.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): Since this is Ukraine’s
first statement in the Chamber after we completed our
two-year term as an elected member of the Security
Council, I would like to take this opportunity to extend
sincere congratulations to the six new members of the
Council on a successful start to their work.
I would also like to congratulate you, Sir, and
wish you good luck in your presidency. We thank you
for convening today’s debate on such an important
subject — the Council’s working methods. The last
time that the United Nations membership had a chance
to engage in such a discussion was in July 2016 (see

S/PV. 8175

S/PV.7740). We are also grateful to Mr. Martin for his
outstanding briefing today.
I would like to pay tribute to the dedication and
hard work of the Japanese delegation, which steered
negotiations on updating presidential note S/2010/507
and on drafting presidential note S/2016/619, regarding
the selection of Chairs of the Security Council’s
subsidiary bodies. The new document S/2017/507 is a
significant achievement, aimed at further streamlining
the Council’s practices. We are also pleased that several
of Ukraine’s priorities are reflected in it, including those
on making the Council’s field visits more transparent.
What is required now is meaningful follow-up, in
particular the proper implementation of the relevant
provisions for the organization of visits, as well as due
preparation of reports following their conclusion.
Ukraine has always been among the proponents of
a more transparent Council. Over the past two years,
we did our best to contribute to further opening up this
body’s activities to the outside world and to enhancing
the role of elected members. We conducted our
presidency exactly one year ago in that spirit of openness
to dialogue and accessibility for all United Nations
Member States. We clearly supported convening open
Council meetings whenever possible. We underscored
that closed consultations should be the exception rather
than the rule. We proceeded from the understanding
that if consultations are held, the outside world deserves
to know what was discussed. We therefore endeavoured
to summarize the respective discussions for further
presentation at the media stakeout. It is encouraging
to see that that trend of greater openness is receiving
increasing support among Council members.
We approached our duties as Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2127
(2013), concerning the Central African Republic, and
the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1591 (2005), concerning the Sudan, in the same way.
We invited civil society representatives to informal
briefings. We convened Committee meetings with
the participation of regional States. My delegation
also initiated joint informal consultations with other
committees to ensure a holistic approach to addressing
issues such as the cross-border spread of armed groups
and illegal arms transfers.
We also remain staunch supporters of the practice
of formal monthly wrap-up sessions, which we see as
an important element of the proper implementation

18-0331645/64

S/PV.8175

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

of presidential note 507. We therefore introduced the
practice of seeking the input of Member States on issues
which they would like Council members to consider.
In the same vein, we are convinced that the timely
issuance of monthly assessments is not something to
be overlooked, since such assessments constitute a
valuable source for preparing annual reports.
All of this means that the working methods of
the Council are what Council members do every day.
Nothing is set in stone and positive change is possible
and is taking place, even if at a slower rate than desired.
We all have seen the Council’s successful political
intervention in the post-conflict electoral crisis in The
Gambia. That achievement testifies to the Council’s
potential in the area of conflict prevention. We hope
that preventive diplomacy will gradually become one
of standard marks of the Council’s work.
Currently, the question of the use of the veto remains
one of the most divisive issues. Ukraine belongs to the
group of States that support both the code of conduct
regarding Security Council action in response to
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes and
the French-Mexican initiative on suspending the use of
the veto in cases of mass atrocities.
While we are fully aware that a Council without the
veto is, unfortunately, a distant and uncertain reality, we
believe that responsible members of the international
community should be able to pledge not to resort to the
veto when considering cases that have all the hallmarks
of crimes against humanity and mass atrocities. Yet the
past few years will be recorded in history as the time
when repeated vetoes, primarily by Russia, stained the
Council’s reputation to a point almost beyond repair.
However, it is never too late to stop abusing the
veto right. Fully aware of the value of short statements,
I will conclude with a remark that any effort to increase
the openness and transparency of the Council will be
warmly welcomed and strongly supported by the wider
United Nations membership, including Ukraine.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Belgium.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): I would first like to congratulate Kuwait on iits
initiative to convene this open debate. It is an important
topic, which is dear to us. Moreover, Belgium had the
honour of presiding over one of the first open debates
on this issue 10 years ago (see S/PV.5968).
46/64

06/02/2018

The review of working methods should take place in
the broader context of the cross-cutting considerations
that the United Nations is currently undertaking. I
am thinking of the Secretary-General’s reforms and
the concept of sustainable peace, which call on us
to address the root causes of conflict. The Security
Council cannot function in a vacuum but must act
consistently in line with the work of the United Nations
and of the region. That is a guarantee of legitimacy for
the Council, which is expected to work in the interests
of international security.
Of course, Belgium does not wish to overhaul
the institutional architecture of the United Nations
nor do we wish to burden the Council with tasks or
missions that duplicate those entrusted to other bodies.
We simply want the Council to benefit from all the
dynamism, observations and information generated
by the United Nations system as a whole in order to
improve its effectiveness and the relevance of its action.
Coordination, common understanding and partnerships
are the triptych that we would like to see take shape.
Allow me, inter alia, to put forward some ideas.
First and foremost, with regard to the relationship
between the Security Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission, we encourage all initiatives to galvanize
that relationship. The activities of the Commission
should contribute to enriching the Council’s discussions,
which requires well-coordinated programmes of work.
That is true not only for meetings of country-specific
configurations but also for meetings devited to a region
or a topic. The discussions on the strategy for the Sahel
are a good example in that regard. In addition, the
Council could invite the Chair of a country-specific
configuration of the Commission to participate in
closed consultations, for example, following a visit by
the Commission to the country concerned.
Secondly, with regard to regional partnerships,
I believe that the Council would only benefit
from strengthening its exchanges with all relevant
stakeholders in a crisis or conflict situation. I am
thinking primarily about regional actors. The special
envoys of a regional organization involved in a peace
process should be almost automatically invited to
Council debates, whether open or closed. That, of
course, goes both ways: clearly, United Nations envoys
could also contribute to deliberations at the regional
level. Moreover, we support the opening up of the
Council to speakers who alert us to mass atrocities, such
18-03316

06/02/2018

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

as the Special Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide
and on the Responsibility to Protect.
Within the Council, it is necessary to continue to
consider how to further promote cooperation on the
penholder role. For example, it goes without saying that
elected members from a region affected by a crisis or
with a specific expertise have an increased role to play.
I also welcome the progress made with respect to the
involvement of troop- and police-contributing countries
in Council debates. The practice of tripartite dialogues
among troop-contributing countries, the Security
Council and the Secretariat must continue, both formally
and informally. We believe that this dialogue needs to
be further strengthened in terms of the preparation of
meetings, the degree of interaction among participants
and transparency of expected outcomes.
Finally, I wish to stress the importance of
respecting procedural guarantees in the context of
the implementation of the various sanctions regimes.
Concrete measures have already been proposed by the
Group of Like-Minded States on Targeted Sanctions, of
which Belgium is an active member. Progress remains
to be made and we will continue to lend our attention.
In the short-term, I call on the Security Council to
appoint a new Ombudsperson as soon as possible to
assist the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning
ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida. and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities, with respect to
delisting requests. It is an important post and has been
vacant since last year.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): We congratulate Kuwait on
assuming the presidency and convening this important
open debate. Since the Security Council acts on behalf
of the States Members of the United Nations, it should
understand and respond to their concerns on Council
transparency, efficiency and accessibility. In this
positive endeavour, the Council should not lose sight
of the basic reality that working methods are not an
end but a means to an end, where there must be an
effective and equitable resolution of conflicts, based on
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
relevant international law.
The working methods of the Security Council are
crucial to its ability to fulfil its responsibility to act

S/PV. 8175

promptly and effectively on behalf of international peace
and security. Over the past decade, the Security Council
has made further progress in codifying and improving
its working methods. Indonesia welcomes those steps,
such as more open debates, increased consultations
with the Presidents of principal organs and suborgans
and voices from regional and multilateral organizations,
civil society, non-governmental organizations and the
private sector to enrich Council discourse.
We would also like to commend Japan for its
work as Chair of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and other Procedural Questions in
2016 and 2017, particularly on improving transitional
arrangements for newly elected Council members, and,
of course, the update of note S/2010/507. That note is
not only actively used by Security Council members, it
is also an important aid for the non-permanent members
preparing to work in the Council. To help bolster the
Council’s work, Indonesia emphasizes the following.
First, the Council should not mirror power statuses,
but stand up credibly for the weak and powerless. On
far too many occasions, the Council has been impeded
by veto in the face of mass atrocities and severe
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law. While Indonesia calls for the abolishment of
veto rights, considering present entrenched realities, it
encourages the Council to consider proposals, such as
those presented by the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency group and the French-Mexican initiative.
The regulation of veto use would, first and foremost,
be a great push to elevate Council effectiveness and
global credibility. Issues of human rights and humanity,
as in the case of mass atrocities that are vetoed for
narrow political raisons d’etre, are issues that affect
the existence of the Security Council in the eyes of
many of our stakeholders. Until veto regulation is
realized, we support a formal explanation of veto use
by the permanent five being circulated to all General
Assembly members.
Secondly, a key factor behind sustaining peace
and ensuring that concrete ground results are achieved
posterior to the restructuring of the United Nations
peace and security pillar are the Council consultations,
cooperation and support vis-à-vis stakeholders of
United Nations special political missions, peacekeeping
operations and peacebuilding. Since United Nations
peacekeeping is indispensable, Indonesia urges the
Council to regularly and meaningfully consult with

18-0331647/64

S/PV.8175

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

troop- and police-contributing countries throughout
the different mission stages and strategy-making.
Indonesia, which has been involved in United
Nations peacekeeping for 60 years and as its ninthlargest troop- and police-contributing country, believes
that at no stage have there been efforts to institutionalize
consultations among the Council, the Secretariat
and troop- and police-contributing countries. Such
consultations are an improvement that many have asked
for in various forums, but remain to be implemented years
after their necessity. That would increase the efficiency
and effectiveness of peacekeeping operations and raise
more support from countries that have contributed to
sending their troops to conflict areas, since they have a
sense of belonging and involvement in the process. As
we are sending our boys and girls in harm’s way, troopand police-contributing countries must be involved in
decision-making related to predeployment, deployment
and mandate changes.
Furthermore, the Peacebuilding Commission,
now in existence for more than a decade, has acquired
valuable expertise not just on specific country
situations but on many vital themes, such as financing
for peacebuilding, private-sector partnerships and
illicit financial flows. Greater drawing by the Council
on the Peacebuilding Commission’s expertise, as well
as improved collaboration with the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council, particularly as
conflicts become more complex and multidimensional,
will only enable the Council to develop more
comprehensive solutions. Synergized responses will
also enhance wider ownership in Council decisions.
Thirdly, reiterating inclusivity and meaningful
consultations, Indonesia stresses the implementation of
Articles 31 and 32 of the Charter by fully taking into
account the views of affected non-member countries.
Since regional countries have critical bearing in various
ongoing conflicts, their input and support, along with
that of regional organizations, could be harnessed
better by the Council.
In conclusion, Indonesia, once again, underscores
that by building on the faithful implementation of
note 507 and the various views expressed by the wider
membership of today, it is hoped that the Security
Council would enhance its inclusivity and promote
more substantive participation by non-permanent
Council members, as well as members not in the
Council. The world outside this room is awaiting with
48/64

06/02/2018

keen interest and expectations for the Council to act
justly and decisively, implement various decisions
and live up to the Charter promise. The Council must
keep the trust reposed in it so as to gain credibility and
continue to exist as a beacon for peace and humankind.
Transparency and trust are the key.
The President (spoke in Arabic) I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): I thank the
Kuwaiti presidency for organizing this open debate.
We appreciate the Kuwaiti delegation’s commitment to
inclusively discharging its functions as the Chair of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and other
Procedural Questions. We recall the work accomplished
by the delegation of Japan in its recently concluded
tenure as the Chair of the Informal Working Group. We
thank Mr. Ian Martin, Executive Director of Security
Council Report, for sharing his insights this morning.
My delegation finds itself in a position in which we
can align ourselves with the pertinent points made by
all non-Council members so far.
We take this opportunity to share some observations
in the light of our recent engagements with the Council
in the aftermath of the atrocity crimes reported in
Myanmar’s Rakhine state since 25 August 2017 and
the resulting forced exodus to date of nearly 688,000
people, mostly Rohingya, into Bangladesh. At a time
when the Council members were still figuring out how
to respond to the unfolding humanitarian crisis, the
Secretary-General rose to the occasion by exercising his
authority under Article 99 of the Charter of the United
Nations to sensitize the Council about the potential
threats posed by the crisis to international peace and
security. We urge that this practice be encouraged on a
more regular basis, as warranted by any humanitarian
exigency likely to be compromised by otherwise
political considerations.
The Council, on its part, had convened a number
of consultations on the Rohingya humanitarian crisis,
which resulted in the adoption of a fairly comprehensive
presidential statement (S/PRST/2017/22). Given the
unfolding nature of the crisis, it is to be expected
that the Council remain seized with the issue, and
that it implement a periodic schedule to monitor the
presidential statement’s implementation by all the
parties concerned. Regular briefings and consultations
on such pressing issues would only further enhance the
Council’s credibility and minimize the possibility of
18-03316

06/02/2018

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

relying on the discretion of one Council member or the
other. In that context, we put on record our appreciation
for the Kuwaiti presidency for remaining seized with
the possibility of reconvening an open meeting on the
subject, since the last one was held nearly three months
ago (see S/PV.8133).
In the same vein, we deem it appropriate for
Council members to consider undertaking a visit to
Myanmar and Bangladesh to reaffirm their support to
the hundreds of thousands of refugees and displaced
persons, who have a rather uncertain future still
awaiting them. The Council’s visits on the ground
are indeed a useful exercise, and we would wish to
see the visits organized in a way that responds to the
most urgent conflict and humanitarian situations under
its consideration.
The Council has so far found it difficult to adopt a
draft resolution on the Rohingya humanitarian crisis,
mostly due to the possibility of the exercise of the veto
against any such draft resolution. We acknowledge
the veto as a responsibility and remain mindful of its
varied use throughout United Nations history, with
mixed results. However, we are increasingly convinced
that the exercise of the veto should be avoided in cases
that involve mass atrocity crimes.
The United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, the Secretary General’s Special Adviser
on the Prevention of Genocide and the Responsibility
to Protect and the Special Representative on Sexual
Violence in Armed Conflict have, among others,
unequivocally referred to the reported commission
of atrocity crimes against the Rohingya in northern
Rakhine state since 25 August 2017. Further facts
attesting to the commission of such crimes are also
coming to light. Against that backdrop, it is expected
that the Council demonstrate pragmatism by working
on a draft resolution that charts a durable solution
package for the Rohingya.
In relation to the reported atrocity crimes, it
is expected that the Council particularly consider
decisive action by demanding accountability, in order
to heal the trauma suffered by the Rohingya and restore
their confidence in the possibility of a safe, dignified
and voluntary return to Myanmar. In that context, as
a State party to the Rome Statute, Bangladesh would
particularly stress the importance of addressing the
critical question of resources in cases referred to the
International Criminal Court by the Council.

S/PV. 8175

Much has been said about the need for streamlining
the work of the various Council sanctions committees,
especially in terms of making their decision-making
processes more transparent and consultative for
non-Council members. In relation to the latest Rohingya
humanitarian crisis, we will particularly remain attuned
to the Council’s actions on possible sanctions, as
recommended by different mandate holders. We would
also wish to see information shared in a transparent
manner on actions taken against Member States that
have reportedly violated the Council’s own sanctions
regime, particularly in cases of arms transfers.
To conclude, we would urge the Council to give
due recognition and space to the voices of victims by
allowing the representatives of the Rohingya to come
and share their narratives with the Council. One clear
facet of the much anticipated reform of the Security
Council must be to further enhance its human face
and interactions.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Castañeda Solares (Guatemala) (spoke
in Spanish): We thank the delegation of Kuwait for
convening this open debate on the working methods
of the Security Council and for the concept note
(S/2018/66, annex) circulated to that end. We trust that
our deliberations will allow us to not only renew our
commitment to continue our advances in improving
the efficiency, transparency and interactivity of the
Security Council, but will also serve as a solid basis
for the effective implementation of presidential note
S/2017/507, to which our delegation attaches great value
and importance.
Guatemala acknowledges the progress made in
some practices and the reinforcement of other measures
included in note S/2017/507, thanks to the commendable
work carried out by the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions,
which was most recently chaired by the delegation of
Japan. Codifying best practices is an infinite task; at
the same time, it is an extremely useful exercise for the
work of this organ. Also taking into account our own
experience as a non-permanent member of the Security
Council for the period 2012-2013, we believe that there
is always room for improvement. In that regard, we
wish to highlight three issues that are currently relevant
to the working methods of the Security Council.

18-0331649/64

S/PV.8175

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

First, searching for information and understanding
regarding the activities of the Council remains a
fundamental and legitimate request. Although there
has been an increase in the Council’s public meetings,
continuing the practice of open debates that promote
greater participation of non-members of the Council
and the holding of numerous Arria Formula meetings
in recent years has allowed the Council to obtain
accurate information that helps it to effectively fulfil
its responsibility of maintaining international peace
and security.
We regret the increasingly irregular wrap-up
sessions and the lack of regular contact with the
Peacebuilding Commission — the Council’s advisory
body that plays an important role in preventing the
recurrence of conflicts — and the Chairs of the
Commission’s country-specific configurations, as well
as with other United Nations bodies. Nevertheless,
we commend the fact that note S/2017/507 conveys
the importance of maintaining communication
with the Peacebuilding Commission, in its capacity
as an intergovernmental advisory body, and its
configurations. Evidently, that would make it possible
to obtain reliable, first-hand information and specific
advice on the Commission’s country configurations.
In addition, such communication would also generate
efficiency in the approach to conflict prevention and in
maintaining appropriate guidance in implementing the
concept of sustainable peace.
Secondly, in the past, the Council has taken
decisions on appointing the Chairs of its subsidiary
bodies in a balanced, transparent and inclusive manner,
which allowed for change; that leads us to believe that
consultations are held around the process, especially
among the newly elected members of the Council.
My delegation hopes that such a practice and trend
will be reinforced in the future. It is also necessary to
ensure that the selection and appointment processes
for the various groups of experts are more transparent
and balanced, in order to create broad geographic and
gender representation, while also bearing in mind the
guidance given in presidential note S/2006/997 and the
provisions of note S/2017/507, which indicates that the
appointment of subsidiary body Chairs must be agreed
upon by 1 October of each year.
Thirdly, Guatemala values the information in
section VIII of the annex of note S/2017/507, as it
shows the importance of holding consultations among
the Security Council, the Secretariat and the troop50/64

06/02/2018

and police-contributing countries, which constitutes
a considerable contribution to increasing the Security
Council’s ability to take appropriate, effective and
timely decisions in fulfilling its responsibilities. Such
coordination is of great importance when peacekeeping
operations transition to special political missions and in
the eventual modification of their mandates.
In conclusion, our delegation appreciates the work
to update the Security Council’s working methods — a
stance we have firmly held in past years regarding the
issue. We welcome the progress made over the past two
years and are pleased to note that the State of Kuwait
has taken over the chairmanship of the Informal
Working Group on this subject for 2018-2019. Past
practice indicates that elected members, which are
accountable to regional groups and all Member States,
tend to improve their working methods. The best way
to highlight the representative and democratic nature of
the Council is to strengthen its rules of accountability
and transparency. That, in addition to cooperating with
the permanent members, would lead to greater synergy
in the Council around our common goal of improving
its working methods, since Security Council decisions
impact on the membership of the Organization.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Azerbaijan .
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to commend your delegation, Mr. President, for
holding this important open debate and for submitting
a concept note (S/2018/66, annex) on the topic. I also
thank Mr. Ian Martin for his insightful briefing.
We congratulate the State of Kuwait on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
February and the chairmanship of the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions. I would also like to praise the contributions
made by the former Chairs of the Working Group.
We acknowledge the role that the Group is playing by
advancing ways to further enhance the transparency,
accountability and overall efficiency of the Council’s
work. As an elected member of the Security Council,
Azerbaijan actively participated in discussions within
the Working Group and, during its presidency of the
Council, held an open debate on the Council’s working
methods in October 2013 (see S/PV.7052).
The Security Council’s working methods continue
to raise great interest among the broader membership.
Such an interest arises from the threats and challenges
18-03316

06/02/2018

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

facing the world nowadays and the functions of the
Security Council, which acts on behalf of Member
States and on which Member States conferred
the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, as provided for by the
Charter of the United Nations. Today’s open debate is
yet another illustration of the high level of attention
given to the topic.
We welcome the adoption by the Security Council,
on 30 August 2017, of presidential note S/2017/507,
which incorporates and further develops the Council’s
previous documents concerning its working methods.
However, there is a need for more efforts in that
direction, including through the Informal Working
Group and annual open debates on working methods. I
would like to focus briefly on three points.
First, it is clear that unity among the permanent
members is an absolute necessity for reaching
agreements. At the same time, it is important to always
remember that both permanent and elected members
of the Security Council bear a collective responsibility
for international peace and security. We note the
progress achieved so far in making the Council a more
collaborative and inclusive organ and would welcome
further deliberations and contributions to that end.
Secondly, the broader United Nations membership
should be given more opportunities to be heard. We
take positive note of some developments in that respect
and look forward to additional efforts to enhance the
transparency of the Security Council and its interaction
with the wider membership.
Thirdly, needless to say, the effectiveness and
accountable functioning of the Security Council
require, first and foremost, the implementation of
its decisions. The fact that the unlawful use of force
against sovereign States and the resulting military
occupation of their territories continue notwithstanding
Security Council resolutions, including those referring
to regional arrangements, does not mean that such a
state of affairs can constitute an accepted practice of
the Council’s working methods.
The objective of maintaining international peace
and security is hardly achievable if the universally
recognized fundamental values, norms and principles
are overtly disregarded, misinterpreted or conditioned
by aggressors to whitewash their illegal actions.
At a time of increased brutality of armed conflicts,
challenges to the sovereignty and territorial integrity

S/PV. 8175

of States, the highest level of forced displacement
and growing terrorist and separatist threats, more
concerted actions and synergy are required at all levels
to safeguard international peace and security.
We look forward to the full implementation of
presidential note 507 and a continued improvement
in the working methods and regular practices of the
Security Council.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, I wish to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on presiding over the Security Council this month, and
to assure you that we are proud of the distinguished role
that the sisterly State of Kuwait is playing in this forum.
We thank you also for convening this open debate on
the working methods of the Council.
We are in general agreement with the elements of
the concept note (S/2018/66, annex), which was carefully
prepared by the Kuwaiti presidency. We also value
Kuwait’s chairmanship of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions, in
its capacity as the coordinator of the Group of Arab
States on Security Council reform.
As a member of the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group, we align ourselves with the
statement made on behalf of the group.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia is at the forefront
of those countries urgently calling for a reform of the
Security Council, including developing its working
methods. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia supports
the efforts of the Arab Group on the reform of the
Council, and we demand that the Arab countries be
granted permanent representation, with full functions
and powers, in any future reform of the Council. We
also demand proportionate Arab representation in the
non-permanent category.
We live in a world that is torn apart by war and
escalating violence. We are in dire need of a Council
that is able to shoulder its main responsibilities of
maintaining international peace and security and
defending international legitimacy. Reforming the
Security Council started in 1993. Many reports and
statements are available on the development of the
Council’s working methods, including increasing
complementarity among the Security Council, the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social

18-0331651/64

S/PV.8175

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

Council. Those efforts have led to concrete steps
towards increasing transparency, efficiency and wider
participation. However, to date, we have not been able to
reach practical and comprehensive solutions that would
enable the Council to shoulder its main responsibilities
of maintaining international peace and security and
rising to the occasion, in order to meet the aspirations
of the international community.
In fact, most Member States agree that part of the
work of the Council is ineffective, which undermines
its credibility and limits its ability to play an active
role in settling conflicts. That is evident in the impasse
among Council members on many issues, including the
question of Palestine and the crisis in Syria.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia appreciates the efforts
made to improve and reform the working methods of
the Security Council and to implement presidential note
S/2017/507, which codifies and explains its working
methods. In that regard, we would like to point to a
number of factors pertaining to this issue.
First, elected Security Council members must
fully participate in the work of the Council, including
the preparation and submission of draft resolutions;
secondly, a code of conduct must be adopetd that
requires all Council members to refrain from obstructing
draft resolutions aimed at ending genocide, crimes
against humanity or war crimes; thirdly, there must be
consultations with the troop- and police-contributing
countries; fourthly, on the work of the sanctions
committees, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia values the
establishment of an Ombudsman post for the Security
Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities. We call for that vacancy to be filled as soon
as possible.
I wish to assure the Council that the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia will continue to call for broad and
comprehensive reform of the Council, and we call on
the membership to creatively interact with proposed
ideas and contribute to finding mechanisms that would
enable the Council to shoulder its responsibility in
maintaining peace and security.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Australia.
52/64

06/02/2018

Mr. Yardley (Australia): The scale and pace of
challenges facing the Security Council today must
bolster our resolve to ensure that the Council is as
agile and effective as possible. Australia welcomes
the update to note by the President S/2010/507. We
thank Japan, which acted as Chair of the Informal
Working Group during its recent Council term in 20162017, for its leadership and commitment on this issue.
Australia likewise commends Kuwait for assuming
the Chair in 2018 and for convening today’s debate.
I will focus on three key areas of working methods
reform — transparency, sanctions and use of the veto.
First, as a member of the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency (ACT) group, Australia firmly
believes transparency is an important element of the
Council’s effectiveness. In line with Article 24 of the
Charter of the United Nations, which enshrines the
responsibility of the Security Council to act on behalf
of the whole membership, Council members should
engage regularly with the broader membership through
briefings, including with regional groups and outreach
to affected countries. We also support greater use of
public meetings, open debates, Arria Formula meetings
and monthly wrap-up sessions.
Secondly, much of the Council’s work relies on
non-members to implement its decisions. It is therefore
imperative that the broader membership be engaged
appropriately in Council deliberations. One clear
example is in the field of sanctions. We need to continue
improving the working methods of the sanctions
committees to enable better implementation of sanctions
measures. Australia was proud to collaborate with
Finland, Germany, Greece and Sweden in launching,
in November 2015, the Compendium of the High-Level
Review of United Nations Sanctions and, in October last
year, its follow-up Assessment Report. We are pleased
that many of the Compendium’s 150 recommendations
are now being implemented. But more can be done. Last
year’s Assessment Report offers further ways in which
cooperation, collaboration, transparency and capacitybuilding on sanctions issues can be enhanced. Both
the compendium and the assessment represent sizable
contributions towards building a better United Nations
sanctions system and are essential tools for reforming
Council working methods.
Finally, we must move urgently, decisively and in
unison to agree on clear restraint of the veto. Too often,
the Council has failed in its mandate because narrow
interests have been allowed to prevail over those of the
18-03316

06/02/2018

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

S/PV. 8175

most vulnerable. We note with concern the observation
by Mr. Martin that 2017 saw the highest number of
vetoes in two decades, which can impede decisive
action in response to egregious crimes. We therefore
join others in calling on all Council members — current
and incoming — to commit unambiguously to the
ACT code of conduct and the complementary FrenchMexican initiative on restraining the use of the veto in
situations of mass atrocity. Australia also encourages
the Secretary-General to make full use of his prerogative
under Article 99 of the Charter to bring to the Council’s
attention any matter that may threaten the maintenance
of international peace and security.

Affairs of the Secretariat, has for the past 15 years
supported the preparation of non-permanent members
to the work and practices of the Council by hosting an
annual workshop. The Hitting the Ground Running
retreat has also earned its place as a central forum for
informal discussions, specifically on the Council’s
working methods. In addition to encouraging earlier
elections and introducing more informal meeting
formats, important discussions on co-penholdership
and elections of Chairs of subsidiary bodies have also
been taken forward at the retreat. Finland stands ready
to continue and further develop this well-established
practice in future.

As we continue to grapple with the multiple,
overlapping challenges of terrorism, instability,
conflict and fragility, working methods reform is not
just a bureaucratic exercise. It is critical to the ability of
the Council to discharge its core mandate — and to the
lives that depend upon it.

We support increased interaction and cooperation
between the Council and non-Council member States
as well as United Nations actors, regional organizations
and non-governmental organizations. We welcome
inviting non-governmental organizations as briefers.
Holding informal briefings for all Member States on
the programme of work by the President of the Council
also increases the flow of information. Open debates,
informal interactive dialogues and Arria Formula
meetings can be useful forums as well.

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Finland.
Mr. Sauer (Finland): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s debate on the
working methods of the Security Council.
Finland also commends the valuable contributions
of the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
group, and we align ourselves with the group’s statement
made earlier by the representative of Switzerland.
We would also like to thank Mr. Ian Martin for his
briefing and acknowledge Security Council Report as
an institution that has provided significant data on the
Security Council — a recent example being the report
on working methods published last month.
We commend the work of the Security Council
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions and hope to see further progress
under Kuwait’s presidency of the Council. In that
regard, we should build upon the work of Japan that
resulted in the revised note by the President S/2017/507.
The preparation of newly elected members to serve
on the Council is one important aspect also considered
in note 507. We believe that it is essential to support
incoming members in preparing for their tenure in a
comprehensive and effective manner. Finland, in close
cooperation with Professor Edward Luck of Columbia
University, and other partners, such as the Security
Council Affairs Division of the Department of Political

Increased interaction within the Council is
important. All members should be given an equal
chance to participate in the work of the Council. How
to further develop the concept of the penholder and
co-penholder is important.
In conclusion, Finland is a member of the Group
of Like-Minded States on Targeted Sanctions, and
was also one of the sponsors of the high-level review
of United Nations sanctions. We continue to seek
to improve due-process guarantees with regard to
Security Council sanctions and to support efforts by
the Council to enhance the fairness and transparency
of its sanctions regimes. Fair and clear procedures
make United Nations sanctions regimes more effective
and credible. The establishment of the Office of the
Ombudsperson for the Da’esh and Al-Qaida sanctions
regime was a considerable achievement. It is worrisome
that the post of the Ombudsperson has been vacant
since August. We therefore urge the Security Council
to complete the appointment procedure without delay.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Thailand.
Mr. Chandrtri (Thailand): Allow me briefly to
congratulate Kuwait for assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of February. I would

18-0331653/64

S/PV.8175

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

also like to express my appreciation to the Kuwaiti
presidency for convening today’s open debate on the
Council’s working methods under the item entitled
“Implementation of the note by the President of the
Security Council (S/2010/507)”.
The items on the Security Council’s agenda are
increasing in number, complexity and sensitivity.
They require the Council to be ever more effective and
efficient. The working methods of the Security Council
therefore require constant review, so as to enable the
Council to adapt and better fulfil its obligations in
maintaining international peace and security. Many of
the proposals and points raised by previous speakers
have merit and enrich our discussions today. We would
like to draw the attention of the Council to two areas we
believe would benefit greatly from our combined focus
on improvement.
First, Security Council sanctions remain an
indispensable tool for global collective action in
maintaining international peace and security. We firmly
believe that any such sanctions, when imposed, should
continue to be targeted in order to minimize unintended
economic and social consequences. Furthermore,
sanctions achieve their intended goals when Member
States implement them fully and effectively. As such,
Member States rely heavily on clarity of measures and
definitions of scope.
In that respect, we welcome the inclusion of the
harmonized system codes for prohibited items in the
latest sanctions resolutions, and hope that will continue
to be the practice in the future. We also welcome ongoing
coordination efforts between sanctions committees and
the practice of updating the consolidated sanctions lists.
The relevant sanctions committees should be further
encouraged to assist Member States by consolidating
and regularly updating lists of all prohibited items,
again with specific harmonized system codes and lists
of all sanctions measures, especially on the inspection
of cargo and means of transportation. Such consolidated
lists will serve as useful implementation guidelines for
national undertakings and enhance collaboration across
Security Council mechanisms.
Secondly, Thailand urges members of the Council
to continue convening public meetings and engaging the
wider membership of the United Nations, particularly
on issues with broader impacts and complexity. That
will ensure a healthy exchange of ideas and lead to a
thorough understanding of how the Council’s action, or
54/64

06/02/2018

inaction, will impact people on the ground. It will also
go a long way in ensuring that the Council is held to the
highest standards of transparency in its deliberations
on matters that, essentially, have a much larger and
more far-reaching impact than the current membership
of the Council. In the same vein, Council members
should share information, developments and outcomes
with the wider membership of the United Nations,
the public, non-governmental organizations and civil
society, as appropriate, through frequent debriefing
sessions. That will help to promote understanding and
support for the work of the Council.
In conclusion, I would like to remind ourselves
that the issue of the working methods of the Security
Council should not be limited to issues particular to the
Security Council. It is also important to understand that
improving the Council’s efficiency should be viewed
within the context of a whole-of-system approach, in
support of the mission of the entire United Nations.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cuba.
Ms. Rodríguez Abascal (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): Cuba supports a genuine and thorough
reform of the Security Council that will make it an
effective, transparent representative and democratic
organ that reflects the evolution of the United Nations
and international relations. We welcome the Security
Council’s adoption of note by the President S/2017/507,
which sets out and consolidates all the presidential notes
on the working methods of the Council. Nevertheless,
additional efforts are required without delay to move
towards the democratization of the Security Council,
both in its membership and its working methods, so as
not to jeopardize the credibility of the United Nations
and its long-term legitimacy.
Although we recognize the increase in recent years
in the number of open debates, informative meetings,
monthly wrap-up sessions and the unprecedented
process of consultations and exchange of views with
Member States for the selection and appointment of the
Secretary-General, we still see a continuation in the
trend in the Council to work mainly in closed formats
and to take decisions without addressing the concerns
of non-permanent members and the other Members of
the United Nations.
We need effective formulas to do away with
exclusive practices and to ensure that there is genuine
participation and democratization of the work and
18-03316

06/02/2018

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

decision-making of the Council. It bears noting that, in
line with Article 24 of the Charter of the United Nations,
its Members recognize that the Security Council, in the
discharge of its functions, acts on behalf of Member
States, and therefore the work of the Council is a shared
responsibility borne by all Member States.
Cuba reiterates the need for the Council to adopt a
definitive text that regulates its work and thereby puts
an end to the provisional nature that has characterized
its rules of procedure for more than 70 years. That is
indispensable in terms of transparency and the need
for accountability.
We note with regret that the Council continues to
present to the General Assembly annual reports that are
merely a descriptive overview of its meetings, activities
and decisions, instead of reflecting an explanatory,
exhaustive and analytical content that focuses on the
work of the Council and enables us to assess the reasons
behind and implications of the Council’s decisions. It
is regrettable that the Security Council continues its
work without presenting special reports on measures
for maintaining international peace and security for
consideration by the General Assembly, as requested
by the Charter in Articles 15 and 24.
With regard to the veto, which is closely linked to
the working methods of the Council, we reiterate that
this is an anachronistic and anti-democratic privilege,
which must be eliminated as soon as possible.
In addition to a change in its working methods,
the Security Council must align its functions with the
mandate entrusted to it in the Charter of the United
Nations. In that regard, Cuba is very concerned about
the trend in the Security Council to take up issues
that do not pose an immediate threat to international
peace and security and to take up functions beyond its
remit, thereby increasingly usurping the role assigned
by the Charter to other organs of the United Nations,
particularly the General Assembly.
The selective manipulation in its operational
practices, attempts to introduce issues that are not
under the agenda of the Council and the politicization
of specific issues in terms of particular interests
of domination and hegemony must cease and be
vigorously rejected.
No genuine reform of the United Nations is possible
until the Security Council is reformed. Only in that way
will we preserve multilateralism and be able to count

S/PV. 8175

on a reformed, democratic, transparent and efficient
Security Council — one that represents the interests of
all the States Members of the Organization.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela.
Mr. Suárez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela commends the State of Kuwait
for presiding over the Security Council in the month of
February and thanks Kuwait for convening this open
debate on the working methods of the Security Council.
We welcome the efforts that have been made so far
for more than two decades to make improvements to the
working methods of the Council, including presidential
statement S/PRST/2015/19, which establishes the
practice of holding an annual exchange of views on
working methods.
Our country believes that there has been progress in
improving the working methods of the Security Council,
such as the participation of elected members in Council
activities three months prior to the assumption of their
responsibilities so that they can witness, at first hand,
the daily activity of this organ with a view to assuming
their responsibilities in the exercise of their mandates.
The inclusive appointment of the Chairs of the
Council’s subsidiary organs is a positive aspect in the
evolution of the working methods. The process was
finalized in 2017, when it was agreed that the process
of appointing the representatives in charge of such
bodies would be facilitated by two member countries
of the Council, with the full cooperation of the rest of
the membership. Undoubtedly, that rule has meant an
improvement over the scheme that prevailed until 2016.
Although the working methods of the Security
Council have improved, it is worth noting that there are
still practices that affect its efficiency and effectiveness
in addressing matters related to the maintenance of
international peace and security. Venezuela is baffled
at objections to the holding of public discussions on
issues that are under the Council’s agenda or objections
to the participation of key regional organizations in the
resolution of protracted conflicts. Such a state of affairs
in no way contributes to the needed confidence-building
among parties if they are to reach a peaceful resolution
to their conflict. We call for public meetings to be the
rule and not the exception.

18-0331655/64

S/PV.8175

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

Although closed consultations are a useful space
for frank discussion, they must not be used to minimize
the importance of public meetings. Based on our
experience as a member of the Council, we sometimes
observed that some discussions in closed consultations
on certain issues could have just as well have taken
place in public meetings with the presence of the
membership, given that the information imparted did
not affect the negotiations in progress.
We regret that in some cases, for reasons unknown,
the Secretariat does not submit the written reports
that have been requested in accordance with Council
resolutions. To date, the written report requested of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016), concerning Israeli settlements in the
occupied Palestinian territories, has not been submitted.
The membership has been limited to listening to oral
presentations by the Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process. We believe that the strengthening of
the working methods of the Security Council is linked
to the effective implementation of its resolutions.
Venezuela expresses its concern regarding some
permanent members’ use of the Council’s working
methods to promote their particular agendas, thereby
violating the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations. In that regard, we reject any
attempt to bring to this organ issues that are not
threats to international peace and security. In that
connection, we are concerned about the abuses
committed when convening Arria Formula meetings
to deal with situations of countries that are not on the
Council’s agenda and that do not represent a threat to
international peace and security. Venezuela believes
that that type of informal meeting format should be
governed by a regulatory body so as to avoid excesses
being committed to the detriment of the purposes and
principles of the Charter. There have been proposals and
calls to that effect voiced in the recent past within the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions, but they have been blocked by
some permanent members.
In conclusion, we express our hope that
improvements to the working methods will be carried
out in a sustained manner with a view to increasing
transparency, inclusiveness and accountability, and in
strict adherence to the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.
56/64

06/02/2018

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Maldives.
Mr. Mohamed (Maldives): I would like to thank
Kuwait, in its capacity as President of the Security
Council for the month of February, for convening today’s
open debate on the working methods of the Council.
This debate is a testimony to the genuine interest
of all Member States in working to enhance the
transparency, inclusivity, and openness of the Council.
The Council deliberates and discusses the maintenance
of international peace and security in accordance
with Article 24 of the Charter of the United Nations. I
would like to recognize the work done by the Council’s
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions and the updates to note by the
President S/2017/507.
The work of the Council is a collective responsibility.
It is undertaken on behalf of the whole membership and
for the common good of humankind8. It is unfortunate
that the work of the Council is often perceived to be
secretive, when decisions that impact many are taken
by a few. It is therefore important that information
about the deliberations of the Council on matters of
importance to the whole international community be
shared in a timely and inclusive manner. Addressing
those perceptions are important, too, for upholding
the Council’s legitimacy and credibility. It is also
fundamental that every member of the Council able to
contribute meaningfully to the work of the Council. The
perceived gap between the five permanent members
and the elected 10 must be addressed and countered.
The Maldives applauds the improvements we have
seen in recent years in sharing information regarding
the work of the Council with the general membership
of the United Nations. Regular meetings between the
Presidents of the Council, the General Assembly and
the Economic and Social Council will go a long way
in enhancing coordination among the work of all the
principal organs of the United Nations. With regard
to the discussions and deliberations of such meetings,
we would also like to see the sharing of information,
through appropriate channels, with the general
membership. We call upon the current members of the
Council, as well as incoming members, to prioritize
improving transparency and inclusivity in their work.
The question of the veto deserves some
consideration in our deliberations on working methods.
While we recognize that it is a prerogative of the
18-03316

06/02/2018

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

Council’s permanent members, we join others in calling
for refrain in the exercise of the veto in situations of
mass atrocities. We must not let the veto stand in the
way of taking timely action.
An area where the Maldives believes that more work
can be done is in enhancing the focus of the Council on
the emerging realities of conflict in the world. In that
regard, focusing on non-traditional threats to security,
in addition to armed conflict, is essential. Extreme
poverty, a shortage of resources, climate change and
violent extremism are increasingly determining and
exacerbating conflict.
Arria Formula meetings have been an important
way of bringing diversity and fresh perspectives
to the deliberations of the Council. We promote
the regular holding of such meetings in order to
address the convergences — but, more important,
the divergences — in opinion on certain issues. That
would advance the work of the Council and make it
more relevant to the global realities of the day. We
also hope that the discussions and views expressed in
Arria formula meetings will find their way into the
deliberations of the Council’s formal agenda.
The Maldives hopes to be elected to the Council
at the election to be held in June for the term 2019 to
2020. We will bring fresh views to the Council and lead
the discussions in finding innovative and long-term
solutions to emerging issues. We believe that creating
an accountable, transparent and coherent Security
Council is a clear way to lead the Organization into the
twenty-first century.
The President: (spoke in Arabic) I now give the
floor to the representative of Mexico.
Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Kuwait for this opportunity to
participate in the open debate on the working methods
of the Security Council and to exchange views on
the topic.
By virtue of Article 24 of the Charter of the United
Nations, we members conferred upon the Security
Council the primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security. In discharging that
duty, the Council acts on our behalf. In my statement
I will refer to two specific issues to which Mexico
attaches particular importance, as they go to the heart of
the expectations and legitimate demands of the Member
States with regard to the effectiveness of the Council.

S/PV. 8175

First of all, I refer to the misnamed right to the
veto. The Charter of the United Nations does not
contain an explicit veto power for the five permanent
members, but rather a voting rule that requires the
concurring affirmative vote of the five permanent
members. The veto therefore should not be seen as a
right or a privilege, but as a responsibility that must
be exercised as such. Unfortunately, the use of the
veto — so far on approximately 280 occasions where it
has been used — has prevented the effective fulfilment
of the responsibilities entrusted to this organ. Far from
being conducive to defending the collective interest
with arguments that facilitate consensus among
the members of the Council, the use of the veto has
obstructed and derailed the common interest and has
encouraged division among members. Abuse of the
exercise of the veto is contrary to international law and
violates the principles of humanity and the dictates of
public conscience, which constitute cardinal principles
of international humanitarian law today.
In 2015, Mexico and France jointly presented a
political declaration stating that situations of mass
atrocities, when committed on a large scale, specifically
crimes against humanity, war crimes and genocide, can
constitute a threat to international peace and security
and require action by the international community. In
such cases, the Security Council should not be prevented
from acting for the use of the veto. The signatories of the
declaration — 100 States so far — propose a collective
and voluntary agreement among the permanent
members, with a view to refraining from the use of the
veto in cases of mass atrocities. The French-Mexican
initiative — as well as the code of conduct promoted by
the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group,
which complements it — seeks to improve the efficiency
of the Security Council while fostering a new culture of
responsibility and accountability among the permanent
members of the Council vis-à-vis the international
community, in addition to visibly contributing to the
effectiveness, legitimacy and accountability of the
Council in carrying out its work.
We invite the permanent members to follow the
example of France, a country that, by promoting this
initiative, has shown determination and a deep sense of
collective responsibility. We also invite those countries
that have not done so to join the French-Mexican
initiative, which is still open for signature.
The second issue that Mexico wishes to draw
attention to are the continuous references to Article 51

18-0331657/64

S/PV.8175

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

of the Charter of the United Nations by some States to
address threats to international peace and security with
military action, especially against non-State actors.
Mexico is troubled that such a practice, coupled with
the ambiguous language of recent Council resolutions,
runs the risk of a de facto broadening of exceptions to
the general prohibition on the use of force, as set out
in Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter of the United
Nations, in an irregular manner.
Beyond the substantive issues, my delegation is very
concerned by the way in which the Security Council
deals with letters, a matter that falls within their working
methods. First, there is a lack of transparency regarding
how such letters are processed. As far as my delegation
is aware, the letters are not published or referenced in
The Journal of the United Nations, so that even in cases
where they have an official public document number
it is extremely difficult not only to obtain the text but
even to know that letters were submitted. Likewise, my
delegation does not know whether the Council, after
receiving such a letter, beyond acting as a filing office,
holds some formal or informal debate to study and
consider its content.
Given the importance and gravity of the issues
addressed in those letters, as well as the interest that
this represents for all Member States, we hope that the
Security Council will review and modify its working
methods in order to lend transparency to the way in
which it responds to the letters addressed to it that
invoke the inherent right of self-defence under Article
51 of the Charter of the United Nations.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Galbavy (Slovakia): As this is the first
time that I am speaking before the Security Council
this year, I would like to congratulate your country,
Mr. President, on its election as a non-permanent
member of the Security Council and I wish you a
successful chairmanship in the month of February. I
would like to thank you, Sir, for organizing this open
debate, and I also thank Mr. Martin for his briefing.
Improving and streamlining the ways in which
the Security Council conducts its work is important
for the effective and efficient work of the Council
in maintaining international peace and security, as
well as for the implementation of its decisions by the
wider membership.
58/64

06/02/2018

The year 2016 marked the tenth anniversary of
the adoption of the first note by the President of the
Security Council (S/2006/507) on the working methods
of the Council, after intensive work by the Security
Council Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions. My delegation had an
opportunity to be a part of that important effort, and
subsequently to chair the Informal Working Group in
2007, following the able leadership of Japan. In fact,
Slovakia was the first Member State appointed to
chair the Informal Working Group for a full year. Our
chairmanship aimed to ensure broader implementation
of the first note. We are happy to observe that since
then two subsequent versions of the note, notably in
2010 and 2017, were elaborated, also under the Japanese
chairmanship. Presidential note S/2017/507, adopted in
August last year, now addresses nearly all aspects of
Council practice.
I would like to acknowledge the ongoing efforts of
the Security Council to improve its working methods
and commend to the work of the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions. It is important to continue to strengthen
efforts to fully implement the existing measures and
commitments set out in the updated note and other
relevant documents. At the same time, the pursuit for
more transparency, inclusiveness, representation and
accountability of the Security Council must remain a
continuous and consistent process. While recognizing
achievements and being mindful of existing challenges,
my country is of the view that more attention could be
given to the following areas in future.
First, efforts aimed at enhancing the openness of
the work of the Security Council, including the work
of its subsidiary bodies, should continue. Interaction
and dialogue between the Security Council and other
Member States, in particular those directly concerned
and affected, should be further enhanced and expanded.
Secondly, the substantive engagement of the
Council with the troop- and police-contributing
countries should be further improved to strengthen
the basis for decision-making in the Council as well
as the incentive for the general membership to support
peacekeeping operations.
Thirdly, we believe that further development
of more active and meaningful relationships and
interactions with the Peacebuilding Commission and
its configurations and the Human Rights Council,
18-03316

06/02/2018

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

where appropriate, could increase the effectiveness of
Security Council response to conflict and strengthen
its role in conflict prevention and sustaining peace.
Fourthly, there must be further consideration of
ways to improve the work of the subsidiary organs
of the Security Council — which are crucial for the
implementation of Council decisions — as well as
inter-committee coordination. That is especially relevant
to the working methods of sanctions committees, given
the impact and scope of the Council’s sanction regimes.
Lastly, I fully concur with your observation,
Mr. President, in the concept note that you circulated
for this debate, that
“[i]t is important for the Security Council
to conduct constructive debates on its working
methods continuously and periodically.”(S/2018/66,
annex, para. 7)
The role of non-permanent members in shaping
and codifying Security Council working methods has
proved to be very valuable and constructive. They bring
fresh ideas and are instrumental in adopting decisions
on new working processes.
I would like to wish you and your country,
Mr. President, only the greatest success in your
chairmanship of the Informal Working Group for
the current year, building on previous development
achievements and making further improvements
where possible.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Uruguay.
Mr. Bermúdez Álvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like to congratulate you, Sir, and
your team on having assumed the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of February. I wish you
every success in carrying out your work. We would
also like to thank Mr. Ian Martin for his comprehensive
briefing today.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of Switzerland on behalf of the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group, of
which my country is a member.
Uruguay has always supported efforts to improve
the working methods of the Security Council in order
to give them greater transparency and efficiency.
Although progress has been made, we must continue
working to further advance such achievements. In my

S/PV. 8175

statement I would therefore like to refer to three aspects
that we consider to be pertinent.
First of all, increased interaction between the
Council and the membership should be encouraged.
Article 24 of the Charter of the United Nations
provides that the Security Council is to act on behalf
of States Members of the Organization. Accordingly,
it is appropriate to encourage the holding of meetings
in formats that promote transparency and improve
information flow with the wider membership. Public
meetings, open debates, informal interactive dialogues,
Arria Formula meetings and wrap-up sessions are
all mechanisms that make it possible to have greater
interaction between the members of the Council and the
rest of the membership.
Uruguay supports the holding of briefings where
members of the Council can deliver public statements.
In addition to promoting transparency, that enhances the
legitimacy and effectiveness of the work of the Council.
Closed consultations should essentially be restricted to
cases where it is necessary to deal with sensitive issues
or which require further debate or interaction among
the 15 Council members. Throughout its recently
concluded participation as a non-permanent member,
Uruguay followed the practice of making public
statements in all open meetings held by the Council in
order to promote transparency.
Secondly, I would like to emphasize the need
to increase consultations with the troop- and
police-contributing countries in all phases of
peacekeeping operations. At a time where Member
States are making progress in the reform process of
peacekeeping operations to make them more efficient
and effective, Uruguay underscores the value of a
productive relationship between those who mandate,
plan, administer and execute peacekeeping operations.
In that regard, the strengthening of triangular
cooperation among the Security Council, the troopand police-contributing countries and the Secretariat is
a central aspect that must be considered in the reform
process. In that connection, we already have a good
theoretical and practical framework available.
Theoretically speaking, the report (A/71/19) of
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations
devotes and entire section to such cooperation.
Similarly, within the scope of the Security Council, the
note by the President S/2017/507, updated in August,
also provides for valuable means of enhancing such

18-0331659/64

S/PV.8175

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

cooperation. In practice, we note that consultation
meetings — both formal and informal — are held
between the Security Council, the Secretariat and the
troop- and police-contributing countries. In our view,
both formats are complementary and can be further
enhanced. On the other hand, the Security Council
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations has also
proven to be a conducive environment for the three
actors to discuss relevant issues.
Finally, the question of the veto is the third issue that
I wish to address. The existence of the veto is a major
obstacle to the work of the Council, which has often
been paralysed in cases where its action is imperative in
order to be able to respond to the threat or perpetration
of atrocities. Uruguay reiterates its commitment to the
code of conduct of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency group, as well as to the French-Mexican
initiative on limiting the use of the veto in situations
of mass atrocities, as we are convinced that the veto
should not be used to block Council actions that seek
to prevent or eliminate abhorrent crimes committed in
complete disregard for human dignity.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bahrain.
Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, we would like to thank the sisterly State of
Kuwait for convening this meeting, and to congratulate
it on its non-permanent membership of the Security
Council. We wish the delegation of Kuwait every
success in assuming the presidency of the Security
Council in February. We also thank Mr. Ian Martin for
his objective and exhaustive briefing.
The concept note (S/2018/66, annex) that you
circulated, Sir, contains important references to
previous attempts to review the working methods of the
Security Council, in particular note by the President
S/2017/507, which highlights many ways to improve the
working methods of the Council. Those include, most
notably, ensuring that consultations are more objective
and interactive, and adapting the work of the Security
Council to permit non-Member States to participate in it
as appropriate, as well as reinforcing the accountability
of the Council and the transparency of its work. The
items on the agenda should be more detailed, as well as
convening more open consultations.
We would like to reaffirm the importance of
convening open debates on a regular basis on the
working methods of the Security Council, as this
60/64

06/02/2018

is an issue in the interests of all Member States that
aspire that the Council works in the best possible way.
The working methods of the Council should adapt to
the continuous changes, progress should be evaluated
as well as shortcomings identified, while different
proposals and points of view ought to be heard so that
they can be addressed.
In that regard, I must commend the work carried
out by the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions to increase the
transparency of its work. We also underscore the
contents of presidential note S/2016/619, on the work
of the Chairs of the subsidiary organs of the Council.
Indeed, the Chairs — including Chairs of the sanctions
committees — must present informal periodic briefings
to all Member States on their activities, specifying
when and where such meetings will take place.
It is very important to step up coordination,
cooperation and interaction among the main organs of
the United Nations, namely, the Security Council, the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council,
the Secretariat and other United Nations bodies,
including the Main Committees. There is also a need
to strengthen coordination between the Council and
regional and subregional organizations, as stipulated
by Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations,
on the maintenance of international and regional peace
and security.
It is also necessary to strengthen approaches
that would enable the Council to prevent conflicts,
particularly through negotiation, investigation,
mediation, conciliation and arbitration, as well as other
peaceful means stipulated in Chapter VI of the Charter
and options enabling the Council to support the good
offices deployed by the Secretariat with a view to
achieve peace and stability and maintain human rights.
With regard to the holding of closed informal
meetings, the question of addressing the details of such
meetings at briefings for Member States continues
to be a point of discussion. Nevertheless, such
transparency must also be guaranteed in press releases
and presidential statements, as mentioned in note
S/2017/507. Indeed, such practices help to build trust
between Council members and other Member States.
Nonetheless there is a need to hold consultations
in open meetings to enable all Member States to listen
to different opinions on the issues discussed within the
Council pertaining to international peace and security.
18-03316

06/02/2018

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

We are all aware that political trends play a significant
role in those discussions, especially in times of crises
or in rapidly developing situations.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of Bahrain
acknowledges the importance to continue discussions
on the working methods of the Security Council. We
hope to work with other Member States to develop the
working methods and to guarantee enhanced coherence
between United Nations organs, as well as introduce
the necessary changes to ensure that the Council can
fulfil its mission in the best possible way.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Costa Rica.
Mr. Mendoza García (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): We would like to begin by thanking you and
your delegation, Mr. President, for convening today’s
debate, as well as for responsibility and seriousness you
have shown in taking over the leadership of the Security
Council Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions. We should not
omit to mention the major work that Japan has done
in this area, and we appreciate the update to the note
contained in the annex to S/2017/507, compiled in the
latest version of the Green Book. We also appreciate
the briefing by Mr. Ian Martin, Executive Director of
the Security Council Report, and all of his work and
collaboration with States both within and outside the
Council over the years. We wish him every success in
his future projects.
The transparency of our decision-making processes
and the accountability of our representatives to the
people they represent are derived from the increasingly
solid principles of the bodies in our Organization,
whichever they are, and the updated note 507 constitutes
an important step forward in terms of strengthening
the transparency of the Security Council’s work. In that
regard, we are pleased to see the progress that has been
made, such as the inclusion of new measures designed
to improve the Council’s efficiency and manage its time
better; more interactive and focused consultations; and
fostering the practice of providing States with more
detailed, substantive reports on informal consultations.
Another very important topic is the affirmation
that any member of the Security Council can act
as a penholder or co-penholder. We call for greater
participation by the 10 non-permanent members in this
regard, as well as formalized consultations among all
members of the Council when making decisions on the

S/PV. 8175

distribution of these responsibilities. We also believe
it is important to establish procedures for informal
consultations, including allowing sufficient time for
the consideration of proposals and establishing silence
procedures whereby any member of the Council may
request that the silence period be extended or, failing
that, may break the silence when deemed necessary. We
believe that such procedures would help to democratize
these processes. Similarly, we should encourage the
practice of enabling members to postpone the adoption
of decisions or the outcomes of open debates in order
to take into consideration the contributions of those
participating in the debates.
Where open debates are concerned, we should
ensure that they can be used as platforms for other
stakeholders who can make positive contributions to
them. We hope that will encourage the participation
of representatives of civil society, especially women,
who can provide perspectives on their experiences
and rights. We believe the Council should also show
greater interest in contributions from those who have
a legitimate interest in its decisions or are affected
by them.
We would like to emphasize once again the
importance of improving relations, communication
and cooperation between the General Assembly and
other relevant bodies and the Council, with the goal of
working jointly to preserve and maintain international
peace and security. It is a positive that progress has been
made in the Council’s relations with regional bodies,
for example by establishing annual consultations with
the African Union Peace and Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission. Such practices should be
institutionalized, as should regular consultations with
troop- and police-contributing countries.
We urge that appointments of the Chairs of
subsidiary bodies be made with greater transparency
and timeliness, and that the new members of the
Council be consulted about them.
Lastly, we would like to echo the words of the
Permanent Representative of Switzerland, speaking
on behalf of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency group, of which we are a member, by
reiterating the need to define limits to the use of the
veto, such as prohibiting its use for issues of genocide,
crimes against humanity, war crimes and large-scale
violations of human rights, as well as on those related

18-0331661/64

S/PV.8175

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

to the responsibility to protect, as stipulated in the ACT
code of conduct.
My delegation reaffirms its conviction that the
working methods represent a fundamental part of the
process of comprehensively reforming the Security
Council. Proper implementation of the agreed
measures, which so far has not been comprehensive,
and the inclusion of new measures to improve working
methods will help to make the Council’s actions
more effective and will improve its transparency and
accountability. We believe that substantive reform of
the Security Council’s working methods will enable
us to help remove the obstacles that so often hinder its
effectiveness and its relations with other bodies.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Algeria.
Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): I thank you,
Mr. President, for your patience, and for deciding to
make this open debate on working methods a focus
of your presidency. I would also like to thank you for
your guiding concept note (S/2018/66, annex), and to
pay tribute to Mr. Ian Martin for his remarkable work
not only on working methods, about which I would like
to share some thoughts, but on all issues linked to the
Security Council.
First, dealing with the working methods of the
Security Council is just as important as the discussions
that are also taking place on restructuring the Council’s
membership. They are both crucial tracks towards
Security Council reform and we should not let any
shortcomings of either track hamper us.
Secondly, it is obvious that changing the Council’s
working methods will improve the sense of ownership
of the general membership, who, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations, have conferred on
the Security Council primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security and
the ability to act on their behalf. Needless to say, the
Security Council’s growing responsibilities render
its working methods even more important, and the
scope and consequence of its decisions require that it
work towards an even greater degree of transparency,
understanding and acceptance.
Clearly, the Council’s decisions must be accepted
and implemented. In that regard, we consider it
essential to consider how those decisions are prepared
and how they evolve, particularly where sanctions are
62/64

06/02/2018

concerned. The working methods should ultimately
affirm the connections between the members of the
Council and the general membership. All nations
should really feel that the Council is acting on their
behalf and for the benefit of the maintenance of peace
and security in the world, and they should not feel
disenfranchised by its working methods. I would like
to suggest some ideas about how we see things with
regard to practical areas where improvement should be
possible and sometimes essential.
First, considering that it has been 36 years since
the last amendment to the rules of procedure was
adopted (resolution 528 (1982)), it is high time to seek
something less provisional and confirm established
practices. The number of public meetings should
increase, in accordance with Articles 31 and 32 of
the Charter of the United Nations. Ironically, the
wider membership’s participation on certain issues is
sought after, but they have no real possibility of being
consulted or contributing information when required.
Closed meetings and informal consultations are
certainly necessary, but they should be the exception.
A form of briefing of the wider membership should be
a rule after such meetings. The Council’s establishment
of subsidiary bodies should accord with the letter and
the spirit of the Charter of the United Nations, and they
should function in a way that enables adequate and
timely information on their activities to be provided to
the general membership.
The annual reports of the Security Council to
the General Assembly should be more explanatory,
comprehensive and specifically analytical in assessing
the Council’s work, including cases where the
Council has failed to act and the views expressed by
its members during discussion of the agenda item
under consideration. Pursuant to Article 15, paragraph
1, and Article 24, paragraph 3, of the Charter of the
United Nations, the Council should submit special
reports for the consideration of the General Assembly.
The Council should ensure that its monthly assessments
are comprehensive and analytical and issued in a timely
fashion. The General Assembly may consider proposing
parameters for the elaboration of such assessments.
The Council should fully take into account the
recommendations of the General Assembly on matters
relating to international peace and security, consistent
with Article 11, paragraph 2, of the Charter.
Although tremendous amounts of work and energy
go into negotiating agreements on many working
18-03316

06/02/2018

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

methods, some are not properly heeded and some
are never implemented. We believe that cooperation
between the Council and regional and subregional
organizations is crucial. States that have undertaken
mediation initiatives should be given ample opportunity
to interact with the Council. At the end of the day, that
would be of benefit to the international community as a
whole, as such endeavours are aimed at ensuring earlywarning, conflict prevention, conflict resolution and
the promotion of peace.
While stressing that the working methods of the
Security Council are an integral part of the reform
process, we reaffirm the African Common Position in
that regard. We note that all but one open debate on the
working methods was held at the initiative of an elected
member, including today. I salute your instrumental
role in that regard, Sir.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Gad (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Since this is
the first time the delegation of Egypt is participating in
the work of the Security Council under your presidency,
I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your assumption of your duties. I would also like to
express our sincere wish that you have every success
at the helm of the Council. I am extremely delighted as
well to see you leading the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.
We are confident that your experience as an active
spokesperson on behalf of one of the main groups
dealing with intergovernmental negotiations for
Security Council reform will undoubtedly augur well
for your chairmanship of the Working Group.
I would also like to commend your initiative in
convening this open debate on the working methods of
the Security Council at the beginning of this year and
at the beginning of your chairmanship of the Working
Group. This is an opportunity for all States Members
of the United Nations, including members and
non-members of the Council, to express their opinion
as to how to move forward, based on progress made in
recent years on the working methods of the Security
Council. This includes the update of note S/2017/507
of the President of the Security Council under the
Japanese chairmanship of the Informal Working Group.
The broad participation in today’s debate
demonstrates Member States’ ongoing interest in
developing the working methods of the Security Council.

S/PV. 8175

It shows their conviction that, when the Security
Council fulfils its mandate of maintaining international
peace and security, it would be acting on behalf of all
States Members of the United Nations, as stipulated in
article 24 of the Charter. The practical implementation
of Article 24 requires continuous strive to develop the
working methods of the Security Council in order to
ensure that it becomes more democratic and inclusive
in its decision-making process and that it involves
the participation of all its members — permanent and
elected — so that the Council becomes more open and
transparent in its interactions with Members of the
Organization and responds to their concerns and ideas.
All of these issues were a prime target for Egypt
during its participation in the Security Council.
Egypt participated in the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions and
in updating note S/2017/507, which is a compilation
of all innovations in terms of the working methods of
the Security Council. I would briefly like to talk about
five points.
First, the functioning of the Security Council is a
collective responsibility that requires full participation
by all its members — both permanent and elected — on
an equal footing. It calls for a fair distribution of duties
and functions, including in drafting Council documents
by the penholder. Through such a fair distribution, the
decision-making process would be more democratic
and inclusive, and Security Council resolutions would
represent all its members’ opinions in a balanced fashion
and would also take into consideration the experience
that some members have with certain issues, situations
or crises that are taking place in the particular regions
to which those countries belong.
Secondly, the discussions between the members of
the Security Council must be transparent and inclusive.
Information should be available to all members, who
would be able to participate in discussions on issues
under consideration. Sufficient time needs to be
allocated to studying draft resolutions and other texts
before they are submitted for adoption.
Thirdly, given the complicated nature of conflicts
on the Security Council’s agenda, there is a need for
comprehensive approaches that take into consideration
the different dimensions of the conflicts throughout
their different stages. That would ensure an ongoing
response from United Nations organs in terms of
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and sustaining peace.

18-0331663/64

S/PV.8175

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507)

Political solutions would always be given priority. It
is also important to highlight the advisory role of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) and its contribution
to the work of the Council in terms of the conflicts on
its agenda. The programmes of work of the Security
Council and the PBC must be coordinated to ensure
that the Council receives the PBC’s contribution at the
right time and before the Council considers the issues
concerned. The procedure for proposing informal
informative discussions with the PBC on issues that are
on the Council’s agenda must also be streamlined.
Fourthly, and in the same vein, we consider it very
important to develop close coordination between the
Security Council and troop-contributing countries in
the context of peacekeeping operations to ensure the
greatest understanding possible between the Council
and those countries in reviewing the mandates that
their troops have to implement on the ground and the
means of overcoming the complex challenges that those
troops face.
Fifthly, the complicated and interconnected nature
of threats to international peace and security requires
close cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations, in particular the African Union.
We therefore commend the contents of note S/2017/507
on the annual joint consultative meetings between the
Security Council and the Peace and Security Council
of the African Union. We underscore the importance
of the informal interactive dialogues between the two
Councils, which should be held more often. The note
also mentions implementing joint missions to the field
by the two Councils.
Our term in the Security Council enabled us to
get to know the functions and working methods of the
sanctions committees. They are one of the instruments
that the Council has at its disposal under the Charter of
the United Nations to manage threats to international
peace and security. The Council has made significant
progress in developing the concept of sanctions. They
changed from being comprehensive measures to become
more intelligent and effective at reducing their negative
and unintended impact on civilians and countries that
are not parties to the conflict.
The specific nature of the different threats to
international peace and security means that any

64/64

06/02/2018

sanctions regime must be designed in a way that is in
line with the nature of those threats, and therefore deals
with those threats according to available data. Of course,
the specific nature does not mean that accumulated
expertise and lessons learned need to be disregarded
in each new case. It is therefore important to form a
genuine partnership among the Security Council,
Member States and stakeholders through mechanisms
and channels that allow the parties to be heard and their
opinions to be understood. That is one of the tools that
would enable more progress within current and future
sanctions regimes. That is also an opportunity for the
Council to discuss this matter on a regular basis and to
adopt necessary measures.
In conclusion, Egypt has sought to make a positive
contribution to the efforts to develop the United Nations
sanctions regime. In July 2017, Egypt organized an
Arria Formula meeting to shed light on the experiences
of three brotherly African nations and to understand
the impact of sanctions on the restoration of stability
in those countries. During the Egyptian presidency of
the Council in August 2017, a briefing was also held to
discuss the same issue (see S/PV.8018). Those meetings
showed the need for more efforts to be made to improve
United Nations sanctions regimes. Egypt was keen to
circulate a report to the Council with a summary of the
meetings, as well as ideas and recommendations from
a national perspective that resulted from that fruitftul
dialogue with Council members. We believe that
multilateralism is a collective effort based on progress
achieved. We hope that the report will be a positive
contribution to any future effort aimed at improving
United Nations sanctions regimes.
The President (spoke in Arabic): We have heard
the last speaker on the list of speakers.
Before I conclude this meeting, I would like
once again to thank Mr. Martin for his briefing and
for participating in this meeting for six full hours. I
would also like to thank all Member States that took
part in the meeting and provided ideas and suggestions.
They will be very useful in our endeavour to make the
Council’s work more transparent and to improve its
working methods. This will definitely be an ongoing
process and will not be time bound.
The meeting rose at 4.15 p.m.

18-03316
