66

General Assembly-Sixteenth Session

1667 (XVI). Admission of Tanganyika to membership in the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Having received the recommendation of the Security
Council of 14 December 1961 that Tanganyika should
be admitted to membership in the United N ations, 9
H avin.r, considered the application for membership of
Tanganyika, 10
Decides to admit Tanganyika to membership in the
United Nations.
1078th plenary meeting,
14 December 1961.
1668 (XVI). Representation of China in the
United Nations

The General Assembly,
Noting that a serious divergence of views exists
among Member States concerning the representation of
a founder Member who is named in the Charter of the
United Nations,
Recalling that this matter has been described repeatedly in the General Assembly by all segments of
opinion as vital and crucial and that on numerous
occasions its inclusion in the agenda has been requested
under rule 15 of the Assembly's rules of procedure as
an item of an important and urgent character,
Recalling further the recommendation contained in
its resolution 396 (V) of 14 December 1950 that, whenever more than one authority claims to be the government entitled to represent a Member State in the United
Nations and this question becomes the subject of controversy in the United Nations, the question should be
considered in the light of the purposes and principles
of the Charter and the circumstances of each case,
Decides, 1,1 accordance with Article 18 of the Charter
of the United Nations, that any proposal to change the
representation of China is an important question.
1080th plenary meeting,
15 December 1961.
1669 (XVI), Report of the Security Council

The General Assembly,
Takes note of the report of the Security Council to
the General Assembly covering the period from 16 July
1960 to 15 July 1961.11
1080th plenary meeting,
15 December 1961.
1670 (XVI). Report of the Committee on arrangements for a conference for the. purpose of
reviewing the Charter

The General Assembly,
Recalling the provisions of its resolutions 992 (X)
of 21 November 1955, 1136 (XII) of 14 October 1957
and 1381 (XIV) of 20 November 1959,
• Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixteenth Session
Annexes, agenda item 92, document A/5033.
'
,. Ibid., document A/5021.
21
Ibid., Sixteenth Session, Supplement No. 2 (A/4867).

Conscious of the fact that present international circumstances are not auspicious for a review of the Charter of the United Nations,
Recognizing at the same time the need for such a
review as soon as international circumstances permit,
1. Decides to keep in being the Committee on•
arrangements for a Conference for the purpose of reviewing the Charter and to request the Committee to
report, with recommendations, to the General Assembly
not later than at its seventeenth session;
2. Requests that the work envisaged in paragraph 4
of General Assembly resolution 992 ( X) should be
continued.
1080th plenary meeting,
15 December 1961.
1723 (XVI). Question of Tibet

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1353 (XIV) of 21 October
1959 on the question of Tibet,
Gravely concerned at the continuation of events in
Tibet, including the violation of the fundamental human
rights of the Tibetan people and the suppression of the
distinctive cultural and religious life which they have
traditionally enjoyed,
Noting with deep anxiety the severe hardships which
these events have inflicted on the Tibetan people, as
evidenced by the large-scale exodus of Tibetan refugees
to the neighbouring countries,
Considering that these events violate fundamental
human rights and freedoms set out in the Charter of the
United Nations and the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, including the principle of self-determination of peoples and nations, and have the deplorable
effect of increasing international tension and embittering relations between peoples,
1. Reaffirms its conviction, that respect for the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights is essential for
the evolution of a peaceful world order based on the
rule of law;
2. Solemnly renews its call for the cessation of
practices which deprive the Tibetan people of their
fundamental human rights and freedoms, including their
right to self-determination;
3. Expresses the hope that Member States will make
all possible efforts, as appropriate, towards achieving
the purposes of the present resolution.
1085th plenary meeting,
20 December 1961.
1741 (XVI). Question of Hungary
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
Representative on Hungary,12 Sir Leslie Munro, who
is responsible to the General Assembly for reporting on
significant developments relating to the implementation
of the Assembly's resolutions on Hungary,
a Ibid., Sixteenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 89, document
A/4996.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Committee

Deplores the continued disregard by the Union. of
Soviet Socialist Republics and the present Hungarian
regime of the General Assembly resolutions concerning
the situation in Hungary.
1087th plenary meeting,
20 December 1961.

1742 (XVI). The situation in Angola
The General Assembly,
Having considered the situation in Angola,
Recalling its resolution 1603 (XV) of 20 April 1961
and the Security Council res,olution of 9 June 1961,13
Having examined the report of the Sub-Committee
on the situation in Angola appointed under resolution
1603 (XV), 14
Deploring the lack of co-operation and assistance by
Portugal in the full and effective discharge of the SubCommittee's task as called for in the aforementioned
resolutions,
Noting with deep regret Portugal's refusal to recognize Angola as a Non-Self-Governing Territory and its
failure to take measures to implement General Assembly
resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 entitled
"Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial
countries and peoples",
Convinced that the continued refusal of Portugal to
recognize the legitimate aspirations of the Angolan
people to self-determination and independence constitutes a permanent source of international friction and
threatens international peace and security,
1. Expresses its appreciation of the work of the
Sub-Committee on the situation in Angola and commends to the Portuguese Government, for urgent consideration and effective implementation, the observations, findings and conclusions set out in the Sub-Committee's report;
u Official Records of the Security Council, Sixteenth Year,
Supplement for April, May and June 1961, document S/4835.
u Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixteenth Session,
Supplement No. 16 (A/4978 and Corr.2).

67

2. Solemnly reaffirms the inalienable right of the
Angolan people to self-determination and independence;
3. Deeply deprecates the repressive measures and
armed action against the people of Angola and the
denial to them of human rights and fundamental freedoms, and calls upon the Portuguese authorities to
desist forthwith from repressive measures against the
people of Angola ;
4. Appeals to the Government of Portugal to release
immediately all Angolan political prisoners wherever
they may be held;
5. Urges the Government of Portugal to undertake,
without further delay, extensive political, economic and
social reforms and measures, and in particular to set
up freely elected and representative politi:al institutions
with a view to transfer of power to the people of
Angola;
6. Decides to continue the Sub-Committee on the
situation in Angola appointed under General Assembly
resolution 1603 (XV) ;
(a) To continue the performance of its tasks;
( b) To study ways and means to secure the implementation of the present resolution and to report
thereon to the Security Council and to the General
Assembly;
7. Requests Member States to use their influence
to secure the compliance of Portugal with the present
resolution;
8. Requests all States Members of the United Nations and members of the specialized agencies to deny
Portugal any support and assistance which may be used
by it for the suppression of the people of Angola;
9. Requests the Government of Portugal to submit
a report to the General Assembly at its seventeenth
session on the measures it has undertaken in the implementation of the present resolution;
10. Recommends the Security Council, in the light
of the Council's resolution of 9 June 1961 and of the
present resolution, to keep the matter under constant
· review.
1102nd plenary meeting,
30 January 1962.
