United Nations

S/PV.4410

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-sixth year

4410th meeting
Friday, 9 November 2001, 11.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Patterson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Jamaica)

Members:

Bangladesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ireland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mauritius . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Singapore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tunisia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ukraine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Amin
Mr. Wang Yingfan
Mr. Valdivieso
Mr. Levitte
Mr. Corr
Mr. Ouane
Mr. Koonjul
Mr. Kolby
Mr. Granovsky
Mr. Mahbubani
Mr. Mejdoub
Mr. Krokhmal
Sir Jeremy Greenstock
Mr. Cunningham

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

01-62870 (E)

*0162870*

S/PV.4410

The meeting was called to order at 11.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of
the Congo
The President: In accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite The Honourable
João Bernardo de Miranda, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Angola and current Chairman of the Political
Committee of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement; Mr.
Térence Sinunguruza, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation of Burundi; Mr. Léonard She Okitundu,
Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of the Democratic Republic of the Congo;
The Honourable Tuliameni Kalomoh, Deputy Minister
for Foreign Affairs, Information and Broadcasting of
Namibia; Mr. Patrick Mazimhaka, Special Envoy of the
President of Rwanda; The Honourable James
Wapakhabulo, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Uganda; The Honourable Keli S.
Walubita, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Zambia; and
The Honourable Stanislaus I.G. Mudenge, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Zimbabwe, to take seats at the
Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. de Miranda
(Angola), Mr. Sinunguruza (Burundi), Mr. She
Okitundu (Democratic Republic of the Congo),
Mr. Kalomoh (Namibia), Mr. Mazimhaka
(Rwanda), Mr. Wapakhabulo (Uganda), Mr.
Walubita (Zambia) and Mr. Mudenge (Zimbabwe)
took seats at the Council table.
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr.
Amos Namanga Ngongi, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and Mr. Amadou Kébé, Permanent Observer of
the Organization of African Unity/African Union, to
take seats at the Council table. I invite Mr. Archibald
M. Mogwe, representative of the facilitator for the
inter-Congolese dialogue, to take a seat at the side of
the Council Chamber. I invite Mr. Olivier Kamitatu,
Secretary-General of the Movement for the Liberation
of the Congo (MLC); Mr. Azarias Ruberwa, SecretaryGeneral of the Congolese Rally for Democracy (RCDGoma); and Mr. Pashi-Claver, representative of the

2

Congolese Rally for Democracy-Kisangani (RCD-K),
to take seats at the Council table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, Mr.
Kofi Annan.
The Secretary-General: Let me first say how
happy I am, Mr. President, to see you presiding over
this meeting.
Let me also welcome the Political Committee of
the Lusaka Agreement. I hope that this meeting with
the Security Council will enable all parties to agree to
move forward together in the peace process.
In my last report to the Council, I recommended
that the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) be
authorized to enter phase III of its deployment. For that
deployment to succeed, however, the parties
themselves must live up to their responsibilities. I
would therefore like to reiterate some of my concerns.
First and foremost, the fighting in the east of the
country must stop. No one should give any further
support to the armed groups that continue to fight in
the east, and no one should take any further aggressive
action against them.
At the same time, everything possible must be
done to create conditions that will encourage former
combatants to return voluntarily to their homes, and
enable them to be settled safely.
(spoke in French)
The Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Rwanda must reach an understanding on the process of
the disarmament, demobilization and repatriation of
combatants, and on the creation of a coordination
mechanism to facilitate a smooth transition from
disarmament to reintegration.
Kisangani must be demilitarized, in accordance
with resolution 1304 (2000). I call on the
Rassemblement congolais pour la démocratie (RCD) to
implement, without further delay, the measures
proposed to that end by my Special Representative, Mr.
Ngongi. It is also my intention to strengthen the

S/PV.4410

military presence of MONUC in Kisangani in order to
facilitate the demilitarization of that city.
The deployment of MONUC at Kindu is aimed at
creating a climate of security, encouraging the armed
groups to disarm. I therefore note with concern the
decision of the RCD and the Mouvement pour la
libération du Congo (MLC) to establish a special joint
force based at Kindu that would be in charge of
tracking down and neutralizing all negative forces.
Kindu must in no instance be used as a base for the
launching of military operations.
(spoke in English)
The withdrawal of the Namibian troops and, also,
many of the Ugandan troops from the territory of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is encouraging. I
strongly urge the Angolan, Zimbabwean and Rwandan
Governments to speed up preparations for the rapid
withdrawal of their troops.
The reopening of the River Congo and its
tributaries is the most important single step that can
now be taken to reunite the country and stimulate
economic and social life. I call on all parties to help
MONUC to do its part in achieving that objective,
notably by dismantling checkpoints and removing any
other remaining barriers to free movement.
I urge members of the Political Committee,
especially the Congolese parties, to support the neutral
facilitator of the inter-Congolese dialogue, Sir
Ketumile Masire, and I welcome the willingness of the
Government of South Africa to host the dialogue when
it resumes. But the Congolese parties should not wait
for this formal resumption. I hope they will continue to
meet informally for constructive discussions on the
country’s future.
I would also urge the three Congolese parties to
continue efforts to improve human rights within the
areas they control. All those in authority have a duty to
investigate alleged violations and to take appropriate
action. The international community will judge them
by the actions they take or fail to take. The Congolese
parties must also facilitate access for those seeking to
bring humanitarian relief to the suffering population in
the areas they control.
And finally, not enough is being done to address
the plight of children, particularly those who have been
inducted into the various armed forces. I urge all
members of the Political Committee, especially the

Congolese parties, to work with the United Nations
Children’s Fund and my Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict, as well as with
MONUC’s child protection officers, to draw up and
implement agreements on demobilizing child soldiers
as soon as possible.
The peace process in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo may be at a turning point. At stake is the
reunification of the country after years of war.
MONUC stands ready to make a decisive contribution
by deploying to the East. As the Security Council
prepares to take action on my recommendations, I call
on the parties to fulfil their important responsibilities
and so bring to completion the peace process they
began in Lusaka more than two years ago.
The President: I now have great pleasure in
giving the floor to the Chairman of the Political
Committee of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement, the
Honourable João Bernardo de Miranda, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Angola.
Mr. Miranda (Angola) (spoke in Portuguese;
interpretation provided by the delegation): It is a great
honour for me to address this forum in my capacity as
Chairman of the Political Committee of the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement. Allow me first to commend the
initiative to convene this joint meeting with the
members of the Security Council. Although this has
become a routine practice, it is more important than
ever today because it occurs on the eve of a decisive
stage in the implementation of the Lusaka Agreement
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo: the
launching of phase III of the deployment of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC).
The fundamental reason for this meeting is to
determine together how to ensure the maintenance
and strengthening of the ceasefire, to achieve the
disarmament and demobilization of the armed groups,
to accelerate the withdrawal of foreign forces, to step
up the internal dialogue and, most important, to
contribute substantially to the restoration of peace and
stability to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
These tasks are crucial, urgent and unavoidable. Their
successful implementation can make the difference
between pursuing the path of lasting peace or returning
to large-scale warfare and insecurity, not only in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, but in the Great
Lakes region as a whole.

3

S/PV.4410

The progress achieved to date in the
implementation of the Lusaka Agreement raises hope
and optimism for the effective completion of future
stages. The most important of these advances has been
the ceasefire. Despite some setbacks, which are very
common in efforts of such complexity, the observation
of the ceasefire by the parties demonstrates their will to
end the war and to resolve their problems peacefully. It
also shows that there can be no military solution to the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We are still concerned, however, by the ongoing
military activities in parts of the country, particularly in
the eastern Congo, involving the forces of some
signatories to the Agreement and of others that are not
parties to the ceasefire. If it continues, this situation
may imperil the ceasefire and launch a new wave of
hostilities.
It is up to us to find an effective political solution
to this problem. The solution should not be limited to
the suspension of military aid to armed groups. We
must also provide the conditions and guarantees for
disarmament, demobilization, repatriation, resettlement
and full reintegration of all armed groups living in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
A positive step in this direction was the recent
measure announced by the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to disarm about
3,000 former Burundian combatants now living in
Kamina. We praise this step, which is so propitious for
the Lusaka Agreement. It is very important to
emphasize that the combatants must see an alternative
to war. They must be encouraged to abandon their
weapons and return to their land. They must be given
effective guarantees of physical integrity and a
prospect of social reintegration for themselves and
their families.
With the completion of the disengagement and
force deployment, despite minor problems that have
arisen, the total withdrawal of Namibian forces and the
partial withdrawal of Angolan, Ugandan and
Zimbabwean forces now under way, the basis has been
established for phase III of MONUC deployment. The
Political Committee will take the necessary measures
to ensure that all signatories fulfil, totally and in good
faith, the obligations freely undertaken to make peace
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo a fact.
In this context, I welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation to the Security Council that

4

it authorize the start of phase III in accordance with the
MONUC report. I also appeal to the members of the
Council to support this recommendation so as to allow
the broadening of MONUC operations throughout the
territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
This would build trust among all the parties involved.
The Political Committee also understands that the
future phases of the ceasefire agreement process,
especially the full withdrawal of foreign forces, will
require the further involvement of the United Nations
to accelerate the return of peace to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. It is therefore necessary to
reflect on the need for the Council to authorize the
deployment of a peacekeeping force in that country.
The people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
have suffered for a long time, and continue to suffer
from the effects of a devastating conflict that has killed
hundreds of thousands of its children, destroyed its
economy and infrastructure, and spread misery among
most of its population. Sixteen million of its people are
now dependent on emergency food assistance.
We must allow the Congolese themselves to
resolve their own internal problems, achieve genuine
national reconciliation, rebuild their economy and
establish a democratic society in peaceful coexistence
with its neighbours in accordance with the principles
and norms of international law. For that to happen, all
States must respect the sovereignty, territorial integrity
and independence of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
The difficulties arising in the inter-Congolese
national dialogue show that certain problems have not
been taken into account. We hope that the preparation
of the work of Durban will take into account all
pending questions so that the national dialogue will in
fact be all-inclusive and fruitful.
To summarize, I would like to express my
conviction that there is a great need for a return to
peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It will
allow the transformation of the Central Africa region
into a zone of peace, security and cooperation, which is
a sine qua non for the harmonious development of that
region’s countries. To reach this dream, the
international community and the Security Council in
particular have a very important role to play.
I must also take advantage of this occasion to
praise the commitment of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Kofi Annan, and his Special Representative to the

S/PV.4410

Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mr. Namanga
Ngongi, the head of MONUC, General Diallo, and the
head of the Joint Military Commission, General
Mwaniki, to bring peace to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We also praise the efforts made by all
parties that led to the co-location of MONUC and the
Joint Military Commission in Kinshasa, the capital of
the country.
The President: I now propose to make a
statement as President of the Council.
It is my honour to preside over this meeting of the
Security Council with the Political Committee of the
Lusaka Agreement on a framework for peace. On
behalf of the Council, I extend a cordial welcome to
the Ministers and representatives of Angola, Burundi,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Namibia,
Rwanda, Uganda, Zambia and Zimbabwe; the
Organization of African Unity; the facilitator of the
inter-Congolese dialogue; the Mouvement pour la
Libération du Congo; the Rassemblement Congolais
pour la Démocratie (RCD)-Goma; RCD-Kisangani; and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We are very pleased that the Secretary-General,
Kofi Annan, has been able to join us at this very
important meeting. His presence and his contribution
here confirm the importance that the Security Council
and the Secretary-General place on bringing peace to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
countries of the Great Lakes region — indeed, to all of
Africa, and thereby to the entire global community.
Jamaica regards it as a privilege to chair this
meeting on the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
given our historic bonds and heritage. Over 80 per cent
of the Jamaican population springs from African
descent, and we therefore share a special affinity with
both the problems and the aspirations of Africa.
On 7 September last year, the Security Council
Summit issued a declaration in which we committed
ourselves to ensuring “an effective role for the Security
Council in the maintenance of international peace and
security, particularly in Africa”. (resolution 1318
(2000), annex, first paragraph) In my contribution on
that occasion, I stressed that in fulfilling our “charge to
maintain international peace and security, this Council
must impact on the lives of people, changing their
despair to hope and liberating them from conflict.”
(S/PV.4194, pp. 15-16) We expressed our deep concern

for the devastating effects of conflicts on the
humanitarian conditions of the civilian population,
particularly women and children. Nowhere has this
been more prevalent than in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. It is a stated objective of Jamaica’s
presidency of the Security Council during the month of
November to advance peace in all areas of the world
and to give special attention to the conflicts besetting
the African continent. I am therefore very privileged to
preside over this meeting in furtherance of an
important objective of Jamaica’s membership of the
Council.
At the time of our meeting last September, the
prospects for peace in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the region were on the distant horizon.
Since then, considerable progress has been made, and
the Security Council has played a major role in support
of the peace process. The Security Council mission to
the region earlier this year was an important milestone
on the road to peace. The deployment of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) throughout that
country has continued to have an important effect on
the peace process, and the concept of operations for the
deployment of phase III of MONUC, which has been
provided by the Secretary-General, is now under
serious consideration by the Security Council.
Today, the Security Council meets with you, our
partners, in order to consolidate the gains we have
achieved and to provide further impetus for making
lasting peace a reality in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and in the Great Lakes region. It is part of
an ongoing dialogue between the Security Council and
the regional leaders to explore ways in which the
Security Council and countries within the region can
sustain momentum for the peace process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We have witnessed
some positive changes in the political landscape of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region. We
must continue to build on them.
Yesterday,
the
Council
met
with
the
representatives of the countries of the Regional Peace
Initiative on Burundi, of which most of those invited to
join us today are members. We discussed the prospects
for the implementation of the Arusha Peace Agreement
in that country. It is undeniable that there are common
interlinkages between the conflicts in Burundi and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. For this reason, a
solution to the conflict in the Democratic Republic of

5

S/PV.4410

the Congo must be pursued at a regional level, in a
holistic and comprehensive manner. In that regard, our
meeting today is taking note of the Secretary-General’s
suggestion that the time has come for the parties to
explore ways of associating Burundi more closely with
the peace process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
In our meeting today, we must seek to pay close
attention to some key issues which must be resolved in
order to realize sustainable peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and throughout the Great Lakes
region.
First, there must be a credible plan for the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration or
resettlement of the former combatants, especially of the
so-called negative forces. In particular, we call on all
States to cease support for armed groups operating in
the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and call for a cessation of all hostilities
throughout the country. As MONUC deploys further
eastward, it is critical that the armed groups comply
with and fully implement the relevant Security Council
resolutions, as well as the Lusaka Agreement.
Secondly, there is a need for a comprehensive
plan for the full withdrawal of all foreign forces from
the territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
in accordance with the Lusaka Agreement and the
relevant Security Council resolutions. It is imperative
that all parties provide MONUC with the necessary
information, as is their obligation under the relevant
agreements.
Thirdly, the failure to demilitarize Kisangani
remains an obstacle to peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. This Council must insist on
compliance with its resolutions. So we reiterate our call
on all parties to ensure that this issue be settled without
further delay.

6

Fourthly, while progress has been made in the
preparatory stages of the inter-Congolese dialogue, the
parties must renew their commitments to the political
process, and the international community must give its
full support. The determining of the political future of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo by the people
themselves must remain a priority if there is to be a
lasting peace. The commitment of all parties to a
political process which will enable the widest possible
participation of all groups is a first essential step
towards the achievement of a democratic and inclusive
system of Government, which we regard as a
prerequisite to lasting peace.
Fifthly, we must pursue in earnest the
commitments made to address the illegal exploitation
of the natural resources of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and seek ways to ensure that revenue from
these resources is channelled into the economic and
social development of the country for the benefit of all
its people.
Let us use this opportunity to build on the
partnership between the Security Council and the
United Nations as a whole, and the countries of the
region. Let us use this opportunity to reaffirm our
commitment to the cause of peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes region. The
positive steps which we have taken so far must be
reinforced by our renewed commitment to peace. We
owe it to the people of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the region, and it is our collective
responsibility to ensure that sustainable peace is
achieved.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
our prior consultations, I shall adjourn this meeting
now and invite the Council members and all invitees to
attend the private meeting five minutes from now.
The meeting rose at 12 noon.
