Resolntions adopted on the reporta of the Seeond Committee

Governments of member States on the possibility of
convening a special international conference on industrialization,
Considering the answers received so far, 48
T aking into account Industrial Development Board
resolution 24 (III) of 14 May 1969, 47 in which the
Board decided that high priority should be given to
the work of the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization in connexion with accelerating industrial
development in the developing countries, particularly
in the less developed among them, within the framework .of the Second United Nations Development
Decade,
1. Suggests that a special international conference
of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, at the highest possible level of governmental representation, be held at an appropriate time, ensuring that
this conference and the third session of the United
N ations Conference on Trade and Development are
not held in the same year, within a framework which
will reduce the expenditures far holding the conference
to a mínimum;
2. Requests the Industrial Development Board to
consider the suggestion in paragraph 1 above and, if
necessary, to propase the venue, date and duration of
the special conference and to farmulate its provisional
agenda and its basic objectives, including the longerrange orientation of the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization, its organizational structure
and the question of financing;
3. Further requests the Executive Director of the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization
to prepare a report on the above-mentioned subjects
far consideration by the Industrial Development Board
at its famth session.
1834th plenary meeting,
15 December 1969.
2579 (XXIV). Final report of the Enlarged
Committee for Programme and Co-ordination

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2188 (XXI) of 13 December
1966 regarding the enlargement of the Committee far
Programme and Co-ordination of the Economic and
Social Council with the purpose of undertaking a review
of the operational and research activities of the United
N ations family of organizations in the field of economic
and social development,
Recalling further Economic and Social Council resolution 1367 (XLV) of 2 August 1968,
Reaffirming the central role assigned to the Economic
and Social Council in the economic, social and human
rights fields under Chapter X of the Charter of the
United Nations,
Noting Economic and Social Council resolution 1467
(XLVII) of 31 October 1969,
Noting with appreciation the work completed by the
Enlarged Committee far Programme and Co-ordination
with the co-operation of the United N ations Secretariat,
the specialized agencies, the International Atomic
Energy Agency and other United Nations organs and
related bodies,
48 /bid., Twenty-fourth Session, A.nnexes, agenda ítem 38,
documents A/7693 and Add.1.

43

Having examined the final report of the Enlarged
Committee far Programme and Co-ordination, 49
Conscious of the urgent need to ensure the optimum
utilization of the resources of the United N ations system
of organizations, in particular by concentrating attention on co-ordinated efforts in areas of high priority in
the context of the international development strategy
far the Second United Nations Development Decade,
1. Reaffirms the following objectives set out in its
resolution 2188 (XXI), which should guide the organizations in the United Nations system in carrying out
their research and operational activities in the field of
economic and social development:
(a) The maximum concentration of resources, at
present and increasing levels, on programmes of direct
relevance to Member States;
( b) A flexible, prompt and effective response to
the specific needs of individual countries and regions,
as determined by them, within the limits of available
resources;
(e) The mínimum burden on the administrative
resources of Member States and of members of the
organizations in the United Nations system;
(d) Toe evolution of an integrated system of longterm planning on a programme basis;
(e) Toe institution of systematic procedures for
evaluating the effectiveness of operational and research
activities;
2. W elcomes the final report of the Enlarged Committee far Programme and Co-ordination, in particular
the document entitled Assistance for Economic and
Social Development A vailable from the United Nations
System: A H andbook of Criteria and Procedures, 110 and
expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for
preparing the clear and comprehensive picture of the
existing operational and research activities of the United
Nations family of organizations in the field of economic
and social development;51
3. Requests the Economic and Social Council, at its
organizational meetings in January 1970, to reconstitute
its Committee for Programme and Co-ordination in
accordance with the recommendation of the Enlarged
Committee for Programme and Co-ordination; 112
4. Further requests the Economic and Social Council, as soon as possible thereafter, to examine and to
keep under continuing review the machinery for coordination and programme review and to introduce improvements or modifications which may appear necessary in the light of the experience gained and of
relevant developments within the United Nations system of organizations;
5. Decides to review at its twenty-sixth session the
arrangements made by the Economic and Social Council
in pursuance of paragraphs 3 and 4 above;
6. Endorses the arrangements for co-operation between the reconstituted Committee for Programme and
Co-ordination and the Joint Inspection Unit outlined
4 9 Of!icial Records of the Economic and Social Councll,
Forty-seventh Session, document B/4748/Rev.1.
11o United Nations publication, Sales No.: B.69.1.23 and corrigendum.
111 E/4744 (vol. 1), E/4744 (vol. 1)/Add.1 and Corr.t, B/
4744 (vol.U) and Corr.1 and 3.
112 See Of!icial Records of the Economic and Social Cormcll,
Forty-seventh Session, document B/4748/Rev.t, chaptet
recommendation A.
'

m

44

General Assembly-Twenty-fourth Session

in the final report of the Enlarged Committee for
Programme and Co-ordination;53
7. Requests the Secretary-General to provide adequate and effective secretaria! assistance to the reconstituted Committee for Programme and Co-ordination
and keep it informed of relevant developments within
the United N ations system of organizations;
8. Notes in particular the recommendation of the
Enlarged Committee for Programme and Co-ordination
conceming the use of computers in the United Nations
system of organizations54 and requests the SecretaryGeneral to submit, in 1971, the report suggested in
paragraph 40 of the final report of the Enlarged Committee;
9. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the specialized agencies and other bodies in the
United Nations system, to include as part of the report
to be submitted to the Economic and Social Council at
its forty-ninth session, as requested in its resolution 1454 (XLVII) of 8 August 1969, an examination of the existing Secretari~t machinery for providing
scientific and technical advice in the United Nations
system and to prepare recommendations for its reorganization in a way which will enable it to contribute
most effectively to the selection of priorities and to
the planning and programming of United Nations activities designed to meet the growing and changing needs
of the United Nations system, of the intemational
community and of Member States;
10. W elcomes the practice recently initiated by the
Secretary-General of holding top-echelon meetings of
staff concemed with economic and social affairs within
the United Nations, including the regional economic
commissions and the semi-autonomous organs, and
urges the Secretary-General to bring to the attention
of the Committee for Programme and Co-ordination
any matters discussed in these meetings which may be
of interest to it;
11. Welcomes the practice of joint meetings between
the Committee for Programme and Co-ordination and
the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination and
µrges that these meetings should be continued, bearing
in mind that they have proved their value in facilitating
understanding and co-operation among those dealing
with ,interagency issues at the intergovemmental and
executive levels, respectively;
12. Requests the Secretary-General, as Chairman
of the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination, to
bring to the attention of all organizations in the United
Nations system the recommendation of the Enlarged
Committee for Programme and Co-ordination for
strengthening the present arrangements for co-ordination
by the adoption of more effective procedures for prior
consultations on work programmes;1111
13. Notes the recommendation of the Enlarged
Committee for Programme and Co-ordination on co~rdination at the national level116 and requests the
Secretary-General to draw to the attention of the memt,ers of the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination
the recommendation contained in paragraph 80 of the
$nal report of the Enlarged Committee;
' GS lbid., document E/4748/Rev.1, paras. 27 and 28.

• ~! lbid., docuinent E/4748/Rev.1, chapter III, rccommen-

aauon B.
' 111 lbid., rccommendation E.
116 Jbid., rccommendation F.

14. Notes with interest the other matters considered
by the Enlarged Committee for Programme and Coordination in its final report 57 and agrees that these
proposals should be reviewed by the reconstituted Committee for Programme and Co-ordination.
1834th plenary meeting,
15 December 1969.
2580 (XXIV).

Co-ordination of marine activities

The General Assembly,
Having considered the final report of the Enlarged
Committee for Programme and Co-ordination, 118
Noting that the Enlarged Committee was unable in
the time available to give thorough consideration to a
proposal for more systematic co-ordination of continuing activities of the organizations in the United
N ations system relating to the seas and oceans,
A ware of the complexity of the co-ordination of
existing intemational activities with regard to marine
science and its applications, and that the field of marine
science is only one aspect of the existing activities of
the organizations in the United Nations system relating
to the seas and oceans,
Noting that use by States of the marine environment
is rapidly becoming intensified and diversified,
Noting with appreciation the work done in this field
by the organizations in the United Nations system,
Concerned that present intemational machinery may
not permit a prompt, effective and flexible response to
existing and emerging needs of Member States,
Recognizing that, in order to avoid the overlapping
and duplication of programmes and gaps in competence, a full review of the existing activities of the
organizations in the United Nations system relating to
the seas and oceans may be urgently required,
1. Requests the Economic and Social Council, at
its organizational meetings in January 1970, to consider instructing the Committee for Programme and
Co-ordination, after reconstitution, to examine the need
for a comprehensive review of existing activities of the
United Nations system relating to the seas and oceans
in the light of present and emerging needs of Member
States, with a view to making the Committee's recommendations available to the Council at its fortv-ninth
session;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to assist the Committee for Programme and Co-ordination in the fulfilment of this task;
3. Invites the specialized agencies and the intergovemmental bodies concemed to extend their full cooperation and assistance to the Committee for Programme and Co-ordination.
1834th plenary meeting,
15 December 1969.
2581 (XXIV). United Nations Conference on the
Human Environment

The General Assembly,
In pursuance of its decision in resolution 2398
(XXIII) of.3 December 1968 to convene in 1972 a
117 /bid.,
118 /bid.,

document E/4748/Rev.1, chapter IV.
document E/4748/Rev.l.
