United Nations

A/RES/67/260

General Assembly

Distr.: General
16 August 2013

Sixty-seventh session
Agenda item 103

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 1 May 2013
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/67/L.62)]

67/260. Modalities, format and organization of the high-level
meeting of the General Assembly on the appraisal of
the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 67/190 of 20 December 2012, in which it recalled its
decision to conduct, in 2013, an appraisal of the progress achieved in the
implementation of the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking
in Persons 1 and decided to convene, within existing resources, a high-level meeting
of the General Assembly at its sixty-seventh session, no later than July 2013, in
order to assess achievements, gaps and challenges, including in the implementation
of the relevant legal instruments,
Recalling also its resolution 64/293 of 30 July 2010, by which it adopted the
Global Plan of Action,
Recalling further its resolution 55/25 of 15 November 2000, by which it
adopted the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime 2 and
the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially
Women and Children, supplementing the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime, 3
Recalling its decision in paragraph 13 of resolution 67/190 to determine the
modalities of the high-level meeting, including the participation of international,
regional and subregional organizations, as well as civil society, including
non-governmental organizations, the private sector and the media, whose role is
emphasized in the Global Plan of Action,
Decides that the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the
1.
appraisal of the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in
_______________
1

Resolution 64/293.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2225, No. 39574.
3
Ibid., vol. 2237, No. 39574.
2

12-49420

*1249420*

Please recycle

A/RES/67/260

Modalities, format and organization of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly
on the appraisal of the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons

Persons1 will be held on Monday, 13 May, and Tuesday, 14 May 2013, and will
consist of an opening plenary meeting on 13 May from 9 a.m. to 10 a.m., plenary
meetings on 13 May from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and on 14 May from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m.
and from 3 p.m. to 6 p.m., and a closing plenary meeting after the list of speakers
has been exhausted, as well as two consecutive interactive panel discussions on
13 May in the afternoon;
Also decides that the opening plenary meeting will feature statements by
2.
the President of the General Assembly, the Secretary-General and the Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime as well as an eminent
person actively engaged in the fight against trafficking in persons and a
representative, who may be a survivor, from a non-governmental organization in
consultative status with the Economic and Social Council, both of whom are to be
identified by the President of the Assembly;
Further decides that the organizational arrangements for the interactive
3.
panel discussions to take place on Monday, 13 May 2013, in the afternoon and to be
chaired by Member States at the invitation of the President of the General Assembly,
after consultations with regional groups, will be as follows:
(a) Interactive panel discussion 1, which will take place from 3 p.m. to
4.30 p.m., will address the theme “The Global Plan of Action, relevant legal
instruments and effective partnerships to protect and assist victims of human
trafficking”;
(b) Interactive panel discussion 2, which will take place from 4.30 p.m. to
6 p.m., will address the theme “Sharing best practices and lessons learned for
prevention and prosecution in the implementation of the Global Plan of Action and
relevant legal instruments”;
(c) The Chairs of the interactive panel discussions will present summaries of
the discussions at the closing plenary meeting, followed by final remarks by the
President of the General Assembly;
(d) In order to promote interactive and substantive discussions, participation
in each panel discussion will include Member States, observers, representatives of
United Nations organizations and entities, and representatives of international,
regional and subregional organizations, as well as of civil society, including
non-governmental organizations, the private sector and the media;
Recalls its request in paragraph 14 of resolution 67/190 that the President
4.
of the General Assembly prepare a summary of the high-level meeting identifying
achievements, gaps and challenges in the implementation of the Global Plan of
Action and relevant legal instruments, and decides to bring the summary to the
attention of relevant United Nations entities and other stakeholders;
Invites Member States, the Holy See and the State of Palestine, in their
5.
capacity as observer States, and the European Union, in its capacity as observer, to
be represented at the highest possible level at the meeting;
Encourages Member States to consider including in their delegations to
6.
the high-level meeting representatives of civil society active in combating
trafficking in persons and representatives of the private sector;
Invites all relevant United Nations entities and other relevant
7.
intergovernmental, regional and subregional organizations to participate in the highlevel meeting;

2/3

Modalities, format and organization of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly
on the appraisal of the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons

A/RES/67/260

8.
Requests the President of the General Assembly to draw up a list of
interested representatives of non-governmental organizations in consultative status
with the Economic and Social Council who may participate in the high-level
meeting;
Also requests the President of the General Assembly to draw up a list of
9.
representatives of other relevant non-governmental organizations, civil society
organizations, the private sector and the media active in combating trafficking in
persons, taking into account the principle of transparency and the principle of
equitable geographical representation, and to submit the proposed list to Member
States for their consideration on a non-objection basis and to bring the list to the
attention of the Assembly;
10. Further requests the President of the General Assembly, in consultation
with Member States, to finalize the organizational arrangements for the meetings,
taking into account the duration of the meetings, the identification of the eminent
person and the representative from a non-governmental organization in consultative
status with the Economic and Social Council to speak at the opening plenary
meeting and the identification of Chairs for the interactive panel discussions,
bearing in mind the level of representation as well as equitable geographical
representation;
11. Encourages Member States, United Nations entities, intergovernmental
and non-governmental organizations, private sector entities and other relevant
stakeholders to consider supporting the participation of representatives from
developing countries, including representatives of non-governmental organizations
from those countries, in order to ensure the broadest possible participation, and
requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary measures in this regard;
12.

Decides that the proceedings of the high-level meeting shall be webcast;

13. Encourages Member States and other stakeholders to continue to
contribute to the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund for Victims of Trafficking in
Persons, Especially Women and Children, which was established by the Global Plan
of Action.
75th plenary meeting
1 May 2013

3/3
