VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

wherever appropriate, and urges him to pursue those
efforts in co-operation with interested Governments, as
well as with the World Bank, the United Nations Development Programme and other developmental organizations,
including non-governmental organizations;
8. Commends all States that facilitate the attainment
of durable solutions and contribute generously to the High
Commissioner's programmes;
9. Notes with appreciation the support consistently given to the High Commissioner by agencies of the United
Nations system, as well as intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations, in carrying out his humanitarian task and requests the High Commissioner to continue
to co-ordinate his efforts with those agencies and
organizations;
10. Calls upon all States to promote durable solutions
and to contribute generously to the High Commissioner's
humanitarian programmes in order to assist persons of
concern to the High Commissioner in a spirit of international solidarity and burden-sharing.
101st plenary meeting
14 December 1984

39/141. Draft Convention against Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances and
Related Activities

229

2. Requests the Economic and Social Council, taking
into consideration Article 62, paragraph 3, and Article 66,
paragraph 1, of the Charter of the United Nations and
Council resolution 9 (I) of 16 February 1946, to request
the Commission on Narcotic Drugs to initiate at its thirtyfirst session, to be held in February 1985, as a matter of
priority, the preparation of a draft convention against
illicit traffic in narcotic drugs which considers the various
aspects of the problem as a whole and, in particular, those
not envisaged in existing international instruments, and,
to that end, to transmit to it the draft Convention annexed
to the present resolution as a working paper;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to propose to the
Commission on Narcotic Drugs that it adjust the agenda
of its thirty-first session, as approved by the Economic and
Social Council in its decision 1983/115 of24 May 1983, to
enable the Commission to initiate the preparation of the
draft convention referred to in paragraph 2 above;
4. Requests the Commission on Narcotic Drugs to
report to the Economic and Social Council, if possible at
its first regular session of 1985, on the results achieved in
this respect;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its fortieth session on the implementation of the present resolution.
101st plenary meeting
14 December 1984

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 33/ l 68 of 20 December 1978,
35/195 of 15 December 1980, 36/132 of 14 December
1981, 36/168 of 16 December 1981, 37/168 of 17 December 1982, 37/198 of 18 December 1982, 38/93 and 38/122
of 16 December 1983 and other relevant provisions,
Aware of the dangers posed by the illegal production of
drugs, illicit demand, illicit drug traffic and drug abuse and
of the need to pay renewed attention to these problems
and to their pernicious effects,
Concerned at the increasing damage which the illicit
drug traffic causes to public health, the economic and
social development of peoples, and young people in
particular,
Bearing in mind the Quito Declaration against Traffic in
Narcotic Drugs of 11 August 1984205 and the New York
Declaration against Drug Trafficking and the Illicit Use of
Drugs of l October 1984, 206 in which profound alarm was
expressed at the seriousness of the problem,
Recognizing the valuable contribution made by existing
international legal instruments in their specialized areas,
including the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of
1961, as amended by the 1972 Protocol Amending the
Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961, 207 and the
Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971, 208
Convinced that the wide scope of the illicit traffic in narcotic drugs and its consequences make it necessary to prepare a convention which considers the various aspects of
the problem as a whole and, in particular, those not envisaged in existing international instruments,
Commending the important work of the Commission on
Narcotic Drugs, the United Nations Fund for Drug Abuse
Control and the International Narcotics Control Board,
1. Reiterates that the struggle against the illegal production and demand and the illicit use and traffic in drugs
deserves urgent treatment of the highest priority;
205 N39/407, annex.
206 N39/55 I and Corr. I and 2. annex.

ANNEX
Draft Convention aplnst Traffic In Narcotic Drop and Psychotropic
Substances and Related Activities
Preamble
The States Parties to the present Convention,
Concerned that illicit traffic in and use of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances transcend the sphere of the physical and moral well-being
of mankind and are detrimental to the identity and integration of peoples,
since they constitute a factor of dependence and corruption which undermines their spiritual, cultural, social and economic values, and aware that
such problems must be dealt with within the framework of international
co-operation and global geopolitics, since drugs are goods used to weaken
the legitimate economies of the countries and to undermine their sovereignty, and that such practices are impeding development, especially in the
countries of the Andean region, agree to declare illicit traffic in narcotic
drugs and psychotropic substances, the fundamental means of promoting
illicit use of such substances, which use is inflicting serious harm on the
youth of the world, to be a grave crime against humanity under international law, having regard to the following considerations:
1. Whereas illicit traffic in and use of such substances are detrimental
to the integrity and identity of our peoples since they undermine their spiritual, historical and social values, and, as a result of technical advances in
the communications media, unprecedented expansion in untoward crosscultural influences, increase in organized crime and other factors, have
reached proportions too great to be dealt with through the isolated
demands and actions of States,
2. Whereas there is clear evidence that illicit trafficking is closely linked
to the designs and actions of some aimed at subverting the legal order and
social peace in our countries in pursuit of their despicable commercial
aims, and that it constitutes a factor of dependence for developing peoples
and impedes economic integration in keeping with their common interests,
3. Whereas it is clearly established that illicit trafficking operates by
corrupting the political and administrative structures of producing and
consuming countries and undermines the security and defence of peoples
by sapping their military strength and affecting their sovereignty,
4. Whereas there is a need for international legislation that would provide a basis for effective action to combat illicit trafficking in and use of
narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances beyond national boundaries,
and for punishing those responsible wherever they may be.
20 7 United Nations publication, Sales No. E.77.XI.3, p. 13.
208 United Nations publication. Sales No. E.78.XI.3. p. 7.

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

230

5. Whereas the volume, magnitude and extent of illicit trafficking and
use represent a challenge to society as a whole and constitute activities
threatening the very existence and future development of human beings
and especially affect youth, a key factor for the development of the peoples
of the world,
6. Whereas drug addiction is detrimental to health, one of the basic
assets and inalienable rights of every human being, and whereas without
individual health there is no public health, a fact which in turn bears upon
and determines the economic development of peoples,
7. Bearing in mind that the repeated use of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances affects the individual and that, through its biological,
psychological and social effects, damages the personality and creates problems for the family, society and the State,
8. Whereas the illicit use of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances
is taking a very serious and often irreversible toll on youth, which is the
noblest part of the human resources of the world's peoples, and weakens
their capacity for cultural and material progress,
Have agreed as follows:
Art1cle I

DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of the present Convention:
(a) Trafficking shall mean the preparation, production, extraction, cultivation, preservation, acquisition, distribution, financing, organization
and management, transport, supply and/or storing of any of the substances,
or their raw materials, referred to in the present Convention, except those
enumerated for medical or scientific use in the I 972 Protocol Amending
the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 196 I ,207 and in the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971 :208
(b) Narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances shall mean the substances, preparations and proprietary drugs listed in the schedules to the
Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of I 96 I, as amended by the I 972
Protocol, and the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971, and
such others as may, as determined by the World Health Organization, produce a state of dependence, stimulation or depression of the central nervous system, result in hallucinations or disturbances in motor function or
thinking, behaviour, perception or mood, or the use of which may produce
effects similar to those produced by any of the substances referred to
above.
Article 2

NATURE OF THE CRIME
Trafficking in narcotic drugs or psychotropic substances is a grave international crime against humanity. The States Parties to the present Convention undertake to prevent and suppress it.
Article 3

ILLICIT ACTIVITIES
The following shall be deemed illicit activities: trafficking, distribution,
supply, manufacture, elaboration, refining, processing, extraction, preparation, production, cultivation, preservation, transport and storage and the
management, organization, financing or facilitating of the traffic in any of
the substances or their raw materials referred to in the present Convention.
Article 4

AGGRAVATING CIRCUMSTANCE
It shall be deemed an aggravating circumstance if an individual responsible for such activities performs a public function of any kind.
Article 5

or punishment, as determined by law or otherwise, of the crimes referred to
in article 3 and part A, paragraph 2, of article 10 of the present Convention, and that, where they exist, such statutory limitations shall be
abolished.
Article 7

DUTIES OF THE STATES PARTIES
The States Parties undertake to adopt the legislative measures necessary
to ensure implementation of the provisions of the present Convention and,
m particular, to provide for stringent criminal penalties against individuals
responsible for the activities referred to herein.
Article 8

DUTIES OF INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS
Any State Party or competent international organization may seek to
have the relevant bodies of the United Nations or of other regional organizations take such action as they deem appropriate, in accordance with the
international instruments governing them, to prevent and suppress the
illicit activities enumerated in the present Convention.
Article 9

INTERNATIONAL CO-OPERATION
I. The States Parties shall co-operate on a bilateral and multilateral
basis to prevent and suppress the illicit activities enumerated in the present
Convention and shall take all necessary measures towards that end.
2. Accordingly, they shall:
(a) Ensure that, at the national level, there is co-ordination of preventive and repressive action against illicit trafficking in narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances. They may assign responsibility for such co-ordination to an appropriate agency;
(b) Provide mutual assistance in combating illicit trafficking and cooperate with each other in identifying, arresting and taking legal action
against those suspected of engaging in such illicit activities and their
accomplices or abettors and also in seizing and destroying such substances;
(c) Co-operate closely with each other and with competent international organizations of which they are members in a co-ordinated effort to
corn bat illicit trafficking, particularly by collecting information and documents relevant to investigation with the aim of facilitating the prosecution
of the persons referred to in the preceding paragraph, and exchange such
information;
(d) See to it that international co-operation between the relevant agencies is expeditiously carried out;
(e) Ensure that writs for judicial action are transmitted between
countries directly and expeditiously to the organs designated by the States
Parties. This provision shall not prevent any State Party from exercising its
right to require that such writs be transmitted to it through the diplomatic
channel or from Government to Government;
(/) Provide information on illicit activities within their territories that
involve narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, including information
on the cultivation, production and manufacture of, trafficking in and use of
such substances;
(g) Refrain from enacting legislative provisions or taking measures of
any other kind which might be prejudicial to the international obligations
which they have assumed with respect to the identification, arrest, extradition and punishment of individuals guilty of the crimes enumerated in the
present Convention.
Article JO

PENAL PROVISIONS
A

CHARACTER OF THE CRIME
The illicit activities enumerated in the present Convention shall not be
considered as political crimes for the purpose of extradition.
Article 6

IMPRESCRIPTIBILITY OF THE CRIMES
I. The crimes enumerated in the present Convention shall be imprescriptible. Irrespective of the date on which they were committed, they
shall be investigated, and individuals against whom there exists sufficient
evidence of having committed such crimes shall be sought, arrested.
charged and, if found guilty, punished.
2. The States Parties undertake to adopt, in accordance with their
respective laws, any legislative or other measures as may be necessary to
ensure that statutory or other limitations shall not apply to the prosecution

I. Each of the crimes enumerated in the present Convention, whether
committed by one individual or by several acting in collusion in different
countries, shall be considered a distinct offence.
2. Participation or association in the commission of any such crime,
conspiracy, instigation or the attempt to commit any such crime, and preparatory actions for such crimes, shall be considered offences.
3. Convictions obtained abroad in respect of such crimes shall be taken
mto account in determining whether the accused is a habitual offender.
4. Crimes committed by both nationals and aliens shall be tried by the
State Party in whose territory the crime was committed, or by the State
Party in whose territory the offender is present if extradition is not authorized under the law of the State Party to which a request for extradition is
made and if the offender has not yet been tried and sentenced for one of the
crimes enumerated in the present Convention.

VI.

231

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

----------------------------------- ------------------------B

I. Each of the crimes enumerated in article 3 and part A. paragraph 2,
of the present article shall be deemed to be included among the extraditable offences covered by any extradition treaty which has been or may hereafter be concluded between the States Parties.
2. If a State Party which makes extradition contingent on the existence
ofa treaty receives a request for extradition from another State Party with
which it has no treaty, it may, should it so choose, consider the present
Convention as the necessary legal basis for extradition in respect of the
crimes enumerated in article 3 and in part A, paragraph 2, of the present
article. Extradition shall be subject to any other conditions laid down by
the law of the State Party to which the application is made_
3. States Parties which do not make extradition contingent on the existence of a treaty shall recognize the crimes enumerated in article 3 and in
part A, paragraph 2, of the present article as extraditable offences as
between them, subject to any conditions laid down by the law of the State
Party to which the application for extradition is made.
4. The provisions of the present article shall not affect the principle that
the crimes in question must be prosecuted and punished in accordance
with the national law of each State Party.
Article 11

COURTS HAVING JURISDICTION IN SUCH CASES
Anyone involved in any of the activities enumerated in the present Convention may be tried by a competent tribunal in any of the States in whose
territory an act or acts to which the present Convention applies was or were
committed, or by such international criminal tribunal as ma} have Jurisdiction under the applicable legal rules.

Dl'RATION
The nrcsent Convention shall remain in effe,·t for a period of fifty years
folio~ 1,1g its ,·ntry into force_

39/142.

Declaration on the Control of Drug Trafficking and Drug Abuse

The (ieneral Assembly.
Recalling its resolutions 33/ l 68 of 20 December 1978,
35/195 of 15 December 1980, 36/132 of 14 December
198 L 36/168 of 16 December I 981, 37/168 of 17 December 1982, 3 7/ 198 of 18 December 1982, 38/93, 38/98 and
38/122 of 16 December 1983 and other relevant
prov1s10ns,
Recognizing the concern that prevails in the international community about the problem of the illegal production of, illicit trafficking in and abuse of drugs,
Adopts the Declaration set forth in the annex to the present resolution.

IOI st plenary meeting
14 December 1984
ANNEX

Article I 2

Declaration on the Control of Dru11 Traffickin11 and Dru11 Abuse
ASSISTANCE FUND
A fund shall be established to assist developing countries affected by the
illicit traffic in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances with a view to
combating and overcoming the causes of those phenomena and providing
them with adequate means of combating such illicit activities. The fund
shall be constituted by contributions from States which are Parties to the
present Convention on the basis of the method of assessment used by the
United Nations and by voluntary contributions.

l he General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that the purposes and principles of the Charter of the

United Nations reaffirm faith in the dignity and worth of the human person
and promote social progress and hetter standards of life in larger freedom
and internat10nal co-operation in solving problems ofan economic, social.
cultural or humanitarian character,

Article lJ

( ·ons1dering that Member States have undertaken in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 209 to promote social progress and better standards of life for the peoples of the world,

GOVERNING BOARD
The fund shall be administered by a Governing Board composed of an
equal number of representatives from each of the States Parties.

Considering that the international community has expressed grave concern at the fact that trafficking in narcotics and drug abuse constitute an
obstacle to the physical and moral well-being of peoples and of youth in
particular,

Article 14

CONTROL
The States Parties agree to entrust the task of overseeing the activities
and obligations set out in the present Convention to the Commission on
Narcotic Drugs and the International Narcotics Control Board of the Economic and Social Council of the United Nations
Article 15

SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES
Disputes relating to the interpretation, application or fulfilment of the
present Convention shall be submitted to the International Court of Justice
at the request of one of the States Parties to the dispute.
Article 16

SIGNATURE OR ACCESSION
The present Convention shall be open for signature or accession by all
States, whether they are Members or non-members of the United Nations.
without limitation as to time; it shall be subject to ratification and the
respective instruments shall be deposited with the Secretary-General of the
United Nations.

Dewing to heighten the awareness of the international community of the
urgency of preventing and punishing the illicit demand for, abuse of and
illicit production of and traffic in drugs,
C·ons1derrng that the Quito Declaration against Traffic in Narcotic Drugs
of 11 August 1984 205 and the New York Declaration against Drug Trafficking and the Illicit Use of Drugs of I October 1984206 recognize the
international nature of this problem and emphasize that it should be solved
with the firm support of the entire international community,
( 'ons1derinx that the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, the International
Narcotics Control Board and the United Nations Fund for Drug Abuse
Control have made valuable contributions to the control and elimination
of drug trafficking and drug abuse,

Recognizing that existing international instruments, including the Single
Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961. as amended by the 1972 Protocol
Amending the Single Convention on Narcotic Dru~s of 1961, 207 and the
Convenuon on Psychotropic Substances of 1971, 2 8 have created a legal
framework for combating trafficking in narcotic drugs and drug abuse in
their specialized fields.
Declares that:

Article 17

I. Drug trafficking and drug abuse are extremely serious problems
which. owing to their magnitude, scope and widespread pernicious effects,
have become an international criminal activity demanding urgent attention
and maximum priority.

ENTRY INTO FORCE
The present Convention shall enter into force on the tenth day following
the date on which the twentieth instrument of ratification or accession is
deposited.

2. The illegal production of, illicit demand for, abuse of and illicit trafficking m drugs impede economic and social progress, constitute a grave
threat to the security and development of many countries and peoples and
should be combated b} all moral, legal and institutional means, at the
nallonal. regional and international levels_

209 Resolution 217 A (IJI).
