88

General ANembly- -Tw-1:,-ninth Senion

graph 2, of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,
Noting with appreciation the interest of the Committee when performing its functions under the Convention and the direct involvement of its members in
contributing, as appropriate, to the achievement of the
objectives of the Decade for Action to Combat Racism
and Racial Discrimination,
Mindful of the undertaking of States parties to the
Convention to engage in no act or practice of racial
discrimination against any person, groups of persons or
national or ethnic minorities, and to ensure that all
public authorities and public institutions, national and
local, shall act in conformity with this obligation,
Noting the decisions adopted by the Committee at
its ninth and tenth sessions, 28
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination;
2. Takes note also of the part of the report of the
Committee concerning petitions and other information
relating to Trust and Non-Self-Governing Territories
and to all other Territories to which General Assembly
resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 applies;2•
3. Expresses its appreciation to the Committee for
the work it performs in pursuance of the provisions of
the International Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination;
4. Expresses its satisfaction at the increasing participation of States parties to the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination in submitting their reports to the Committee and by sending representatives to the Committee
when it considers their reports;
5. Calls upon all States parties to the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discriminatlion to extend their fullest co-operation to
the Committee, particularly in providing all necessary
information in accordance with article 9 of the Convention and with requests by the Committee;
6. Endorses the Committee's decision to make its
contribution, in the context of the Decade for Action
to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination and the
Programme for the Decade, 'to the total and unconditional elimination of racism and racial discrimination
in ~ccordance with the powers vested in it by the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Racial Discrimination, especially by concentrating
its efforts, pursuant to articles 3, 9 and 15 of the Convention, on preparin1t recommendations with regard to
the most flagrant and large-scale manifestations of
racial discrimination, particularly in areas which are
still under the domination of racist and colonial regimes
and foreign occupation;
1. Commends the practice of the Committee, inaugurated in its adoption of general recommendation 111, 30 of welcoming information from States parties
to the International Convention on the Elimination of
All F~rms_ of Racial. Discrimination regarding their
respective 1mplementat1on of the relevant resolutions of
c~mpetent U_nite~ ~ations organs concerning relations
with the racist regimes of southern Africa;
28 Jtd., chap.
2 9 Ibid., chap.

VII.
V.
Twenty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 18 (Al
8718), chap. IX, sect. B, decision I (VI).
3 0 Ibid.,

8. Shares the Committee's concern voiced in its
decision 1 (X) of 22 August 1974,31 relating to the
situation in the Golan Heights, in which the Syrian
Arab Republic, party to the Convention, has been prevented from fulfilling its obligations under the Convention in part of its territory and, in this connexion,
recalls that in section III of General Assembly resolution 2784 (XXVI) of 6 December 1971 it endorsed
the Committee's decision 4 (IV) of 30 August 1971 ;11
9. Calls upon States parties t'o the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination to observe fully the provisions of the
Convention. and other international instruments and
agreements to which they are parties concerning the
elimination of all forms of discrimination based on
race, colour, descent or national or ethnic origin;
10. Makes an urgent appeal to States which are
not yet earties to the International Convention on the
Eliminat10n of All Forms of Racial Discrimination to
ratify or accede to it and, pending such ratification or
accession, to be guided by the basic provisions of the
Convention in their internal and foreign policies.

2311th plenary meeting
10 December 1974

3267 (XXIX). Elimination of all forms
of religious intolerance

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3069 (XXVIII) of 30 November 1973,
Noting that the Commission on Human Rights is
currently seized with the task of elaborating a draft
Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on Religion or
Belief and has established a Working Group for this
purpose,83
Noting also the intention of the Commission on
Human Rights to give priority to the elaboration of
the Declaration at its thirty-first session, to be held
from 3 February to 7 March 1975,34
Desirous that the elaboration of the Declaration be
actively pursued,
l. Requests the Secretary-Genera-I to transmit to
the Commission on Human Rights all the opinions
expressed and suggestions put forward in the course
of the discussion of this question at the twenty-ninth
session of the General Assembly;
2.. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
submit, through the Economic and Social Council, to
the General Assembly at its thirtieth session a single
draft Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of
Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on Religion
or Belief;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirtieth se,;sion the item entitled "Elimination of all
forms of religious intolerance" with a view to assessing
31 Ibid .. Twenty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 18 (A/9618),
chap. VIJ, sect. B.
32 Ibid., Twenty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 18 (A/8418),
chap. VII, s-ct. B.
33 See Of}icial Records of the Economic ·and Social Council
Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 5 (E/5464), paras. 56-58. •
34 Sec Economic and Social Council decision 14 (LVI) of
17 May 1974.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

progress on the elaboration of a Declaration on t~e
Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief and to considering, completing and adopting, if possible, the
Declaration, provided a single draft is completed by
the Commi~ion on Human Rights.

1311th plenary meeting
10 December 1974
3268 (XXIX). Human rights and scientific and
technological developments

The General Assembly,
Recalling that, in its resolution 2450 (XXIII) of
19 December 1968, it stated that it shared the concern
expressed in the Proclamation of. Teheran 35 ~nd . in
resolution XI concerning human nghts and scientific
and technological developments36 adopted by the 1!1temational Conference on Human Rights on 12 May
1968 and recalling in particular the idea expressed in
that ~esolution that studies should be carried out in
that field which might serve as a basis for drawing
up appropriate standards to protect human rights and
fundamental freedoms,
Noting that, pursuant to General Assembly resolutions 2450 ( XXIII) of 19 December 1968, 2721
(XXV) of 15 December 1970, 3026 (XXVII) of
18 December 1972, and 3149 (XXVIII) and 3150
(XXVIII) of 14 December 1973, the United Nations
and the specialized agencies ~ave already. unde!tak~n
research and studies concerning the cons1derat1on m
United Nations organs of the entire problem of the
effect of scientific and technological developments on
human rights,
Noting with satisfaction that there is an increasingly
clear awareness not only of the vast prospects opened
up by scientific and technological developments for
the realization of human rights and economic, social
and cultural development but also of the threats ~o
fundamental rights represented by the abuse of certam
scientific discoveries and their applications,
Reaffirming the principles set forth in resolutions
2721 (XXV) and 3150 (XXVIII) whereby it is important to ensure a balance between scientific and
technological developments, the intellectual, spiritual
and moral advancement of humanity and the improvement of the living conditions of individuals, groups
and peoples,
Emphasizing that the establishment of a new international economic order entails, inter alia, a fundamental contribution on the part of science and technoJogy to economic and social progress and to the
promotion and safeguarding of human rights,
Recognizing that, as stated in the Internati?nal
Develonment Strateov for the Second Unite<l Nations
Development Decade,37 concerted efforts should be
made by the developing countries, with appropriate
assistance from the rest of the world community, to
expand their capability to apply science and technology
for development in accordance with their national
development plans and their priorities, so as to enable
the technological gap to be significantly reduced,
H Final Act of the International Conference on H11man
Rights (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.68.XIV.2),
p. 3.
3G Ibid., p. 12.
37 Resolution 2626 ( XXV l.

89

Noting that, in accordance with the International
Development Strategy, developed and devel?ping countries and competent international organizations sho~ld
draw up and implement a programme for promotmg
the transfer of technology to developing countries,
Aware that when modem technology is introduced
into the developing countries it may pose problems
comparable to those whic~ affect the developed co~ntries and also poses specific problems of. adaptation
which the organizations in the United Nations system
have begun to analyse,
Convinced that the implications of scientific and
technological developments, which cannot always be
clearly foreseen, are international in character and call
for both national and international solutions,
Taking note of Commission on Human Rights resolution 2 (XXX) of 12 February 1974,38
Having studied the reports of the Secretary-General
prepared pursuant to the relevant resoluti?ns of t~
General Assembly, the Economic ~nd Social Council
and the Commission on Human Rights,39
1. Considers, while acknowledging the indispensable
role of science and technology for developmen~, t~at
it is necessary, on the one hand, to ensure that sc1e~ufic
and technological developments are not used m a
manner contrary to the principles of international law
and, on the other hand, to protect human_ ri~hts and
fundamental freedoms in situations of scientific and
technological development, taking into accou_nt the
political, economic and social context of the different
countries considered;
2. Draws the attention of States to the advantages
which may be derived from the elaboration and adoption, by the competent ~ational ~uth<;>rities, of meas~res
designed to adapt national legislation and practices,
where appropriate, not only to take account of _new
technology but also to safeguard the fund~me_ntal ~1ghts
of the individual and of g•roups or organizations m all
sectors of social life, and invites Governments which
already have experience in this field to transmit to
the Secretary-General the information available to
them;
3. Draws the attention of the Economic and Social
Council and the· Commission on Human Rights to the
importance of collecting qualified opinions in the study
of such problems, particularly with regard to a code
of ethics, and requests them to take the necessary
measures for the implementation of the present resolution in liaison, in particular, with the Committee on
Science and Technology for Development and the
Advisory Committee on the Application of Science
and Technology to Development, which are i~vited to
follow these problems as a whole at regular mtervals;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to invite the
specialized agencies1 in particular the Uni~ed .Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations the International Labour Organisation and the
World H'ealth OrPanization, to go into J!reater detail
in the studies which they are pursuing and to consider
the preparation of. recommendat\on_s con~erning international standards m the areas w1thm their competence
which fall within the purview of the present ·resolution,
~8 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No . .5 (E/5464), chap. XIX.
:,u See A/9645.
