VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-eighth session the item entitled ''Question of a convention on the rights of the child".
111 th plenary meeting
18 December 1982

37/191.

International Covenants on Human Rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 33/51 of 14 December 1978, 34/
45 of23 November 1979, 35/132 of 11 December 1980 and
36/58 of 25 November 1981,
Having noted the report of the Secretary-General 149 on
the status of the International Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights, 136 the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights 136 and the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 136
Noting with appreciation that, following its appeal, more
Member States have acceded to the International Covenants
on Human Rights, 136
Bearing in mind the important responsibilities of the Economic and Social Council in relation to the International
Covenants on Human Rights,
Recognizing the important role of the Human Rights Committee in the implementation of the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional Protocol
thereto,
Taking into account the useful work of the Sessional
Working Group of Governmental Experts on the Implementation of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution
1980/30 of 2 May 1980 on the development of public information activities in the field of human rights and the
report of the Secretary-General on publicity for the work of
the Human Rights Committee, 150
1. Notes with appreciation the report of the Human
Rights Committee on its fourteenth, fifteenth and sixteenth
sessions, 151 and expresses satisfaction at the serious and
constructive manner in which the Committee is continuing
to perform its functions;
2. Expresses its appreciation to those States parties to
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights that
have extended their co-operation to the Human Rights Committee in submitting their reports under article 40 of the
Covenant and urges States parties that have not yet done so
to submit their reports to the Committee as speedily as
possible;
3. Urges those States parties to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights that have been requested
by the Human Rights Committee to provide additional information to comply with that request;
4. Commends those States parties to the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights that have
submitted their reports under article 16 of the Covenant and
urges States that have not yet done so to submit their reports
as soon as possible;
5. Takes note of Economic and Social Council resolution 1982/33 of 6 May 1982 concerning the review of the
composition, organization and administrative arrangements

149

A/37/406.

'° A/37/490.

1

151

Official Records of the General Assembl_v, Thirt_v-seventh Session,
Supplement No. 40 (A/37/40).

209

of the Sessional Working Group of Governmental Experts
on the Implementation of the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights;
6. Emphasizes the importance of States parties sending
experts to present their reports under the International Covenants on Human Rights;
7. Again invites all States that have not yet done so to
become parties to the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights and the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights as well as to consider acceding
to the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights;
8. Invites the States parties to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights to consider making the
declaration provided for in article 41 of the Covenant;
9. Appreciates that the Human Rights Committee continues to strive for uniform standards in the implementation
of the provisions of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights and of the Optional Protocol thereto;
10. Emphasizes the importance of strictest compliance
by States parties with their obligations under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and, where
applicable, the Optional Protocol thereto;
ll. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to keep
the Human Rights Committee informed of the activities of
the Commission on Human Rights, the Sub-Commission on
Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities,
the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination
and the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination
against Women and also to transmit the annual reports of
the Human Rights Committee to those bodies;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session a report on the
status of the International Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights, the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights and the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights;
13. Takes note with appreciation of the request of the
Human Rights Committee that its official records be made
available annually in bound volumes--one volume to contain the summary records of public meetings of the Committee and a second volume to contain other public documents
of the Committee, including reports of States parties under
article 40 of the Covenant-and requests the Secretary-General to consider making, within existing resources, the arrangements which he deems most suitable and economical
for publishing those annual volumes;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take
all possible steps to ensure that the Centre for Human Rights
of the Secretariat is able effectively to assist the Human
Rights Committee and the Economic and Social Council in
the implementation of their respective functions under the
International Covenants on Human Rights, taking into account General Assembly resolutions 3534 (XXX) of 17 December 1975 and 31/93 of 14 December 1976.
111 th plenary meeting
/8 December 1982

37/192.

Capital punishment

The General Assembly,
Recalling its decision 35/437 of 15 December 1980 and
its resolution 36/59 of 25 November 1981 concerning the
idea of elaborating a draft of a second optional protocol to
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 136
aiming at the abolition of the death penalty,
