A /73/PV.44

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-third session

44th plenary meeting

Monday, 3 December 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Espinosa Garcés . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ecuador)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Ke (Cambodia),
Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 12
Sport for development and peace
Report of the Secretary-General (A/73/325)
Draft resolution (A/73/L.36)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Tunisia to introduce draft resolution
A/73/L.36.
Mr. Khiari (Tunisia) (spoke in French): Draft
resolution A/73/L.36 highlights the importance of sport
as a crucial vehicle for development, social cohesion,
peace and solidarity among peoples. Resolution 70/1,
adopted by the Assembly on 25 September 2015,
stipulates in paragraph 37:
“Sport is also an important enabler of
sustainable development. We recognize the
growing contribution of sport to the realization of
development and peace in its promotion of tolerance
and respect and the contributions it makes to the
empowerment of women and of young people,
individuals and communities as well as to health,
education and social inclusion objectives.”
It is in that spirit that, among other things, this year’s
draft resolution recognizes the importance of adopting
comprehensive approaches towards health and regular

physical activity, including sport and leisure, in order
to prevent and control non-communicable diseases and
promote healthy lifestyles.
The draft resolution also welcomes the memorandum
of understanding signed in April 2014 between the
International Olympic Committee and the United
Nations and affirms that the Olympic and Paralympic
movements make an invaluable contribution by
establishing sport as a unique means of promoting
peace and development. It also duly reflects the roles
of UNESCO and UN-Women and the importance
of partnerships.
The Convention on the Rights of the Child, the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women and the International
Convention against Doping in Sport are important tools
in the context of sport for development and peace.
The draft resolution also refers to the UNESCO
Kazan Action Plan and the World Health Assembly
Global Action Plan on Physical Activity 20182030. The Kazan Action Plan and its sport policy
follow-up framework, adopted at the sixth UNESCO
International Conference of Ministers and Senior
Officials Responsible for Physical Education and
Sport, together provide a crucial frame of reference
based on voluntary activities that seeks to encourage
international harmonization among decision-makers in
the areas of physical education, physical activity and
sport, as well as a tool for synchronizing international
and national policies in those areas.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-40542 (E)

*1840542*

A/73/PV.44

The draft resolution encourages Member States,
United Nations entities, including peacekeeping
missions, special political missions and integrated
peacebuilding
missions,
sports
organizations,
federations and associations, athletes, the media, civil
society, universities and the private sector to make
use of those tools, where possible, in a coherent and
integrated way to give sport a more decisive role in
intersectoral strategies relating to development and
peace and to integrate sport and physical education
into international, regional and national policies
and programmes.
Finally, the draft resolution calls on the relevant
entities of the United Nations system and other
international and regional organizations, within
their respective mandates and existing resources, to
strengthen and systematize inter-agency collaboration,
in line with the updated United Nations Action Plan on
Sport for Development and Peace, in order to maximize
the potential of sport and physical activity to contribute
to the achievement of the internationally agreed
development goals, including the goals and targets of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and
national peacebuilding and State-building priorities.
In conclusion, I would like to underscore that, as
the main co-sponsors, the delegations of my country
and of Monaco worked to maintain consensus around
this draft resolution. In that regard, I would like to
express the appreciation of my delegation and that
of Monaco for the quality of the fruitful discussions
and exchanges throughout the process of informal
consultations, as well as the great flexibility shown by
various delegations. We express our gratitude to all the
traditional co-sponsors and the new co-sponsors for
their renewed support to the draft resolution.
I could not conclude my remarks without expressing
my heartfelt thanks to Ms. Daniela Bas, Director of the
Division for Inclusive Social Development, and her
team, with whom we worked very closely throughout
the consultation process.
Mr. Stone (Australia): Australia thanks the
Secretary-General for his report (A/73/325).
Australia supports efforts to use sport as an enabler
for development and peace. We recognize the important
role that sport plays in bringing people and communities
together and in providing opportunities for inclusion
while also fostering community pride. Sport also teaches
2/12

03/12/2018

important life skills such as leadership, teamwork,
respecting rules, discipline and perseverance.
Australia is firmly committed to promoting an
inclusive environment and supporting participation
regardless of ability, gender, race, religion,
socioeconomic status, ethnicity and age. To support
that, Australia has invested in national policies and
initiatives to promote diversity in physical activity and
healthy living in all segments of the population at all
levels of sport.
Australia has promoted inclusivity at the major
international sporting events that we have hosted, such
as the 2018 Gold Coast Commonwealth Games, which
has been recognized as the most inclusive and accessible
major sporting event in history. Australia’s para-athletes
are some of the most celebrated and recognizable
athletes and have a particular ability to motivate and
inspire the nation. For the first time in history, the 2018
Commonwealth Games included the full integration of
para-sports in the competition schedule and an equal
number of medals for men and women.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
note that today is the International Day of Persons
with Disabilities, and an important reminder of the
contribution of sport to helping to promote inclusivity
for all.
Australia is working in partnership with our
major sporting codes to help to break down barriers
to integration and inclusion in migrant communities
to deliver a number of community programmes across
the country.
Australia is currently in the process of renewing
its Sports Diplomacy Strategy, and supporting sport
for development will remain one of our strategic
priorities. Australia takes pride in using sport to help
developing countries in our region to achieve positive
economic and social results within their communities.
We are also working to deliver stronger development
outcomes through partnerships throughout the Pacific
through the Sport for Development programme and the
Australia Pacific Sports Linkages programme. Those
programmes aim to strengthen sporting ties with our
valued neighbours across the Pacific, with a particular
focus on championing women to be active.
Australia supports the Secretary-General’s
recommendations to further work on sport for
development and peace at all levels and to promote
18-40542

03/12/2018

policy coherence. Australia’s commitment to the United
Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
the implementation of the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs) offer new significance for sport
inclusion. Through its role on the Commonwealth
Advisory Board on Sport and at the Commonwealth
Sports Ministers Meeting, Australia has identified
key areas where sport can contribute to advancing the
SDGs. Australia’s involvement in research into the
contribution that sport can make to achieving the SDGs
brings depth and credibility to the place of sport as a
vehicle for improving inclusion outcomes across the
areas of health, education, social cohesion, business
and leadership development at home as well as in our
immediate neighbourhood.
Earlier this year, Australia delivered the first-ever
National Sports Plan: Sport 2030. The Plan outlines
a number of initiatives to promote and inspire more
Australians to be more active more often. That includes
specific programmes centred around providing
opportunities to women to assist in overcoming cultural
barriers and enabling women, from the grassroots to
the elite, to become leaders in their sporting fields.
We also remain focused on promoting the importance
of physical activity to an ageing demographic. We have
in place a number of initiatives to encourage older
Australians to engage in sport. Our Play by the Rules
initiative also provides information, resources, tools
and free online training to assist coaches, officials,
players and spectators in preventing and dealing with
discrimination, harassment, child safety, inclusion and
integrity issues in sport. Play by the Rules guides grassroots sports clubs and organizations to be inclusivity
champions in their communities and to celebrate the
rich diversity of sport.
Australia remains committed to working towards
further inclusivity, equality and diversity in sport and
using sport as an enabler for development and peace.
Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to thank
the Permanent Missions of Tunisia and Monaco for
their co-facilitation of the draft resolution to be adopted
today. Australia is very pleased to co-sponsor the draft
resolution, as we did with its many precursors.
Mr. Rybakov (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): We
would like to thank the Secretary-General for his very
thorough report on strengthening the global framework
for leveraging sport for development and peace
(A/73/325).

A/73/PV.44

Belarus was very pleased to join as a co-sponsor of
draft resolution A/73/L.36, entitled “Sport as an enabler
of sustainable development”. We express our gratitude
to Monaco and Tunisia for promoting this important
issue on the United Nations agenda.
The role of physical fitness and sport in forming
a healthy way of life and in achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals is growing every year. Sport
plays an important role in contributing to sustainable
development, reaffirming the principles of tolerance
and respect, broadening rights and opportunities for
women and young people, individuals and communities,
and helping to achieve goals in the areas of health care,
education and social integration.
Against the current backdrop of international
instability, sport continues to serve as a resource that
can consolidate the ideals of peace, friendship and
mutual understanding. We therefore highly value
the efforts of the United Nations and its specialized
agencies in seeking to use sporting opportunities to
promote development and peace.
Promoting health, physical fitness and sport are
among the priority areas of the social policy of Belarus.
Our country is committed to developing international
cooperation in sport and to strengthening friendly
relations among peoples through sport based on
humanist principles and the Olympic ideal.
Sport is indivisible from politics; it is the people’s
diplomacy. Through athleticism, States can project
their national image on the international stage, while
illustrating the social and political values of their
societies. However, sport is politically neutral, and it
must remain so.
Unfortunately, sport is increasingly not about the
playing and has developed into a business rife with
corruption and unsportsmanlike activities to win at all
costs. Doping has become the scourge of modern sport.
Belarus actively participates in international efforts to
combat drug use in sport, and upholds the principle of
legal, individualized and just punishment. At the same
time, we strongly condemn the tendency to politically
pressure certain athletes and entire sporting federations
under the pretext of fighting against doping, while in
fact it is used to settle political scores, and athletes are
being caught up in those dirty games.
Biased officiating is another vice in modern sport,
and it violates the principles of fair play and makes

18-405423/12

A/73/PV.44

03/12/2018

athletes lose faith in the same chances of winning. In
that context, to combat the negative trends in sport,
an important role must be played by the International
Olympic Committee, which must be supported in its
activities by national Olympic committees. We must
not ignore their opinions.

The Maldives enacted its first Sports Act in
September 2015. The legislation aims to assist the
promotion of competitive sports and cultural activities
at the international, national and island levels. It also
outlines policies and guidelines to facilitate sports
development with community-level participation.

International sporting events must be organized
in the spirit of peace, mutual understanding and
friendship, and we must recognize and respect the
unifying and reconciliatory nature of such events.
Belarus is very proud that it was granted the right to
host the most important European sporting event of
2019 — the second European Games. The fact that
these Games will be held in Minsk will be an important
milestone on the European sporting calendar. We note
that preparations are already under way for the eightyfifth Ice Hockey World Championship, to be held in the
capitals of Belarus and Latvia —
­ Minsk and Riga — in
2021.

That is why we pioneered the implementation of
Security Council resolution 2250 (2015). The Maldives,
in collaboration with the United Nations Development
Programme, held an official ceremony in the Maldives
in August 2016 to launch the implementation of the
resolution, thereby becoming the first country to do so
in the Asia-Pacific region.

While sport is not a panacea for solving all
international problems, it has a unique capacity to
bring together people from various cultures and to
help strengthen mutual understanding among States
and peoples in the spirit of the true Olympic ideals of
friendship, solidarity and fair play.
Mr. Nasir (Maldives): The Maldives is proud to
have co-sponsored draft resolution A/73/L.36, entitled
“Sports as an enabler of sustainable development”.
As the draft resolution reiterates, sport has the
extraordinary ability to unite peoples, overcome
differences and promote equality, as well as to help
maintain the physical health of a society. Those
are some of key values that inform our approach to
sustainable development in general, and to Sustainable
Development Goals 3, 4, 5, 16 and 17 in particular.
Sport, especially the Olympic ideal, has helped to
create equality and a level playing field to bring out
the best in humankind. The Maldives is proud to be an
active participant in the Olympic movement. Maldivian
athletes took the great leap forward by participating in
the Olympic Games for the first time in 1988. It was
truly a unique moment in time, not only for those who
participated but also for a generation of youth inspired by
the Games as a transformative event. The Government
of the Maldives has prioritized sport as an instrument
of youth development to promote a healthy population
and to realize the full potential of the country’s youth.
4/12

Since assuming office on 17 November, the new
Government of President Ibrahim Mohamed Solih
has continued to make significant investments in
sports infrastructure and inclusive opportunities for
all. As part of President Solih’s 100-day agenda, the
Government has made it a priority to designate a
sports counsellor on every island to eliminate the
wage difference between men’s and women’s national
sports teams and to encourage female participation in
sport to challenge traditional gender stereotypes. The
investments in sports will no doubt allow young people
to develop leadership skills and provide them with
support networks outside their homes. It is therefore
imperative to empower the growing youth population
to become active citizens in their communities, which
will foster economic and social progress.
Sports programmes coordinated by the United
Nations, Government agencies and non-governmental
organizations have been found to facilitate sustainable
development and peaceful coexistence. It is encouraging
to see that sport for peace and development is reflected
in all 17 Goals under the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and to see that in action in countries
around the world.
The Maldives has been making steady progress
in regional and international competitions in various
sports. Our women’s and men’s teams have performed
quite well in recent months. That success has helped
to galvanize young people in the country and created
more opportunities that will unleash their creativity to
allow them to aim higher and dream bigger.
Mr. Al Braiki (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to say that I am
pleased to participate on behalf of the young people
of the United Arab Emirates in this general debate on
18-40542

03/12/2018

agenda item 12, entitled “Sports for development and
peace”. We welcome the efforts of Monaco and Tunisia
as co-facilitators of draft resolution A/73/L.36, entitled
“Sport as an enabler of sustainable development”,
which stresses the importance of strengthening the
global framework for leveraging sport for development
and peace. Sport is an important enabler for achieving
sustainable development under the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, contributing to the
attainment of the desired goals in the areas of health,
education, justice and peace.
In March 2019, my country will host 7,000 athletes
from more than 170 States at the Abu Dhabi Special
Olympics World Games — the first time they will be
held in the Middle East since the Special Olympics
was established 50 years ago. That is the largest
human sporting event in the world focused on enabling
those with mental disabilities to participate in sports.
The event represents an important step towards the
integration of persons with mental disabilities into
inclusive societies.
The United Arab Emirates attaches great importance
to building a society that is highly cognizant of, and
educated in, the sport of ju-jitsu. We have adopted the
sport as a main subject in more than 162 schools and
more than 300 training centres, with curricula devised
to support students in developing technical skills and
physical health, as well as to strengthen the values of
discipline and commitment and encourage students to
become passionate about sports. My country established
the Abu Dhabi World Ju-Jitsu Championship, now in its
tenth year, to which we welcome the top professional
men and women as well as young people and people
with disabilities.
We believe that the role of women and girls is an
essential tool in the advancement of women. In the
United Arab Emirat, women and girls have attained
prominent positions in karate, weightlifting, volleyball
and Ju-Jitsu. Moreover, the development of the Sheikha
Fatima bint Mubarak Prize in women’s sport is the first
of its kind, aimed at enhancing the position of women
in sport while promoting development and seeking to
achieve their aspirations.
Sport is a useful tool for enhancing the participation
of young people in their growth, self-confidence and
sense of belonging, while strengthening tolerance and
respect. Consequently, youngsters become agents for
change and partners in building peaceful and inclusive

A/73/PV.44

societies and contributing to sustainable development
and social cohesion. That is why young people in my
country have participated in a number of workshops
on sport diplomacy and sport as a lifestyle, as well as
a workshop on sport, youth and social development,
which was held last week at the Permanent Mission of
the United Arab Emirates to the United Nations. We
attach great importance to listening to the opinions of
young people and to discussing their ideas and opinions
as a means of finding solutions to challenges, with the
participation of decision-makers and State officials as
well as at the international level.
My country is also harnessing sport for peace
and development by encouraging sports in refugee
camps. We recently launched the 2018 summer sports
programme in the Mrajeeb Al Fhood camp in Jordan
to develop the talents of young people in the camp and
help to improve the living conditions of refugees.
In conclusion, as a representative of the young
people of the United Arab Emirates, I would like
to stress the importance of leveraging sport for
development and peace as a key element and enabler of
peaceful coexistence, tolerance and team spirit. Sport
also imparts the values of discipline, endurance and
courage to young people.
Mr. Chua (Singapore): At the outset, my delegation
would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report on strengthening the global
framework for leveraging sport for development
and peace (A/73/325). We would also like to express
our appreciation to the Permanent Missions of
Monaco and Tunisia for their hard work on draft
resolution A/73/L.36, entitled “Sport as an enabler of
sustainable development”.
Sport can be a force for positive change in society.
It instils values such as discipline, perseverance,
teamwork and sportsmanship. It also inspires people
to push boundaries and strive for greater heights
beyond what they believe they can normally achieve.
Those are important skills for an individual’s personal
and professional life and future. In addition, exercise
and sport contribute to improvements in health and
the overall quality of life of individuals towards the
attainment of the Sustainable Development Goals.
Singapore celebrates sport in everyday life. We
launched the Get Active initiative in 2016, a weeklong sports festival that encourages Singaporeans
to participate in sport and to have an active and

18-405425/12

A/73/PV.44

healthy lifestyle. Sport not only brings about health
benefits; it also has a positive impact on society. As
noted in the Secretary-General’s report, sport can help
to build human and social capital and promote social
integration, inclusion and cohesion. It is a powerful
vehicle that brings individuals and communities
together. It can foster social development by changing
perceptions. Regardless of faith, culture, background
or gender, sport enhances mutual understanding, true
teamwork and respect.
The esprit de corps forged through sport also
fosters a sense of pride and solidarity among people.
Given the personal and development benefits sport
offers, emphasis should be placed on increasing access
to, and participation in, sport. It is for those reasons
that Singapore has integrated sport into our national
educational curriculum under the sports education
programme. Those are important values that we believe
should be imbued in our people, especially our youth.
Sport also contributes to lowering barriers in
societies in other ways. It can engender greater
acceptance and awareness of persons with disabilities.
In 2016, Singapore launched the Disability Sports
Master Plan to ensure that sport in Singapore remains
an inclusive activity. The Master Plan provides persons
with disabilities with more opportunities to participate
in sports. It also develops and expands the pool of
educators with expertise in disability sport. We are
also working to increase awareness and support for our
athletes with disabilities among Singaporeans through
the annual inclusive sports festival, which features
adaptive sports try-outs and workshops that everyone
can experience.
The efforts to develop sport in Singapore have
succeeded. Notably, at the October 2018 Asian Para
Games in Jakarta, Singapore fielded 44 para-athletes
across 10 sports and achieved our best-ever medal haul.
But sport is about more than just results. For our paraathletes, it gives them self-belief and confidence that,
despite physical disabilities, they are able to participate
and compete. They were also an inspiration to all
Singaporeans, who saw how they achieved sporting
excellence despite their physical disabilities. They prove
that, with hard work, perseverance and determination,
one can overcome all odds.
The benefits of sport also transcend national
boundaries. Sport helps to promote closer people-topeople ties between Member States. There are
6/12

03/12/2018

countless inspirational stories of how regional and
international friendships were forged in the fiery battle
of sporting competition. We hope that such ties serve
as stepping stones towards peace and greater dialogue
and cooperation.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
recognizes the role of sport in the realization of
development and peace, the promotion of tolerance and
respect and the empowerment of women and young
people, as well as its many contributions to health,
education and our goals of social inclusion. Let us
continue to uphold the spirit of sport and aim to build
a sustainable, inclusive and prosperous future for
all peoples.
Ms. Picco (Monaco) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report (A/73/325), and in particular the Division for
Inclusive Social Development, the Secretariat entity
now charged with the issue of sport for development
and peace.
The new title of this draft resolution, “Sport as
an enabler of sustainable development” (A/73/L.36),
unequivocally affirms that sport provides numerous
opportunities for achieving the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. It was 25 years ago, at the
initiative of Egypt, that the General Assembly first
adopted a resolution dedicated to sport and the Olympic
ideal (resolution 48/11). Over the years since 1993, the
recognition of sport within the work of the United
Nations has grown continuously.
As my counterpart the Permanent Representative
of Tunisia underscored in his statement introducing
the draft resolution, the text before us highlights the
normative framework relating to sport. The vast
contribution of sport to development and peace is
undeniable, and we are convinced that it has immense
potential in the context of our joint efforts to achieve
the Sustainable Development Goals. We must continue
to develop sport’s enabling role, in particular by using
the communication tools used by young people.
What better example than the Pyeongchang
Olympic Winter Games to illustrate what dialogue
around sport can achieve? The success of the efforts of
the President of the International Olympic Committee
to establish dialogue between the two Koreas has sent
the world a message of hope. To see athletes from those
two countries parade under the same flag during the
18-40542

03/12/2018

A/73/PV.44

opening and closing ceremonies was extremely moving
for all those who love sport and advocate peace.

articulates how they can contribute to the achievement
of the Sustainable Development Goals and their targets.

Beyond those symbolic moments, sport promotes
understanding, cohesion, reconciliation and peace. In
many countries, among many communities, sport has
proved to be a common language that overcomes barriers.

Sport is a fundamental educational tool, and we
must continue to work to ensure that it is an integral
part of school curricula in all countries. Access to
sport is particularly important for girls and people with
disabilities: they must be assured unhindered access
to sport. In that connection, I would like to commend
the work of the United Nations and its partners as we
celebrate today, 3 December, as the International Day
of Persons with Disabilities.

Whether recreational or competitive, solo or group,
sport conveys fundamental values and allows human
beings to express their full potential. In the context of
the Olympism in Action forum held on the eve of the
opening of the Youth Olympic Games in Buenos Aires
in October, in which I had the privilege of participating,
I had occasion to realize just how much of the work we
do at the United Nations is relevant to non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) and grass-roots associations,
especially in the areas of social development and
human rights. That is worth underscoring in a year
when we are celebrating the seventieth anniversary of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and on the
heels of the Nelson Mandela Peace Summit we held in
September. It is therefore crucial that we always keep
in mind throughout our deliberations those who will be
impacted by the decisions we make.
The great success of that first forum, which brought
together the members of the Olympic movement, NGOs,
sports professionals and United Nations agencies,
demonstrated, as if there were any need, the unifying
power of the International Olympic Committee and its
effective contribution to the activities of the United
Nations. The discussions also confirmed the role of
sport as a means of raising awareness about social
issues and its contribution to social cohesion, inclusion
and the fight against inequalities, including gender and
pay inequality.
Athletes are role models, and young people in
particular identify with the greatest champions.
Therefore, just like world-renowned teams, athletes are
able to spread positive messages and help to support
international cooperation activities. It is therefore up to
us to convince them to help us promote the Sustainable
Development Goals.
The societal benefits of sport are indisputable.
The draft resolution recognizes the Kazan Action
Plan, endorsed by UNESCO in 2017, and its sport
policy follow-up framework. I would like to stress the
relevance of that tool as a point of reference, since it
sets out a comprehensive vision of universal access
to sport, physical education and physical activity and

Through sport many young people from disadvantaged
backgrounds have been able to pursue higher education
and to access opportunities otherwise unavailable to
them. I must also commend private sector-sponsored
after-school programmes, which enable young people
from marginalized communities to avoid becoming
caught up in delinquency.
As highlighted in the political declaration of the
third high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the
prevention and control of non-communicable diseases,
held in September, regular physical activity should
continue to be encouraged as a means of promoting
a healthy lifestyle, as it helps to fight cardiovascular
disease and obesity. Given its benefits, today physical
activity is integrated into medical treatment, including
in the fight against cancer, since it helps patients to
better withstand intense treatment.
We see an encouraging convergence of efforts
by different sectors of society, State institutions, the
private sector and medical establishments. Partnerships
will be key for better harnessing sport to promote and
achieve the Sustainable Development Goals.
Our delegation is also particularly pleased with the
events that it was able to promote over the past year in
cooperation with many missions and organizations on
the sidelines of the Commission for Social Development
and the Commission on the Status of Women, as well
as on the occasion of the International Day of Sport for
Development and Peace and the High-level Political
Forum on Sustainable Development and in conjunction
with the Football World Cup.
The fruitful collaboration between the Permanent
Missions of Tunisia and Monaco, co-Chairs of the
Group of Friends of Sport for Development and Peace,
has increased over the past year with the opening
up of the Group to all interested Member States. We

18-405427/12

A/73/PV.44

03/12/2018

have focused on providing a space for interaction and
exchange with United Nations entities. The strong
mobilization at our monthly meetings demonstrates the
power of sport as a factor of sustainable development.
We are particularly proud that the draft resolution we
are about to adopt is geared towards the future we want
and highlights the synergies between sport and the
2030 Agenda.
I could not conclude without expressing my
gratitude and friendship to my Tunisian counterpart,
an accomplished sportsman with whom it has been my
honour and pleasure to co-chair the Group of Friends of
Sport over the past six years.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/73/L.36, entitled “Sport as an enabler of
sustainable development”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

or

Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should
like to announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution, in addition to those delegations listed in
document A/73/L.36, the following countries have
become sponsors of the draft resolution: Albania,
Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Bahrain, Belarus,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Bulgaria,
Burundi, Canada, the Central African Republic, Chile,
China, Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, the
Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominica, the Dominican
Republic, Estonia, Finland, Greece, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Japan, Kuwait, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Lichtenstein, Lithuania,
Malawi, the Maldives, Malta, Mauritius, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Nepal, Nigeria, Oman, Palau,
Panama, the Philippines, Poland, Qatar, the Republic
of Korea, the Republic of Moldova, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, the Sudan, Sweden, Togo, Turkmenistan, the
United Arab Emirates, Uruguay and Viet Nam.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/73/L.36?
Draft resolution
(resolution 73/24).

A/73/L.36

was

adopted

The Acting President: Before giving the floor
to speakers in explanation of position following the
8/12

adoption of the resolution, I would like to remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Ms. Schorr (United States of America): The
United States believes that sport and physical
education contribute to the promotion of education,
health, development and peace. As such, we joined the
consensus on resolution 73/24 today with the express
understanding that the resolution does not imply that
States must join instruments that they have not already
joined, or implement provisions of human rights
instruments that they have not accepted. By joining
the consensus on the resolution, we do not recognize
any change in the current state of treaty or customary
international law. We also understand the resolution’s
reaffirmation of prior documents to apply to those that
affirmed them initially and, in the case of international
treaties, to the States parties.
We further understand the reference in the resolution
to “internationally agreed development goals” to refer
to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. The
United States position is articulate in the following
explanation of position on that document.
We take this opportunity to make important points
of clarification on language related to the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development. We underscore that the
2030 Agenda is non-binding and does not create or
affect rights or obligations under international law,
neither does it create any new financial commitments.
The United States recognizes the 2030 Agenda
as a global framework for sustainable development
that can help countries work towards global peace and
prosperity. We applaud the call for shared responsibility,
including national responsibility, in the 2030 Agenda,
and emphasize that all countries have a role to play in
achieving its vision. The 2030 Agenda recognizes that
each country must work towards implementation in
accordance with its own national policies and priorities.
The United States also underscores that paragraph
18 of the 2030 Agenda calls for countries to implement
the Agenda in a manner that is consistent with the rights
and obligations of States under international law.
We also highlight our mutual recognition, in
paragraph 58, that the implementation of the 2030
Agenda must respect and be without prejudice to
the independent mandates of other processes and
institutions, including negotiations, and does not
18-40542

03/12/2018

A/73/PV.44

prejudge or serve as a precedent for decisions and
actions under way in other forums. For example, the
Agenda does not represent a commitment to provide
new market access for goods or services. The Agenda
also does not interpret or alter any World Trade
Organization agreement or decision, including the
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual
Property Rights.

the United Nations, in order to fill in an observed lacuna
in the collective global efforts to promote education as
a critical aspect of development.

With regard to paragraph 9, we support the focus on
training, capacity-building and education of teachers,
coaches and community leaders, although the United
States does so mindful of, and consistent with, our
limited authority at the federal level with respect to
education, which is primarily the responsibility of our
state and local governments. With regard to paragraph
15, the United States believes that the United Nations
Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights,
which set out the responsibilities of business enterprises
and provide relevant guidance for sports-related
organizations, federations and associations, provide
a valuable, important and universal framework for
hosting mega sports events, including the complicated
process of bidding, organizing, executing and ensuring
positive legacies for such events.

The United Nations observes many days devoted
to many important things, from bees and mountains
to cycling and others. Clearly, it is education and
knowledge that have led to the observance of such days.
It is therefore important, even belatedly, to accord such
a day to education itself. An intentional day of education
marked by the international community would situation
education at the core of the agenda for achieving the
2030 Sustainable Development Goals.

The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position.
The General Assembly has
consideration of agenda item 12.

concluded

its

Agenda item 14 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Draft resolution (A/73/L.39)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nigeria to introduce draft resolution
A/73/L.39.
Mr. Muhammad Bande (Nigeria): We express our
condolences at the demise of President George Herbert
Walker Bush. May he rest in peace.
I have the honour to introduce draft resolution
A/73/L.39, entitled “International Day of Education”.
Nigeria is introducing this draft resolution, which calls
for the observance of 24 January of every year as the
International Day of Education under the auspices of

Education has been seen as fundamental to global
development, especially within the context of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. Many United
Nations documents have also underscored the centrality
of education to development.

The United Nations has defined education as not
only a right but also a path towards human development.
Its catalytic impact is concretely felt in the way that it
opens doors for individuals, communities and nations,
expands human freedom, contributes to fostering
democracy and economic growth, improves health and
reduces poverty. Furthermore, education has contributed
to global peace, development, innovation, technology
and agriculture. It has also helped in tackling climate
change and in improving the enjoyment of human
rights. In what matter of importance is education not
implicated? That being the case, the denial of education
to any human being is a serious and permanent injury
to that person. So is it with nations and societies.
Against that backdrop, Nigeria calls on the
global community to endorse the observance of the
International Day of Education. Such endorsement is
expected to increase awareness, enhance momentum,
support innovative efforts in transforming education,
celebrate invention and innovation brought about by
knowledge derived from education, and increase the
visibility of education as critical to human and societal
development. It would also invite the global audience
to the continuous task of enhancing education and
broadening educational opportunities, especially for
those on the verge of being left behind, such as women
and children and others in vulnerable situations,
including people with disabilities and those in
humanitarian emergency situations.
The main objective of the draft resolution is not only
to celebrate education in the form of a carnival but also

18-405429/12

A/73/PV.44

03/12/2018

to draw particular attention to the millions, especially
girls and women, in many countries who are denied this
supreme good. That should further galvanize support
among all of us to commit to providing education for all.

following the adoption of the resolution, I would like
to remind delegations that explanations are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.

Finally, I would like to express my delegation’s
profound appreciation to all the delegations that
participated actively in the negotiation of the draft
resolution. Indeed, the various United Nations agencies
whose technical skills on the subject, such as UNESCO,
and an array of non-governmental organizations
helped to shape the draft resolution. Their valuable
contributions, cooperation and support helped us to
arrive at an agreed text that reflects the consensus among
members of the General Assembly. My appreciation
also goes to those delegations — Algeria, Antigua and
Barbuda, Chad, the Congo, Canada, Equatorial Guinea,
Finland, France, Guinea, Ireland, Kenya, Luxembourg,
Malta, Qatar, Singapore, Suriname, Tunisia, Uganda
and Zimbabwe — that have already co-sponsored the
draft resolution. In the same vein, I would like to invite
those that have yet to co-sponsor it to do so, given the
importance of this landmark draft resolution.

Ms. Schorr (United States of America): The
United States believes that education serves as a
foundation for wide-reaching and long-lasting impact,
particularly for the most vulnerable, and helps to put
all our societies on a more sustainable path across all
sectors of development. We are pleased to announce
that the United States Government has just released its
first strategy on international basic education, which
emphasizes our commitment to serving young people
in conflict and crisis, investing in both Governmentprovided and non-State schools, and focusing on
measurable learning outcomes for students.

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/73/L.39, entitled
“International Day of Education”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, and in addition to those delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have become
sponsors of draft resolution A/73/L.39: Afghanistan,
Andorra, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Canada,
the Central African Republic, China, Côte d’Ivoire,
Denmark, Egypt, Estonia, Ethiopia, Greece, India,
Indonesia, Israel, Lithuania, Malawi, the Maldives,
Malta, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Norway,
Panama, the Republic of Korea, Romania, the Russian
Federation, San Marino, South Sudan, the Sudan, Togo,
Turkey, Ukraine and Viet Nam.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/73/L.39?
Draft resolution
(resolution 73/25).

A/73/L.39

was

adopted

The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
delegations that wish to speak in explanation of position
10/12

We wish to call attention yet again to the important
points of clarification on language related to the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development that we made a
few minutes ago under agenda item 12 following the
adoption of resolution 73/24, entitled “Sport as an
enabler of sustainable development”.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position.
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 14.
Agenda item 131
Investigation into the conditions and circumstances
resulting in the tragic death of Dag Hammarskjöld
and of the members of the party accompanying him
The Acting President: In accordance with rule 70
of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly, I now
give the floor to Mr. Miguel Ferreira de Serpa Soares,
Under-Secretary-General for Legal Affairs and United
Nations Legal Counsel, to provide an oral briefing
on behalf of the Secretary-General, as mandated in
paragraph 7 of resolution 72/252, of 24 December 2017.
Mr. Ferreira de Serpa Soares (Office of Legal
Affairs): The Secretary-General regrets that he cannot
join the General Assembly today, as he is in Katowice
attending the Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. It
is therefore my pleasure to deliver this oral briefing on
his behalf.
18-40542

03/12/2018

In its resolution 72/252, the Assembly requested that
the Secretary-General provide the Assembly, before the
end of the main part of its seventy-third session, with
an oral briefing on any progress made in relation to the
investigation into the conditions and circumstances
resulting in the tragic death of former SecretaryGeneral Dag Hammarskjöld and the members of the
party accompanying him.
As an initial matter, I wish to recall that, pursuant
to resolution 72/252, in March, the Secretary-General
reappointed Mr. Mohamed Chande Othman as Eminent
Person to continue the Dag Hammarskjöld investigation.
In advance of the oral briefing, the Eminent Person
submitted to the Secretary-General an interim report
on progress in relation to the investigation.
Upon the Eminent Person’s reappointment
and pursuant to resolution 72/252, Mr. Othman
initially requested nine Member States to appoint an
independent and high-ranking official to conduct a
dedicated internal review of their intelligence, security
and defence archives to identify information that might
be of relevance to the Dag Hammarskjöld investigation.
The initial nine Member States to which requests
were made were Belgium, Canada, France, Germany,
the Russian Federation, South Africa, Sweden, the
United Kingdom and the United States. Out of the nine
Member States to which requests were made, Belgium,
Canada, France, Germany, the Russian Federation,
Sweden and the United States took action in response
to resolution 72/252 and the Eminent Person’s requests.
Since the establishment of improved cooperation
between those Member States and the Eminent Person,
new information has been received from certain
independent and high-ranking officials appointed by
Member States, as well as from other sources. That
information will be assessed by the Eminent Person for
its probative value, in accordance with his mandate.
A preliminary review indicates that the new
information, including that from intelligence, security
and defence archives, is of probative value in respect of
our knowledge of the context and surrounding events
of 1961, the presence of foreign paramilitary and
intelligence personnel in and around the Congo and
the capacity of armed forces present in and around the
region at that time.
In recent months, the Eminent Person has made
additional requests for the appointment of independent
and high-ranking officials to another five Member

A/73/PV.44

States, namely, Angola, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Portugal, Zambia and Zimbabwe. He has already
received notification from the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Zimbabwe of their appointments and
continues to follow up on those additional requests.
The Secretary-General wishes to express his
gratitude to Member States for their cooperation with
the Eminent Person and their willingness to provide
additional information. The Secretary-General also
wishes to remind Member States that may hold
information of the need to appoint independent and
high-ranking officials, or to make possible a full
review of their intelligence, security and defence
archives, consistent with paragraph 5 of resolution
72/252. In particular, the Secretary-General notes that
the Eminent Person calls on certain Member States to
appoint such officials, and he is considering how he can
assist in that process.
The Eminent Person appointed pursuant to
resolution 71/260 noted in his report of last year that
“the burden of proof has now shifted to Member States”
(A/71/1042, para. 21) to show that they have conducted a
full review of all records and archives in their custody or
possession, including those from intelligence, security
and defence archives. Indeed, the active participation
of Member States remains of the highest importance in
our shared search for the truth on this matter.
The Secretary-General reiterates his full personal
commitment to this matter and restates his gratitude
for the work done so far by Member States and the
Eminent Person. The Secretary-General recalls that it
is our solemn duty to pursue the full truth concerning
the conditions and circumstances resulting in the tragic
death of former Secretary-General Dag Hammarskjöld
and the members of the party accompanying him.
The Secretary-General looks forward to further
cooperation and engagement among Member States,
the Eminent Person and the Secretariat, with a view
to fully meeting the objectives set out by the General
Assembly in resolution 72/252. The interim report
of the Eminent Person will be available to interested
Member States following this briefing and, consistent
with resolution 72/252, the Eminent Person will submit
a final report to the Secretary-General in mid-2019.
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): Let me first
express my gratitude to the Secretary-General and the
Under-Secretary-General for Legal Affairs and Legal
Counsel for their strong commitment to, and continued

18-4054211/12

A/73/PV.44

engagement on, this matter. The Under-SecretaryGeneral’s presence here today signals to all of us the
determination of the United Nations leadership to
see this issue through to a conclusion. Let me also
express my sincere gratitude to the Eminent Person,
Judge Mohamed Chande Othman, and his team for
their tireless work on this matter, and to all Member
States that have collaborated on, and contributed to, the
investigation. Since 2015, Judge Othman has overseen
major progress in the investigation. We strongly believe
that we now have a unique opportunity to shed light on
what happened in Ndola on 17 September 1961.
We are pleased to learn today about the progress
made in the investigation since the reappointment of
Judge Othman, earlier this year. We look forward to
receiving his interim report in order to study the details
further. Let me particularly thank those Member States
that have appointed national investigators to conduct
dedicated reviews of their national archives to determine
whether additional relevant information exists.
Earlier this year, Sweden appointed Ambassador
Mathias Mossberg as special investigator to ensure
that all relevant information in the Swedish archives
has reached the United Nations investigation. We have
learned from the briefing today how important the

12/12

03/12/2018

findings of the national investigators are to driving the
investigation forward. Therefore, let me strongly urge
those countries that have been asked to but have yet to
appoint a national investigator to do so without further
delay. That was called for in resolution 72/252, which
was adopted by consensus 11 months ago in this very
Hall. The value of independent confirmation that all
relevant information has been shared with the United
Nations investigation cannot be underestimated.
Judge Othman has concluded that the burden of
proof has shifted to Member States to show that we
have all conducted full reviews of records and archives,
including those that remain classified. We must all
show, beyond any uncertainty, that we have done just
that. We owe it to the families of those who perished 57
years ago and to the Organization itself. We count on the
full cooperation of all Member States. It is our shared
responsibility to pursue the full truth in this matter.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this agenda item.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 131.
The meeting rose at 11.20 a.m.

18-40542
