320th

United Nations

PLENARY MEETING

GENERAL

ASSEMBLY

Tue,day, 12 December 1950~ at 10.45 a.m.

FIFTH SESSION
Flushing Meadol", [few York

OfJicial Records
CONTENTS

Page

Consideration of the various items on the agenda of the meeting. . . . . . . . . . .. 600
Question of the representation of China in the United Nations: membership
of the Special Committee .... ,....................................... 600
Administrative unions affecting Trust Territories: report of the Fourth
Committee (A/I642) ................•.........•......••.•••••••• 600
Information from Non:Self-Governing Territories: report of the Fourth
Committee (A/1638)
601
8

•

••

Postponement of the vote on the question of South West Africa

601

Draft rules for the calling of non-governmental conferences: report of the
Sixth Committee (A/1632)
602
Designation of non-member States to which a certified copy of the Revised
General Act for the Pacific Settlement of International Disputes shall
be communicated by the Secretary-General for the purpose of accession
to this act: report of the Sixth Committee (A/1633)................. 60~
Regulations to give effect to article Ill, section 8, of the Headquarters Agreement between the United Nations and the United States of America:
report of the Sixth Committee (A/1641)
602
0

••••••••

Registration and publication of treaties and international agreements: ~eports
of the Sixth Committee (A/1626) and the Fifth Committee (Ajl663) .. 602
Provision of a United Nations distinguishing ribbon or other insignia for
personnel participating in Korea in the defence of the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations: reports of the Sixth Committee (A/1631)
and the Fifth Committee (A/1664) ......................••.•...•.. 602
Report of the InternatioD<J.ll Law Commission on the work of its second session: reports of the Sixth Committee (A/1639) and the Fifth Committee

(AI 1648 and A,/1665)............................................. 6()4.

Report of the Economk and Social Council (chapters Il, III and IV) : report
of the Second Committee (A/1625) .............................•.. 604
Action to achieve and maintain full employment and economic stability:
reports of the Second Committee (A/1627) and the Fifth Committee
(Ajl666)
"
60S
\I

Postponement of the discussion on international control of atomic energy.. .. .... 60S
United Nations telecommunications system: i"eport of the Fifth Committee
(A/:i63S)
,....... 005
Headquarters of the United Nations: report of the Fifth Committee (A/1634). 60S
p,.esident: Mr. Nasrollah .ENTEZAM (Iran).

S99

A/PV.320

600

General Assembly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings

Consideration of the various items on the agenda
.
of the meeting
1. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
As you can see, our agenda for this meeting is very
heavy and we have very little time to deal with it. In
accordance with past procedure, I shall consult the
Assembly to determine whether it wishes to have a
discussion on the various items on the agenda of the
present meeting.
2. I shall not consult the Assembly on the twelfth
item [i.tem 26], which must in any event be discussed
in plenary meeting, nor on the twenty-second and
twenty-third items [items 32 and 21], which involve
elections and so do not require a debate.
It was decided unanimously not to discuss the first
PJJO items (items 33 and 34).
It was decided, by 12 votes to 3, Mt to discuss the
third item (item 35).
It was decided unanimously not to discuss any of the
other items (items 53, 51, 55, 54, 74, 52, 12, 27, 47, 36,
40, 43, 39, 38, 6i, 20, 30, 32 and 21) egeept the twelfth
(item 26).

taken after the luncheon recess, at our afternoon
meeting.
9. That is what I wished to ask the President.
10. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
There was no need to place thifl item once again on our
agenda; there had simply been a request for its postponement. Since, however, the representative of the
Soviet Union has requested that the discussion of the
question should be deferred until this aftemoon, I can
see no objection to complying with his request.
11. I wanted to submit to the Assembly the list of the
delegations which I propose, so that the representatives
may have time to con:~ider it.
12. If there is no objection, we shall therefore resume
the consideration of this question at the beginning of
our meeting this afternoon and come to a decision.
I t was so decided.
Admfnistrative unions aftecting T~'Ust Territories:
report of the Fourth Committee (A/1M2)

[Agenda it~"l1 33]
13. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Question of the representation of China in the
We shall now consider the first item on our agenda,
United Nations: membership of the Special
but before doing so I should like to inform the Assembly
Committ~
that I do not intend to call upon every rapporteur to
submit his report, unless he so requests. Generally
3. The FPESIDENT (translated from French):
speaking, such reports are self-explanatory.
Before putting the first ite.."l1 on our agenda to the vote,
we should settle a matter which has been deferred for a
14. I put to the vote the draft re~olution contained in
long time-the composition of the Committ'ee which is
the report of the Fourth Committee [A/1642].
to report to the Assembly on the questinn of the
The draft resolution was adopted by 45 'Votes to 5,
representation of China. Some time ago [305th meet'lJJith
1 abstention.
ing], I made a proposal in that connexion. A delegation
15. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
requested the postponement of the question. We must
now take a decision.
I call upon the representative of the Soviet Union, who
wishes
to explain his vote.
4. I therefore now submit to the Assembly the names
16. Mr. SOLDATOV (Union of Soviet Socialist
of the delegations which I propose should be elected as
Republics) (translated from Russian): Both in the
members of the Committee. They are the following:
Canada, Ecuador, India, Iraq, Mexico, Philippines,
Fourth Committee and in the General Assembly the
Poland.
USSR delegation opposed and voted against the draft
resolution which provided that the consideration of
S. A few days ago the Assembly was not certain that
the
question of administrative unions should be postit was ready to take a decision on my proposal. There
poned
until the sixth session of the General Assembly.
are two alternatives before us: either to vote on my
proposal or to hold a secret ballot.
17. The question of administrative unions is one of
the
important questions of the whole International
6. I would first ask the Assembly to come to a decision
Trusteeship System. The discussion of it in the Trusteeon the question whether it is prepared to vote· on my
ship
Council and the Fourth Committee during- the past
proposal.
few years has shown that a number of Administering
7. Mr. ARUTIUNIAN (Union of Soviet Socialist
Authorities-the United King-dom, Belgium, Australia
Republics) (translated from Russian): The question
and SOlne others-are pursuing in the Trust Territories
the President has raised has caught the General Assemunder their administration a policy designed to deprive
bly unprepared, since it was not included in our agenda
those Territories of their special status and to effect
for today. It is not, of course, a question which must
their annexation, by uniting them with their adjacent
necessarily be included in the agenda, but. delegations
colonies in the form of so-called "administrative
should have been given some indication that it would
unions".
come up for discussion this morning.
18. This policy is intended to consolidate the colonial
8. In view of the situation which·has arisen, I would
r.egime in the Trust Territories and is contrary to the
ask the President to postpone a decision on the question
Charter, Article 76 b of which requires the promotion
until our afternoon meeting. Delegations will then know
of the "political, economic, social and educational adthat a proposal has been made by the Presiident regardvancement of the inhabitants of the Trust Territories,
ing the composition of the Committee and will have an
and their progressive development towards self-governopportunity of thinking it over; a decision can then be ' ment or independence".

S20th Meeting-i2 December 1950
19. This policy of consolidating the colonial regime
in the Trust Territories by means of so-called "ad~
ministrative unions" is also contrary to the General
Assembly resolution of 18 November 1948 [resolution
224 (Ill)], which endorsed the Trusteeship Council's
view that an administrative union "must remain strictly
administrative in its nature and its scope, and that its
operation must not have the effect of creating any
conditions which will obstruct the separate development
of the Trust Territory, in the fields of political,
economic, social and educational advancement, as a
distinct entity".
20. As we mow, both in the General Assembly and in
the Trusteeship Council, the USSR delegation has
proposed the adoption of a recommendation to the
Administering Authorities to put an end to annexation
of Trust Territories by way of "administrative unions",
to establish in the Trust Territories legislative and
executive organs which would not be subordinate to any
organs established as a result of the unification of such
Territories with adjacent colonies, and to that end to
take the necessary legislative and other measures to
secure the participation of the indigenous population
in the legislative, executive and judicial organs.
21. Because of the opposition of the Administering
Authorities, however, the proposals of the Soviet Union
have not so far been adopted. Neither the Trusteeship
Council nor the General Assembly has as yet taken
the necessary measures to ensure strk~ compliance by
the Administering Authorities with the United Nations
Charter and with the General Assembly decisions on
the subject of administrative unions.

22.' In view of this, the USSR delegation pressed for a
discussion of the question of administrative unions at
the current session of the General Assembly and for
the adoption of the necessary decisions to secure the
accomplishment of the purposes of the Intemational
Trusteeship System as set forth in the United Nations
Charter. For the same reason, it voted against the
proposal for deferring the consideration of this question
until the sixth session of the General Assembly.

601

In favour: United States of America, Uruguay,
Yemen, Yugoslavia, Afghanistan, Brazil, Burma, Bye1orussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Chile, China, COlom~
bia, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Guatemala, Haiti, Iceland, India, Iran, Iraq, Israel,
Lebanon, Liberia, Mexico, Nicaragua, Pakistan,Paraguay, Philippines, Poland, Saudi Arabia, Syria, Thailand, Turkey, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
Against: United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northem Ireland, Australia, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Sweden,
Union of South Africa.
Abstaining: Venezuela, Argentina, Bolivia, Costa
Rica, Dominican Republic, France, Greece, Honduras,
Peru.
Draft resolution III was adopted by 37 flotes to 10,
with 9 abstentions.
25. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): A
rol1·call vote has also been requested on draft resolution IV.
A vote was taken by roll~call.
'''''''y
India, ha'fJing been drawn by lot by the P.-_sid8flf,
was called upon to vote first. .
In favour: Iran, Iraq, Lebanon, Mexico, Nicar~ '~,
Pakistan, Philippines, Poland, Saudi Arabia, Syria,
Thailand, Turkey, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of South Africa, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, Uruguay, Venezuela, Yemen, Afghanistan,
Argentina, Brazil, Bye10russian Soviet Socialist Republic, China, Colombia, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti.
Against: India, Israel, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northem Ireland, United States of lunerica, Australia, Belgium, Canada, Detl1t1ark, France.
Abstaining: Indonesia, Liberia, Paraguay, Peru,
Yugoslavia, Bolivia, Burma, Chile, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, Ethiopia, Honduras, Iceland.

Information from Non-SeH-GovernIDg Territories:
report of the Fourth, Committee (A/16S8)

Draft resolution IV was adopted by 32 flotes to 13,
with 13 abstentions.

[Agenda item 34]

Draft resolution V was adopted by 41 votes to none,
with 8 abstentic-ns.

23. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
am going to put to the vote, in tum, the draft resolu~
tions a~ring in the report of the Fourth Committee
[A/1638].
Draft resolution I was adopted by 50 votes to nOlle,
with 2 abstenliofis.
Draft resolution 11 was adopted by 49 votes to none,
with 4 abstentions.

24. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
A roll-call vote has been requested on draft resolution
Ill.
A vote was taken by roll-call.
The United Kingdom, hafJing been drawn by lot by
the President, was called upon 10 flot, first.
~;".

Postponement of the vote on the question of
South West Mriea
26. The PRESIDENT (translated from Pt-meA):
Some delegations have expressed a desire tfutt the vote
on the third item on our agenda should be postponed
until this aftemoon's meeting. Since an amendment has
been submitted, it is proper that the members of the
Assembly should have time to consider it.
27. If there is no objection, the question of South
West Africa will. be put to the vote this afternoon. I
shall ask the Assembly to decide that point.
. It was decided, by 35 flotesto none', with 14 ab". .
lions, to postpone the flote.
.

602

General Aesembly-Fifth Seseion-Plenary Meetings

Draft rulee fo... th...~ calling of non-governmental
confel"ences: rellort of the Sixth Committee
(Ajl632)
[Agenda item 53]
28. The PRESIDENT (translated from French) : I
put to the vote the draft resolution contained in the
report of the Sixth Committee [A/1632].
The draft resolution was adopted by 35 votes to 5,
with 2 abstentions.
Designation of non-member States to which a certified copy of the Revised General Act for the
Pacific Settlement of International Disputes
shall he communicated by the Secretary-General for the purpose of accession to this act:
report of the Sixth Committee (A/1633)
[Agenda item 51]
29. The PRESIDENT (translated from French) : I
put to the vote the draft resolution contained in the
report of the Sixth Committee [A/1633].
The draft resolution was adopted by 45 votes to]
tlone~ with 3 abstentions.
Regulations to give eRect to article ID, section
8, of the Headquarters Agreement between
the Uaited Nations and the United States of
America: report of the Sixth Committee

(A/IMl)
[Agenda item 55]
30. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
put to the vote the draft resolution contained in the
report of the Sixth Committee [A/1641].
The draft resolution was adopted by 47 votes to none.
Repstration and publication of treaties and international agreements: reports of the Sixth Committee (A/1626) and the Fifth Committee
(A/1663)
[Agenda item 54]
31. The PRESIDENT (translated from French) : I
put to the vote the draft resolution contained in the
report of the Sbr.th Committee [A/1626].
The draft resolution was adopted by 50 votes to none.
Provision of a United Nations distinguishing ribbOD or other insignia for personnel participating in Korea in the defence of the principles of
the Charter of the United Nations: reports of
the Sixth Committee (Aj1631) and the Fifth
Committee (A/1664)
[Agenda item 74]
32. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
put to the vote the draft resolution contained in the
report of the Sixth Committee [A/163.1].
The draft resolution was adopted by 38 votes to 5~
with 2 abste1dions.
33. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
call upon the representative of the Soviet Union, who
wishes to €2tplain this vote.

34. Mr. ROSHCHIN (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): The USSR delegation wishes to expalin why it voted against the Sixth
Committee's draft resolution on the provision of a
distinguishing ribbon or other insignia for personnel
participating in Korea allegedly in the defence of the
Charter of the United Nations.
35. It will be remembered that the delegation of the
Soviet Union voted [294th meeting] against including
this question in the agenda of the General Assembly,
considering it to be another attempt to com~it a flagrant
violation of the basic principles of the United Nations
Charter.
36. The aggressive war which the United States has
been waging against the Korean people for over five
months is once more described in this resolution as "repelling aggression" and "defence of the principles of the
Charter". This latest attempt to distort the true nature
of the events in Korea will be ;:a,S unsuccessful as all
those which have preceded it.
37. During the consideration of the Korean question
in the First Committee1 and in the General Assembly
[292nd to 294th meetings inclusive] at this session, the
USSR delegation and a number of other delegations
repeatedly cited numerous facts proving incontrovertibly that armed intervention had been undertaken by
the United States in Korea, an intervention constituting direct aggression against the Korean people, who
are fighting for their national independence and unification. Consequently there is no need to repeat these facts,
not one of which has been refuted.
38. As a ground for providing a United Nations
distinguishing ribbon or other insignia, the resolution
refers to· the .Security Council resolution of 7 July of
this year2 authorizing the so-called Unified Command
to use the flag of the United Nations. This reference
is of no value whatsoever, since the resolution of 7
July was illegal, as the USSR delegation has also repeatedly pointed out.
39. In reply to the Secretary-General's cablegram
transmitting the text of the resolution of 7 July, the
Government of the Soviet Union stated that "the adoption of this resolution [constituted] the same flagrant
violation of the United Nations Charter as the Security
Council resolution of 27 June on the Korean question".'
In th3t reply, the USSR Government further drew attention to the fact that the Security Council resolution
of 7 July was "directed towards the illegal use of the
United. Nations flag as a cloak for United States military operations in Ko' a", which were "a direct aggression by the United ~tates against the Korean people".
It added that all that gave "thp. Government of the
Soviet Union grounds for declaring that the Security
Council resolution of 7 July first, [was 1 illegal and,
secondly, [constituted] a direct act of assistance to
armed aggression against the Korean people".
40. No matter what efforts are made to distort the
truth, it is cl~r to everyone that it is the armed forces
of the United States and several other countries, and
not the armed forces of the United Nations, which are
1 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifth Session, First Committee, 346th to 353rd meetings inclUSive.
:2 See document 5/1588.
I See document S/1596/Rev.l.

320th Meeting-12 December 1950
taking part in the military operations in Korea, and' that
such participation in the United States aggression
against the Kor~an people is a flagrant violation of the
principles of the Charter.

41. In these circumstances, the adoption of the draft
resolution submitted by the Sixth Committee represents
another violation of the Charter and may lead to a
further decline in the authority of the United Nations
in the eyes of millions of ordinary people throughout
the world.
42. For :hese reasons, the USSR delegation voted
against that resolution.
43. Mr. DROHOJOWSKI (Poland): My delegation voted against the resolution for reasons which I
shall explain.
44. First, the majority in the Sixth Committee failed
to establish the right of the United Nations to create
any sort of decorations, ribbons or otherwise, and to
bestow them upon military or civilian personnel allegedly in the service of the United Nations." There is
not a single word in the Charter in support of the
opinion expressed by the majority in the Committee.
References to Article 10 and Article 11, paragraph 4,
are entirely irrelevant to the item under consideration.
The allegec! precedent of the seal and the flag of the
United Nations is far from convincing. Efforts to involve the authority of the Int~mational Court of Justice
must be discarded. The Intemational Court of Justice
stated only that the United Nations had the powers
necessary for the performance of its duties lS and to propose that decorations are necessary for the performance
of the duties of our Organization is too far-fetched as
well as undignified. My delegation maintains that the
right to bestow decorations belongs only to States and
governments.
45. Secondly, my delegation continues to believe that
in spite of arguments to the contrary, the intervention
in Korea was and is illegal. Th~ so-called resolutions of
25 June, 27 June and 7 July 19501l were illegally adopted
by several members of the Security Council in flagrant
violation of the Charter and with the sole purpose of
masking the armed intervention of the United States
Government in Korea. It would therefore be immoral,
in the opinion of my delegation, to reward those who
knowingly or unknowingly were and are the instrulJlents of aggression.
46. Thirdly, those engaged in the ranks of the forces
of the aggressors and those who have helped the aggressors are directly or indirectly responsible for atrocities in the form of the inhuman bombing of civilian
populations and of towns and viIIages, and of rape and
arson. To reward those people or their assistants for
such barbarous acts would be a form of approval of
such acts, whit:h are revolting to every fair-minded
human being.
"For the discussion on this subject in the Sixth Committee,
see Official Records of the Genera! Assembly, Fifth Session,
Sixth Committee, 247tl, meeting.
IS See Reparation fo, injuries suffered in the service of the
United Nations, Advisory OpinIon: I.C.I. Rel'G7ts 1949,
page 174.
e See Official Records of the Security Council, Fifth Year,
Nos. 15, 16 and 18.

603

47. Fourthly, the decision taken by the General As..
sembly on 20 October 1947 [resolution 167 (/1)]
clearly stipulates that the use of the flag is to be
regulated and its dignity protected. It has conse.quentlr
been decided that the fl~g must be flown bJT the Secretary-General only on United Nations buildings and
buildings in which United Nations commissions and
committees are housed. If, therefore, the flag' is to serve
exclusively for peaceful purposes, a decoration, whatever it might be, cannot serve any other purpose, mu~h
less any contrary purpose.
48. Fifthly, in the opinion of my deleg'tltion decorations cannot be awarded to those who have participated
or are participating in the intervention in Korea. TJ:oUlt
would be a reward to those who are waging war on a
foreign territory against those who are fighting on their
own soil for their native land and who are helping to
repel aggression. The troops of the aggressors in Korea
are not soldiers of the United Nations, for they have not
been sent in accordance with Article 4:~ of the Charter.
49. Lastly, the adoption of the resolution gives the
impression that certam individuals are to be rewarded
for their political beliefs or the beliefs of those who ordered them to participate in the intervention.
50. For the above reasons the Polish delegation voted
against the resolution. Its adoption was, in our estimation, illegal, immoral, uncalled for and untimely and,
furthermore, in the opinion of my delegation, will bring
discredit upon the Organization.
51. Mr. NOSEK (Czechoslovakia): The Czechoslovak delegation voted against the draft resolution submitted to the General Assembly by the Sixth Committee. By its'stand, the Czechoslovak delegation has r~
peatedly-ever since the opening of discussions in the
General Assembly - demonstrated its opposition, on
grounds of principle, to the Philippine proposal that a
United Natlons distinguishing ribbon or other insignia
should be provided for persons who have participated
in the events in Korea.
52. The representatives of Czechoslovakia, in the General Assembly [294th meeting], and in the Sixth Committee, and in the Fifth Committee'l submitted for consideration by the members of those bodies serious objections to the Philippine proposal and thoroughly explained their vote against it. The Czechoslovak representatives stressed the fact that the Philippine proposal was based on illegal resolutions of the Security
Council which were nothing but an attempt to disguise
United States aggression in Korea and to conceal
United States imperialistic aims in the Far East.
Further, the Czechoslovak representatives stated that
the Philippine proposal was an obvious violation of the
Charter, since It would confer upon the Secretary-Gen~
eral powers far exceeding those conferred upon him
by the Charter.
53. The text just adopted by the General Assembly
was approved by the Sixth Committee on 30 November
1950, Just a few days after hundreds of millions of
peace-loving peoples all over the world had enthusiastically welcomed the manifesto of the Second World Congress of the Partisans of Peace and its message to the
'1 See Official Reco'rds of the Gtneral Assembly, Fifth Ses-

$;'0", Fifth Committee, 278th meeting.

General As8embly-Fifth Se8lion-Plensry Meetings
604
--------------Report of the International Law Commillsion
United Nations. Allow me to quote, in connexilJn with
this resolution, article 6 of the mes~e of the 'Warsaw
congress to the United Nations [A/lo60] :

"Since all decent men, irrespective of their political
beliefs, regard the ruthl~ss mass extermination of the
civil population of Korea as 9. crime against mankind,
we ask that an authoritative international commission
should be called upon to investig~te the crimes which
have been committed in the Korean war and, in
particular, the question of General MacArthur's responsibility."

54. Allow me also to quote a few sentences from the
speech delivered to the Second World Congress of
the Partisans of Peace in Warsaw by the Korean
woman delegate Pal<: Den-ai:
"American aggressors who have suffered defeat
after defeat ha.ve indulged in barbarous reprisals
P.4gainst the Korean people and in criminal methods
of war-making. Under the United Nations flag the
American aggressors launched their barbarous and
terroristic air raids during which the helpless and
innocent inhabitants of Korean cities and villages)
have been massacred. The American Air Force detroyed entire living quarters; American bombs
poured upon thousands of Korean women and children, destroyed schools, theatres and cultural institutions. American airplanes malevolently bombed
Korean villages and hospital trains. American fliers
strafed and bombed Korean peasants working on
fields."
55. I should like to ask the President a question, if I
may. Can there be a greater argument against the resolution than this shattering testimony of the Korean
representative? I ask the Assembly how it is possible
to vote in favour of a resolution which provides for the
confelnngof distinguishing ribbons or other insignia
on those who have committed the inhuman crimes described by an eye-witness of the Korean people to the
World Peace Congress?
56. The resolution which has been adopted is directed
against hundreds of millions of peace-loving people all
over the world and against the Charter of the United
Nations. For this reason, my delegation voted against it.
57. Mr. COHEN (United States of America) : I wish
briefly to explain th~ reasons why the United States
voted for this resolution.
58. Forces not only of the United States but of many
other nations are fighting together in Korea under the
United Nations flag to support the rule of law in the
world. The very least we can do to show our appreciation of their deeds of valour and of their sacrifices is to
authorize the granting to them of the insignia of the
United Nations. It is the only war we can show our
appreciation of those who are wi111Dg to fight and die
~or the United Nations.
59. If we want peace in this world, we must show our
willingness to supp<>rt and to show our appreciation of
those who are willing to die in order to support the
rule of law in the world. Without law, there can be no
peac~. !f we want peace and if we are citing all the socaned peace conferences which are being held throughOt~t the world, let us show our willingtless to support
the law and the Charter of the United Nations.

OD

the work of its second session: repom of the
Sixth Committee (A/1639) and the Fifth Committee (A/l648 and A/16(5)
[Agenda item 52]
60. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
am going to put to the vote the draft resolutions contained in the report of the Sixth Committee [A/1639] ..
Draft resolution A was adopted by 45 flotlS to nonl~

with 6 abstentions.

61. The PRESIDENT (translated from French) : An
amendment [A/1640] has been submitted to draft resolution B by the following States: Argentina, Chile.
Colombia, Ct:ba, Dominican Republic, Egypt, India.
Iran, Lebanon, Mexico, Panama, Syria, Turkey, Uruguay, Venezue1a. A roll-call vote has been requested..

A vote was taken by roll-call•.
Greece, having been drawn by lot by the President~
was called v..pot:, to 'fIote first.
In favour: Greece, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Israel, Lebanon.
Liberia, Mexico, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Paraguay, Peru,
Saudi Arabia, Syria, Thailand, Turkey, United States
of America, Uruguay, Venezuela, Yemen, Yugoslavia,
Afghanistan, Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Burma, Chile,
China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Denmark, Dominican Repu.blic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador.
Agai1lJSt: New Zealand, Union of South Africa.
United King~om of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Australia.
Abstaining: Netherlands, Norway, Philippines, Poland, Sweden, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic.
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Belgium, Bye1orussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Canada, Czechoslovakia, France.

The amendment to draft resolution B was adopted
by 41 flotes to 4, with 12 abstentions.
Draft resolution B, JJS amended, was adopted by 41
votes to 2, with 10 abstentions.
Draft resolution C was adopted by 45 flotes 10 2~
with 5 abstentions.
Draft resolution D was adopted by 50 flOtlS to 11011'.
Draft resolution E was adopted by 42 flotes to IIOIl'~
with 6 abstentions.
Draft resolution F was adopted by 42 flotes tfi 1,.
with 5 abstentions.
Bell0rt of the Economic and Social CouueU
(chapters D, m and IV): report of theSecond Committee (A/1625)
[Agenda item 12]
62. The PRESIDENT (translated from French) : I
put to the vote the recommendation which appears in·
aragraph 4 of the report of the Second Committee
A/1625].

f

The ~ecommenda#on was adopted by 44 'Votes tonone, wdh 5 abstentions.

605

320th Meeting-12 December 1950

--------------------~-

63. M.r. ARUTIUNIAN (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian) : The USSR delegation abstained from voting 011 the recommendation
-concerning the report of the Economic and Social Cotmcll for reason~ which I shall proceed to e.xplain.
64. In connex.i.on with the consideration by the Gen-eral Assembly of the Economic and Social Council's report for the period 16 August 1949 to 16 August 1950,
tpe delegation of the Soviet Union wishes to state that
the Economic and Social Council was not empowered
to take decisions with the participation of the Kuomintang representative, who does not represent China, and
in the absence of the representatives of four members of
the Council-the USSR, China, Poland and Czechoslovakia. Such decisions of the Council, taken in violation of the United Nation~ Charter, are illegal.
-65. I would ask the President to take this statement
as applying to the whole report of the Economic and
Social Council. As the President is aware, di'fferent
-chapters of this report were examined by different Committees, and these Committees are presenting the results of their deliberations separately for the consideration of the General Assembly. In the end, a single
resolution will be adopted on the Economic and Social
.~ Council's report. We declare that we shall abstain from
voting on that occasion. In that connexion, we request
that the statement we have just made should be recorded as applying to the whole report of the Economic
and Social CouncU.
66. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The statement of the rc:presentative of the Soviet Union
will of course appear in the verbatim record. Moreover,
the report of the Second Committee already mentions,
in paragraph 5, the attitude adopted by the USSR
delegation and specifies the other delegations which
have adopted a similar attitude.

Action to achieve and maintain full employment
and economic stability: rep9rts of the Second
CoDllDittee (A/1627) and the Fifth Committee (Ajl666)
[Agenda item 27]
67. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
put to the vote the draft resolutions contained in the report of the Second Committee [A/1627].

Printed in U.S.A.

._-------------------

Draft resolution A was adopted by 43 'Votes to 5,
with 1 abstention.
Draft resolution B was adopted by 50 votes to none.
Draft resolution C was adopted by 51 'tIotes to none,
with 1 abstention.
Draft resolution D was adopted by 53 votes to none.
Postponement of tine discussion on international
control of atomic energy
68. The PRESIDENT (translated from French) : I
propose that the Assembly should not now embark
upon'a discussion of the twelfth item of our agenda,
namely, international control of atomic energy. It is a
very important question, and the members of the First
Committee wish to be present during the discussion.

69. I therefore propose that the Assembly should
postpone its discussion of this item and should pass on
to the thirteenth item of the agenda for this meeting.

It was so decided.
United Nations telecommunications system: report of the Fifth Committee (A/1635)
[Agenda item 47]
70. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
put the draft resolution contained ifl the report of the
Fifth Committee [A/1635] to the vote.

The draft resolution was adopted by 49 'Votes to none.
Headquarters of the United Nations: repOh of the
Fifth Committee (Aj163-i)
[Agenda item 36]
71. The PRESIDENT (translated from French) : I
put the draft resolution contained in the report of the
Fifth Committee [A/1634] to the vote.

The draft resolution was adopted by 46 flotes to none.
The meeting rose at 12.25 p.ffl.

A-40464-March 1951-3.609 ,
