S/PV.7962

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7962nd meeting

Thursday, 8 June 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Llorentty Solíz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Bolivia (Plurinational State of))

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Moustafa
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Lambertini
Mr. Kawamura
Mr. Sadykov
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Ciss
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison
Mrs. Carrión

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts
Fifth report of the Secretary-General on the threat posed by ISIL (Da’esh) to
international peace and security and the range of United Nations efforts in
support of Member States in countering the threat (S/2017/467)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-16188 (E)
*1716188*

S/PV.7962

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security caused
by terrorist acts
Fifth report of the Secretary-General on the
threat posed by ISIL (Da’esh) to international
peace and security and the range of
United Nations efforts in support of Member
States in countering the threat (S/2017/467)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2017/467, which contains the fifth report of
the Secretary-General on the threat posed by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh) to international
peace and security and the range of United Nations
efforts in support of Member States in countering the
threat.
I give the floor to Mr. Feltman.
Mr. Feltman: At the outset, I would like to reiterate,
on behalf of the Secretary-General, my solidarity with
the people and the Governments of Iraq, Afghanistan,
the United Kingdom, the Philippines, Egypt and Iran
following the recent terrorist attacks on their cities.
I call on all Member States to redouble their efforts
to strengthen international cooperation to address
terrorism and violent extremism, and bring those
responsible for these despicable attacks to justice.
I am grateful for this opportunity to brief the
Security Council on the fifth report of the SecretaryGeneral on the threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) (Da’esh) to international peace
and security and the range of United Nations efforts
in support of Member States in countering the threat
(S/2017/467).
The report was prepared with the input of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) and the Analytical Support and Sanctions
2/19

08/06/2017

Monitoring Team of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL (Da’esh),
Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities, and in close collaboration
with the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force
(CTITF), the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre
and other relevant entities.
Since January 2016, the four previous reports to
the Security Council on the threat posed by ISIL have
focused on the global landscape; South-East Asia;
Yemen and East Africa; Libya and Afghanistan; and
Europe, North Africa and West Africa. This fifth
report has taken a global approach, with a focus on the
financing of terrorism.
The report stresses that ISIL, despite continuous
military pressure, continues to resist, particularly
in Mosul and Raqqa. At the same time, ISIL has
reorganized its military structure, giving more power
to local commanders, and is more focused than ever
before on enabling and inspiring attacks outside of
conflict zones.
The threat from ISIL has been intensified by its
use of the Internet and social media to disseminate
propaganda online to a wide international audience.
Although the volume of such messages has declined
over the past 16 months, the threat persists as supporters
outside Syria and Iraq collect and redistribute
that propaganda.
In Europe, ISIL has used its online presence to
encourage supporters to mount attacks in their countries
of residence. That has led to multiple attacks, including
in Belgium, France, Germany, the Russian Federation,
Sweden, Turkey and the United Kingdom. Some attacks
were carried out by foreign terrorist fighter returnees,
while others were conducted by individuals who had not
travelled to conflict zones. Investigations demonstrate
that the perpetrators, despite being sometimes labelled
as lone actors, often received support or resources from
facilitators and, in a number of cases, were in direct
contact with ISIL enablers.
The report notes a decrease in the flow of foreign
terrorist fighters and in the overall number of ISIL
fighters during the past 16 months. However, returnees
and the relocation of fighters from the conflict zones
to other regions now present a considerable threat to
international security.
17-16188

08/06/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

S/PV.7962

Although ISIL’s financial situation has steadily
declined over the past 16 months, it continues to rely
chiefly on the same two revenue streams, namely, sales
of hydrocarbons and extortion/taxation, which may
amount to tens of millions of dollars per month. ISIL
has also drawn income from antiquities smuggling,
agricultural products, the sale of electricity, exploitation
of mineral resources such as phosphates and sulfuric
acid, external donations, kidnapping for ransom
and human trafficking. As ISIL loses its control on
population centres and its forces continue to dwindle,
it will also have substantially lower costs. Despite
growing liquidity shortages, ISIL may be able to stretch
further its existing resources.

and addressing the terrorist threat in the Lake Chad
basin region.

ISIL continues to fund affiliates, while urging
them to become more self-sufficient and proactive in
developing internal revenue streams. Money services,
including exchange houses and money couriers, continue
to be a preferred method for ISIL and its supporters to
move funds across borders. As Member States consider
efforts to counter ISIL financing, a key concern is
how to allow reconstruction and stabilization funds to
flow into liberated areas, including by reconnecting
international financial structures, without also enabling
ISIL remnants to abuse those structures and exploit that
new liquidity.

Secondly, Member States are making substantial
progress on adapting their legal and operational
frameworks to the requirements of Security Council
resolutions in order to address the terrorist financing
and foreign terrorist fighter threats. Notwithstanding
that, more work needs to be done with regard to the
implementation of those norms and mechanisms,
including in the context of terrorist asset-freezing,
cross-border movement of cash, and human rightscompliant travel measures to address the foreign
terrorist fighter threat.

With regard to ISIL’s evolving threat outside
of Syria and Iraq, ISIL-affiliated groups in North
Africa have shown considerable resilience and pose a
serious danger. For example, while ISIL in Libya has
been weakened after losing a significant portion of
the territory it controlled, its threat persists in Libya
and in neighbouring countries. In West Africa, ISIL
is challenging established Al-Qaida affiliates. In East
Africa, emerging ISIL affiliates operating in Puntland
and parts of southern Somalia compound the threat
posed by Al-Qaida’s affiliates. Al-Shabaab, ISIL in
Somalia and ISIL in Yemen represent an increasing
menace. ISIL in Afghanistan is shifting its focus to the
north of the country. The threat level has intensified
in South-East Asia, with ISIL directing more of its
attention, including its propaganda, at the region.
I welcome the efforts of the Council over the past
months to adopt resolutions on countering terrorist
narratives; protecting critical infrastructure from
terrorist attacks; stemming the destruction, looting
and smuggling of cultural heritage sites and artefacts,
as well as their illicit trade and trafficking carried out
by terrorist groups or in a context of armed conflict;

Member States, the United Nations and international,
regional and subregional organizations continue to
strengthen existing tools while also developing new
ones to address the rapidly evolving threat posed by
ISIL, including the threat posed by returning foreign
terrorist fighters. In that context, the report highlights
some points that deserve attention.
First, since the adoption of resolution 2253 (2015),
11 associated individuals have been listed in the ISIL
and Al-Qaida sanctions list. Among them, eight are
listed as financiers or financial facilitators.

Thirdly, the efforts of United Nations entities, as
well as those of other key actors, such as INTERPOL
and the Financial Action Task Force, have helped
strengthen regional and national frameworks to
counter terrorism financing and stem the flow of
foreign terrorist fighters. Other examples in the report
include CTED’s assessments and identification of good
practices, and the capacity-building initiatives of the
United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre, the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the United
Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research
Institute, including on the legal and judicial aspects of
terrorism financing, kidnapping for ransom and asset
freezing, and border security and management.
The CTITF office and CTED recently concluded the
second iteration of the Security Council-mandated allof-United Nations capacity-building implementation
plan to stem the flow of foreign terrorist fighters.
While the projects and the plan continue to address
the entire life-cycle of the foreign terrorist fighter
phenomenon, the updated version focuses on the tail
end of the life-cycle, with a number of projects related to
prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration to support
Member States in their efforts to address returnees. A

17-161883/19

S/PV.7962

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

number of projects have now been completed or are
well under way. The plan now includes 50 projects,
submitted by 13 entities, with a total budget of
$107 million over five years. Forty-one per cent of the
total budget is funded.
Fourthly, the United Nations is assisting Member
States and regions most at risk and where United
Nations support can bring added value. For example,
the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre, as
mandated by resolution 2195 (2015) and presidential
statement S/PRST/2015/24, and in collaboration with
other CTITF entities, is developing a regional all-ofUnited Nations integrated assistance for countering
terrorism initiative for the Group of Five (G-5) Sahel
countries, as well as a national initiative for Mali.
As mentioned in the report, the United Nations
engagement in the Sahel will evolve in response to
the continued threats posed by terrorism, violent
extremism, transnational organized crime and illicit
trans-border trafficking. Partnerships between the
United Nations system and regional stakeholders need
to be strengthened to effectively support G-5 countries’
efforts to fight terrorism and illicit trafficking. The
United Nations is renewing its engagement in the region,
following an independent review of the Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel.
Since the first report of the Secretary-General
pursuant to resolution 2253 (2015), ISIL and its affiliates
have remained under continuous military pressure and
experienced significant setbacks. At the same time, ISIL
is becoming an increasingly transnational threat, which
severely undermines international peace and security.
Consequently, the Secretary-General welcomes the
focus that the Security Council has put on this matter
and urges it to enhance multilateral cooperation to
address the threats and challenges he has reported on.
The Secretary-General considers countering
terrorism and preventing violent extremism to be one
of the highest priorities of the Organization. That is
why, in his report contained in documentA /71/858,
currently being considered by the General Assembly,
he recommends the establishment of a new office of
counter-terrorism headed by an Under-SecretaryGeneral. I am convinced that the new office will provide
stronger leadership to our counter-terrorism efforts,
enhance United Nations coordination and increase the
impact of our assistance to Member States.
4/19

08/06/2017

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Feltman for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Feltman for his briefing.
Defeating the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
(ISIS) is an urgent priority. As noted in the report
(S/2017/467) of the Secretary-General, the international
community has made notable progress in degrading
ISIS, but we have a long road ahead to ultimately defeat
it. Thanks to the efforts of the United States-led global
coalition, ISIS has not retaken any territory in Iraq and
Syria from coalition forces since May 2015. Overall,
with the support of the coalition, local ground forces
have liberated more than 4 million people — 2.7 million
in Iraq and 1.4 million in Syria. They have retaken more
than 55,000 square kilometres of territory from ISIS,
about 66 per cent of the populated territory ISIS once
held in Iraq, and 47 per cent of the populated territory it
once held in Syria. That is real progress.
While ISIS is losing territory and the ability
to fund itself, we must stay vigilant to counter the
evolving threat that it poses across the globe. We need
to maintain pressure on regional and local safehavens.
To advance that work, I should like to emphasize today
three lines of effort: first, cracking down on ISIS’s
finances; secondly, addressing the threat posed by its
foreign terrorist fighters; and thirdly, countering ISIS’s
terrorist messaging.
Isolating ISIS from the international financial
system remains essential. The United States, since
2014, has sanctioned eight ISIS branches, along
with more than 70 senior ISIS leaders, operatives,
financial facilitators, recruiters and affiliated moneyservice businesses. We have also proposed that the
Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL
(Da’esh), Al-Qaida,and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities designate senior ISIS leaders,
financiers, facilitators and affiliates for sanctions.
The Committee’s list must continually adapt to the
evolving threat, such as by designating money-service
businesses, as well as ISIS affiliates and their leaders.
When the Security Council starts its regular
review this month of the ISIS and Al-Qaida sanctions,
we will support any necessary modifications to make
17-16188

08/06/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

sure that the sanctions are adapted to this evolving
terrorist threat. Adapting our approach has been key to
preventing the flow of foreign terrorist fighters. This
has been and must continue to be a major part of our
effort to defeat ISIS. Through diplomatic engagement
and the global implementation of important Security
Council resolutions, such as resolution 2178 (2014), we
have seen significant progress, and that must continue.
INTERPOL has been essential to this effort. In the
past four years, there has been a thousand-fold increase
in the amount of information on foreign fighters shared
with INTERPOL. INTERPOL now hold the details of
more than 15,000 individuals provided by more than
60 countries, and that number continues to grow.
Strengthening this shared resource empowers global
law enforcement authorities, helping them to identify
and disrupt foreign terrorist fighter transit networks.
We are concerned as highlighted by the SecretaryGeneral in his report (S/2017/467), about the increasing
number of foreign terrorist fighters returning to their
countries of origin or going to third countries. Addressing
this issue requires a truly global approach, and that
should begin with improving information-sharing
and cooperation at the international, regional and
subregional levels. We all must get better at identifying
foreign fighter returnees. Also, all countries must enact
legislation, as required by resolution 2178 (2014), to
strengthen their ability to prosecute related crimes.
We also must respond to ISIS’s stepped up efforts
to radicalize and recruit others to violence. To do so, we
are working closely with our partners to combat ISIS’s
messaging and poisonous narrative. We commend the
work of the Global Coalition Communications Working
Group, which is led by the United States, the United
Arab Emirates and the United Kingdom. The Working
Group regularly brings together over 30 countries with
media and tech companies to share information and
strategies to counter violent extremist messages online
and present positive alternative narratives.
We also applaud private-sector efforts to police
ISIS-related content. Twitter has suspended more than
635,000 ISIS-related or ISIS-affiliated accounts since
2015. Facebook and YouTube are similarly removing
ISIS-related content from their platforms that violate
their terms of service. Meanwhile, Google is putting in
place new and innovative ideas to redirect those who
search for ISIS content to other content.

S/PV.7962

In closing, the United States, working in concert
with our partners, will take aggressive action to defeat
ISIS and adapt to changing threats. We call on the
United Nations to do the same, helping Member States
to strengthen their ability to counter ISIS, to adapt and
to prevent the next terrorist threat from emerging.
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): I should like
to thank Under-Secretary-General Feltman for his
comprehensive briefing. We also welcome the timely and
relevant report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/467),
which underscores a number of the significant features
of the threat we face.
The attacks over the past weeks in Manchester,
Kabul, Baghdad, London and Tehran are a stark
reminder, if one were needed, of the continued and
shared threat that we all face from terrorist groups.
The aim of these acts is clear — to create fear and
mistrust within communities and between countries.
The attackers targeted women and children in Baghdad
who were breaking their Ramadan fast with a treat of
ice cream. In Manchester, they targeted young children
seeing their favourite singer perform.
However, in the response to these most recent
attacks, we have seen the opposite of fear and division.
In fact, rather than fear, there were acts of courage and
incredible bravery on the part of ordinary individuals.
Rather than division, all sections of society across
many countries came together in solidarity for vigils
and marches that sent a message of unity and peace.
Since our last briefing in February (see S/PV.7877),
our capital, Stockholm, was the target of an attack
that is being investigated as a terrorist attack. The
perpetrator is suspected of being a sympathizer or
member of Da’esh. In response, thousands of Swedes
gathered in Stockholm’s central square to mourn the
dead, but also in a show of defiance — showing, as our
Prime Minister said, “that there is a strength in Sweden
that nobody can take away from us”.
Responding to the threat of terrorism requires
solidarity not only within countries, but also between
countries. In March, Sweden hosted the first Nordic
Regional Meeting of Security Services, which included
the participation of the Monitoring Team. As noted in
the trip report, the terrorist threat posed by Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant in the Nordic countries
is rising, in particular with regard to foreign terrorist
fighters returning from conflict zones.

17-161885/19

S/PV.7962

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

In order to counter and prevent the threat, we have
introduced legislation specifically targeting foreign
terrorist fighters and returnees. We have increased
national inter-agency cooperation and taken steps
to ensure that local actors are involved in the effort
to prevent terrorism and violent extremism. Sweden
now makes an assessment of each returnee, seeking to
identify individuals who are deemed to pose a risk or
suspected of crimes. If they are found to pose such a
risk, they are monitored, investigated and tried.
As part of our strong focus on prevention, we are
putting in place mechanisms aimed at safeguarding
vulnerable individuals, targeting in particular those at
risk of radicalization. In addition, rehabilitation and
support for defectors requires a broad spectrum of
interventions at all levels — municipal, regional and
national. We stress the importance of strengthening
the fight against impunity for terrorist acts, including
by holding the perpetrators, organizers and sponsors
of terrorist attacks responsible. All measures
against terrorism must be taken in compliance with
international law, including international human
rights law, international refugee law and international
humanitarian law.
We must all make every effort possible to cut
off the supply of financing to terrorist organizations.
Domestically, we have revised the offence of terrorist
financing in line with the updated international
standards mentioned in the report. Even though we
had successfully prosecuted and convicted individuals
for terrorist financing before these revisions, we
believe that the updated legislation will provide our
law enforcement authorities with new possibilities
for prosecuting terrorist financing, in line with
relevant Security Council resolutions and other
international obligations.
We agree that information-sharing on risks, as
stated in paragraphs 38 and 39 of the report, is an
essential tool in the fight against terrorist financing.
The more the authorities and the private sector know
about the means through which terrorists attempt to
finance their activities, the better our opportunities to
put an end to it. Our ultimate goal in this regard must be
to detect and stop attacks before they take place.
We encourage the Secretary-General to apply an
integrated gender perspective in future reports, as
mandated in resolution 2242 (2015). Among Swedish
foreign terrorist fighters, several have been women. We
6/19

08/06/2017

want to reiterate the multiple roles played by women
in relation to terrorism, including those of perpetrator,
supporter, facilitator, victim and preventer. Each of
these roles requires different approaches and strategies
as part of our fight against terrorism.
The attacks we have witnessed over the last three
weeks will not be the last. However, with a common
will and collective action future attacks need not be
inevitable. The message from those who have stood up
with courage and dignity in the face of terrorist attacks
is this: the resilience of the human spirit means that
those who seek to sow terror will never truly succeed.
Mrs. Carrión (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank the Deputy Secretary-General for his briefing
on the Secretary-General’s report on the evolution of
the Da’esh threat to international peace and security
(S/2017/467). The report also gives an account of the
United Nations activities in support of Member States
for the purposes of combating this threat.
The report refers to the geographical presence
of this terrorist group and its affiliates, its growing
transnational character, its constant adaptation to new
circumstances, and the variety of methods it uses to
perpetrate its attacks. It also refers to the initiatives
carried out by the United Nations, its Member States and
international, regional and subregional organizations
to deal with the rapid evolution of the threat posed
by Da’esh.
However, the recent attacks in Tehran, London,
Kabul, Adwa, Baghdad, Manila, Manchester and Paris
indicate that everything that is being done is not enough
to protect innocent civilians from the barbarism of
Da’esh and its affiliates. Uruguay views with concern
the systematic execution of terrorist acts and reaffirms
its absolute rejection of the use of violence against the
civilian population, the use of intimidation aimed at
disrupting the way of life of societies, shattering their
basic principles and values, and undermining freedom
and respect for the fundamental human rights that
underpin peaceful coexistence.
We are aware of and thankful for the unceasing
work of the United Nations through its bodies to prevent
and combat terrorism in various key areas, as well as
the work of many States and regional and subregional
organizations. We would like to highlight some elements
that we consider fundamental to succeeding in the fight
against terrorism, which the international community
must continue to strengthen and bring together.
17-16188

08/06/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The first of the elements is cooperation. More and
better cooperation is needed. There is no doubt that
cooperation and coordinated action in different areas
and levels are necessary to combat the multiple facets
of this complex terrorist phenomenon. This includes
greater interaction between public and private actors
and different sectors of civil society.
A second element we wish to mention is the
primary responsibility of States to combat terrorism
and the political will they must unambiguously have to
achieve that goal. The development of national counterterrorism strategies, while respecting the obligations
of the United Nations Charter and international
law, including international human rights law and
international humanitarian law, is a fundamental
aspect of this commitment, particularly in the countries
most concerned.
A third element to highlight is technical assistance.
It is essential that countries lacking the necessary
capacities to prevent or combat such a complex and
changing phenomenon, and particularly those most
affected, can receive technical and financial assistance.
A fourth and last element that we wish to emphasize
is prevention. In this regard, I would like to mention
the recent resolution 2354 (2017), on a comprehensive
international framework to counteract the discourse
of terrorist groups, reflecting an effort to prevent and
combat violent extremism that can lead to radicalization
and terrorism. This element is part of the struggle in
the field of ideas to which Uruguay attaches particular
importance, and for whose sake it is necessary to seek
and foster channels of dialogue between Governments
and various non-State actors.
In addition, promoting tolerance and peaceful
coexistence and bolstering respect for international
law, the principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
human rights and fundamental freedoms are the
responsibility of States as members of the international
community and contribute to preventing and combating
terrorism and violent extremism.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We should like to extend our gratitude to
Mr. Feltman for his detailed and comprehensive briefing.
Given present-day conditions, as the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) is morphing through
the changing situation on the ground, the SecretaryGeneral’s strategic analysis is especially important. The

S/PV.7962

group’s significant losses notwithstanding, members of
ISIL are managing to put up a military resistance in
Mosul and are holding their grip on Raqqa. The group
continues to spread its influence in various parts of
the world. Against this backdrop, we see an ongoing
reorganization of its structures and an adaptation to new
conditions in the conduct of hostilities. The leadership
of ISIL is curbing expenditures, funnelling money for
the procurement of weapons and making regional units
self-sufficient. ISIL continues to use the heinous and
inhumane tactic of terrorist attacks. Yesterday, in Iran,
tragedy struck once again. We extend our solidarity to
the people and the Government of Iran and other States
that have suffered at the hands of terrorists.
The Secretary-General’s latest report (S/2017/467)
on resolution 2253 (2015) contains an overall conclusion
that terrorist revenue is gradually dwindling on the
whole. At first glance, it might appear that Security
Council mechanisms to combat terrorism financing are
finally beginning to function at full capacity. However,
such an assessment would be far too optimistic.
Unfortunately, not all States conscientiously uphold
their obligations in this sphere. Clearly, it is past time
to stiffen the Security Council’s sanctions mechanisms
with a focus on the full financial and economic
asphyxiation of ISIL.
For the moment, the reduction or curbing of
revenue, as was repeatedly stressed by the SecretaryGeneral in the report, is chiefly attributable to
military losses incurred by terrorists, and yet the
sources of the expansion of ISIL’s budget have not
significantly changed with time. Key sources — trade
in hydrocarbons and extortion from populations in the
territories held by the terrorists — remain. According
to the information at our disposal, ISIL’s proceeds from
the sale of oil has dropped to between $12 million and
$20 million per month, which is nearly three times less
than what we saw in 2015. The achievement of such
results has been possible thanks to the effective actions
of the Russian Air Force during the counter-terrorism
campaign in Syria. According to recent independent
information, some 4,000 tankers have been destroyed,
which has put 206 oil- and gas-producing facilities out
of commission.
We have previously drawn the attention of the
sponsors of the report to the need to avoid selectivity
in assessing developments in the context of the struggle
against ISIL in Syria and Iraq. For reasons unknown,
the document fails to refer to the repeated liberation

17-161887/19

S/PV.7962

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

of Palmyra, but highlights the fact that Manbij was
liberated, which happened way back in the summer of
2016. The report further fails to mention information
about civilian casualties during the operations of the
so-called coalition to liberate Mosul.
We are closely tracking new sources of financing for
ISIL and sharing the relevant information with partners
abroad and specialized organizations, particularly the
Financial Action Task Force. For example, recently ISIL
is increasingly resorting to human organ trafficking.
It is also participating in the transport of refugees to
Europe and engaging in kidnapping for ransom.
In the struggle against terrorism financing, it is
important to work in regional formats, including the
Eurasian Group on Combating Money-Laundering and
the Financing of Terrorism. We welcome the fact that
the role of this organization is stressed in the report.
Terrorists have mastered all the nuances of Internet
and social-network use for the recruitment of fighters
and for the financing of their operations. We concur with
the conclusions of the report, namely, that the recent
terrorist attacks in Europe and Russia were the result
of the large-scale proliferation of ISIL propaganda via
online platforms. In a number of cases, instructions for
carrying out terrorist attacks were delivered through
mobile applications that used encryption.
An important step in countering terrorist
propaganda was the adoption of resolution 2354
(2017), which set forth a comprehensive international
framework in this realm. We consider the framework
to be a solid foundation for further expansion of
the Council’s mechanisms in countering terrorist
ideology, including by strengthening sanctions and law
enforcement measures.
Despite the rivalry among the pro-Al-Qaida
structures and the resistance of State bodies, ISIL
continues to penetrate deep into the African continent.
Recently, the level of the terrorist threat has risen in
South-East Asia, including as a result of the active
work of ISIL’s propaganda centres. We agree with the
assessment of the ISIL threat in northern Afghanistan,
contained in the report. Despite the enduring impressive
international presence in the country, we believe it is
premature to refer to the allegedly weakened influence
of Afghan factions of ISIL. This is especially true in
the light of the recent tragic events in Kabul.
8/19

08/06/2017

Evidently, the threat of the radicalization of the
population, the actions of lone-wolf fighters, the
creation of sleeper cells and full operational branches of
large terrorist organizations have affected every State.
It will be possible to stop the territorial spread of ISIL
is possible only if we establish a single counter-terrorist
front that defends our common values ​​enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank UnderSecretary-General Jeffrey Feltman for his briefing
just now.
At the outset, let me express my condolences
to the Government and the people of Iran following
the terrible attacks yesterday. In recent weeks, the
United Kingdom has stood firm through senseless
terrorist atrocities that targeted innocent people in
Manchester and London. These attacks show the worst
of humankind. They seek to intimidate us, to divide us
and to undermine our resolve. They fail every time. In
response, ordinary people show the best of humankind.
In the United Kingdom, we witnessed the men and
women of our emergency services, as well as members
of the public, show the greatest courage, even risking
their own lives to protect others from attack.
The Council has a duty now to show the same
courage, the same resolve as those ordinary men and
women in the face of such brutality. That is why the
United Kingdom is playing a leading role in the Global
Coalition to Counter Islamic State of Iraq and the
Levant. Our collective efforts are bearing fruit. Da’esh
has lost over two-thirds of the ground it once occupied
in Iraq and nearly half of that held in Syria. More than
2.5 million people have now been freed from their
tyrannical rule.
Make no mistake — we are defeating Da’esh on
the ground. In Iraq, Mosul will soon be liberated. The
Iraqi security forces, with the support of the Coalition,
have successfully isolated Da’esh to a final holdout in
west Mosul. Thanks to the valiant efforts of the Iraqi
security forces, people are already starting to return
to their homes in liberated areas. In Syria, operations
against Raqqa have now begun. It is only a matter of
time before Da’esh loses its so-called capital.
But, ultimately, degrading Da’esh effectively
will take time, patience and sustained effort from the
international community, including the Council. It is
an effort that goes far beyond military support and
that is why the Global Coalition is supporting the
17-16188

08/06/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Government of Iraq to restore security, governance and
basic services across Iraq. Helping people rebuild their
lives is the first step to winning the peace. To counter
the longer-term threat of Da’esh, Iraqis need political
reconciliation and reform, and in Syria, we need to
see a long-overdue national political settlement and a
transition to a Government for all Syrians.
The threat we face is changing. As we successfully
degrade Da’esh in Syria and Iraq, we have seen its
propaganda promote attacks elsewhere across the
world. We have seen individuals inspired by these calls
carryout careless attacks in the name of Da’esh. As it
loses its caliphates, we are seeing its fighters flee. We
must work together to deprive Da’esh of safe spaces
across the world, tackling the threat of foreign fighters
travelling to new havens or returning to home countries.
We must also bring an end to their havens online.
The pervasive spread of Islamist extremism online has
gone on for too long. As one of the leads on the counterDa’esh communications effort and, in partnership
with Coalition countries, the United Kingdom has
successfully diminished the quantity, but also the
quality and the impact of that hateful propaganda. We
are working with the industry so that, together, we take
a more proactive approach to terrorist and extremist
content online. Engagement so far has resulted in
companies strengthening their terms and conditions
and the announcement of a shared database that will
catalogue known terrorist content from the Internet.
We have also seen a public commitment from Google,
Facebook, Twitter and Microsoft to look at options
for establishing an international industry-led forum
focused on this issue. There is much more to be done, so
let us call on industry to do the right thing and remove
hateful extremist content from its platforms.

S/PV.7962

significant statement by Prime Minister Al Abadi
calling, at the end of March, for “the United Nations
Security Council to issue a resolution to prosecute
Da’esh’s crimes against civilians”. We believe the
United Kingdom’s proposal is the clear way forward
for the Council to answer Prime Minister Al Abadi’s
call and we look forward to working with our Iraqi
colleagues so that the proposal can be finalized as soon
as possible.
Mr. Kawamura (Japan): I would like to begin by
thanking Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman
for his detailed briefing. Japan takes note and pays
particular attention to the three points included in
the briefing: first, that the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) faces financial difficulty; secondly,
that the flow of foreign terrorist fighters to Iraq and
Syria has slowed; and, thirdly, that the number of ISIL
fighters has significantly decreased.
These are positive developments, however, since
the last report in February (S/2017/97), we have
witnessed a number of terrorist attacks throughout the
world, including in the United Kingdom, Afghanistan,
Australia, Egypt, Indonesia, the Philippines, France,
Sweden, Russia, Syria, Iraq and now in Iran. On this
occasion, I would like to express again my deepest
sympathy and condolences to the families of those
victims and all the affected Governments. Now, as the
Under-Secretary-General said, the threat posed by ISIL
is evolving globally. While ISIL is experiencing military
setbacks, foreign terrorist fighters are returning to their
countries of origin or relocating to other regions.

Finally, if we are to defeat Da’esh, we must hold it
to account for its actions, whether online or in the real
world, and seek justice for all Da’esh victims around the
world. That is why the United Kingdom has launched
a United Nations-led global campaign to bring Da’esh
to justice that will show that Da’esh cannot act with
impunity. It will act as a deterrent, both now and in
the future, and help to strengthen global security. Time
is of the essence. It is vital that we act now. We must
start gathering evidence before it is lost or destroyed on
the battlefield.

As the report (S/2017/467) notes, the threat level
has intensified in South-East Asia. Returnees to that
region continue to pose a significant concern, as they
could increase the military capabilities of local terrorist
networks. Relocators from Iraq and Syria, who are
not nationals of South-East Asian States, are another
source of concern, as they are most likely unknown to
the local authorities. We are alarmed by ISIL’s evolving
tactics, which include diversifying financial sources,
disseminating propaganda through social media,
exploiting encrypted applications and using broken
travel. We have heard reports of the use of bitcoin and
drones. ISIL employs those evolving tactics and we
must be responsive to the counterterrorism resolutions
and enhance our capabilities.

I therefore welcome the discussions we have had
with the Government of Iraq on this issue and the

The Council has recently adopted resolutions
on aviation security with resolution 2309 (2016);

17-161889/19

S/PV.7962

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

international judicial cooperation with resolution 2322
(2016); the protection of critical infrastructure with
resolution 2341 (2017); and counter-narratives with
resolution 2354 (2017). The adoption of those resolutions
is noteworthy, but their implementation is equally vital.
Japan has implemented them and has also developed
new measures. For example, we recently enacted laws
to prevent terrorists from using bitcoin and virtual
currencies, and to prohibit drones from flying over
critical facilities, embassies, and nuclear plants.
The terrorist threat is global, and we must extend
assistance to those in need as part of our collective
response. Japan, for example, provided $35 million
in March, mainly to South-East Asia, in the light of
the increasing threat in that region. Those funds will
be used to facilitate the implementation of relevant
resolutions through concrete projects, including
on advance passenger information, international
judicial cooperation, INTERPOL databases and
counter-propaganda.
Last week, a briefing was held by the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force on the Capacity
Building Implementation Plan for Countering the Flow
of Foreign Terrorist Fighters, which was established
by PRST/2015/11. While the plan was proposed
two years ago, only eight Member States and two
organizations have contributed thus far and only 41 per
cent of budgetary demands have been met. Japan has
contributed $12.5 million — that is, 12 per cent of the
total budget. Japan invites all Member States to consider
contributing to that plan as well, given the importance
of implementation and impact.
The new office of counter-terrorism is expected to
better coordinate our contributions and, consequently,
to enhance counter-terrorism measures in all Member
States. We must not lose that momentum. We must
unite to fight against ISIL and other terrorist groups by
implementing Council resolutions and developing our
counter-terrorism measures.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy): At the outset, I should
like to thank the Secretary-General for his clear and
exhaustive report (S/2017/467) and Under-SecretaryGeneral Jeffrey Feltman for his comprehensive
briefing. Some issues are worth highlighting for
today’s discussion.
Daily brutal violent acts affecting civilians
continue to occur. In that regard, we strongly condemn
the most recent terrorist attacks in Afghanistan, in
10/19

08/06/2017

London and Manchester of the United Kingdom, in the
Islamic Republic of Iran, in the Philippines, Iraq, Egypt
and France. It is a long list of attacks that ocurred in a
relatively short period of time and, while we want to
express our deepest condolences to the families of the
victims and our solidarity to the affected Governments,
we also want to highlight that this is the most evident
proof of the level of threat that we face.
We are also aware that the threat is increasing
via hate propaganda. Security Council resolution
2354 (2017) raised awareness within the international
community that strictly military counter-terrorism
operations or attempts to block terrorist revenue sources
are not enough. It is crucial that the credibility of their
distorted interpretation of religion be undermined by
effective and widely shared information and education
through solid and durable cooperation with the
private sector, internet service providers and social
media platforms.
We also recognize the importance of the private
sectors in fighting financial flows to the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). We therefore welcome
the report’s emphasis on ongoing efforts aimed at
strengthening multilateral frameworks to combat
the financing of terrorism in national legislation and
acknowledging the importance of providing the most
explosive countries with technical assistance and
training programmes.
We share the concern highlighted in the SecretaryGeneral’s report over trafficking in human beings
and cultural property as a means of funding terrorist
activities. Resolution 2347 (2017) on the illicit trade and
trafficking of cultural property, as well as resolution
2331 (2016), which condemns all forms of human
trafficking undertaken by Da’esh and other criminal
groups, are milestones of paramount importance in that
challenge. In that regard, I want to reiterate our strong
condemnation of the smuggling of migrants and human
trafficking that continues to endanger the lives of
thousands of people along the journey through Africa
and the Mediterranean Sea — made more appealing by
its possible contribution to the financing of terrorism. I
want to reiterate that in its ongoing efforts to combine
security and solidarity, my country remains committed
to rescuing and assisting the thousands of migrants who
reach our shore.
We acknowledge that Da’esh will long remain the
most serious threat to the security of our country. While
17-16188

08/06/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

its military defeat in Iraq and Syria is only a matter
of time, the international community must remain
vigilant by helping to stabilize liberated areas and by
countering and preventing the lingering global threats.
The stabilization of liberated areas in Iraq, together with
reforms and reconciliation are the strongest antidotes to
the resurgence of a terrorist threat.
As for Syria, only a genuine political transition can
bring about the conditions for completely uprooting
ISIL and other extremist and terrorist actors from
the country. In Libya, outstanding results have been
achieved in he fight against Da’esh. Nevertheless,
counter terrorism must remain a strategic priority.
In order to make it more effective, we continue to
support a solution based on a unified security force
under the control of the Presidency Council. That
will strengthen the legitimate institutional framework
underpinned by the Libyan Political Agreement and the
Security Council.
In time, Da’esh may turn into a more traditional
terrorist and criminal organization with unique appeal
and capabilities. The more the would-be caliphate
disappears from the map, the more it might try to raise
the profile through additional terrorist attacks in our
homeland. In that regard, we welcome the report’s
emphasis on returning and relocating foreign terrorist
fighters. Indeed, regardless of the size of flows, we share
the concern over the risk of foreign terrorist fighters
returning to their countries of origin or relocating to a
third country.
Still, with respect to returnees, we appreciate
the report’s focus on legal aspects — stressing the
centrality of the judicial response to terrorist criminal
activity and the respect for the rule of law. We therefore
believe that the most effective countries should receive
technical and legal assistance in a timely and effective
manner. Moreover, the experience gained in the Lake
Chad basin highlighted in resolution 2341 (2017)
should be considered a model for the larger-scale
development of a strategy for the return, rehabilitation
and reintegration of foreign terrorist fighters.
We welcome the report’s reference to a human
rights-compliant approach in countering Da’esh, which
must remain central to the international community’s
counter-terrorism strategy. We cannot expect to build
an effective and credible counter narrative without a
crystal-clear record of upholding human rights and
promoting fundamental freedoms, including when

S/PV.7962

it comes to monitoring terrorists’ exploitation of
information and communications technology.
Finally, international cooperation is crucial to
countering terrorism. The United Nations must continue
to play a leading role in fostering law enforcement and
judicial cooperation, including through its agencies
and offices, to strengthen responses to ISIL at the
regional and global levels. We therefore fully support
the proposal to establish a new counter terrorism
office in order to increase the effectiveness of United
Nations assistance to Member States through enhanced
coordination and streamlining. Likewise, Italy is
closely following the implementation of resolution
2322 (2016) adopted on 12 December. The 8 May Arria
Formula meeting, dedicated to the role of national
central authorities, represents one of Italy’s specific
contributions in that regard.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, let me warmly thank Jeffrey Feltman for his
illuminating presentation of the Secretary-General’s
report on the threat posed by Da’esh. I also convey, on
behalf of France, my most heartfelt condolences to all
of our partners who have suffered from the terrorist
attacks of the last two weeks.
Nothing can justify the targeting of civilian
populations and cowardly attacking innocent people,
as occurred in Manchester, Baghdad, Kabul, Manila,
London, and, yesterday, in Tehran — to cite just the
most recent examples. More than ever before, we must
be completely committed to fighting terrorism and
to curbing the barbarism of Da’esh. The President of
the French Republic, Mr. Emmanuel Macron, has
strongly reaffirmed that this fight is a priority and has
announced that France will step up its efforts in that
area, in particular by establishing a coordination unit
that would report directly to him.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2017/467) clearly
points out that Da’esh has continued to suffer major
defeats in Iraq and Syria, due in particular to the efforts
of the international coalition. We must continue to fight
Da’esh terrorists in their strongholds in Syria and Iraq
and prevent them from extending their control over
other areas in the Middle East, Libya and, importantly,
the Sahel. In that regard, the start of the battle to retake
Raqqa, which has led to the planning of attacks to be
carried out in France and Europe, is a major issue and a
top priority for my country.

17-1618811/19

S/PV.7962

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

But above and beyond our military efforts, I would
like to emphasize three areas in which we can and must
do better.
First of all, the fight against the financing of
terrorism must remain a top priority, in line with
resolution 2253 (2015). Although it cannot be denied
that Da’esh is facing financial difficulties, we should not
underestimate the ability of the group and its supporters
to adapt and diversify their sources of income. We must
therefore remain fully committed to drying up the
sources of Da’esh financing. That will require specific
and concerted efforts to monitor suspicious funds and
transactions, reduce anonymity, limit the use of cash
in the economy and strengthen cooperation among all
institutions concerned.
Secondly, the dynamic flows of foreign terrorist
fighters must compel us to constantly adapt our
legislation and systems. Apart from the need to
continue to prevent radicalization and stop people
from leaving, we must anticipate the risks posed by
those who might return and by fighters who decide to
remain in a third country. That would mean improving
our detection tools, strengthening information-sharing
and devising an appropriate response when fighters and
their entourage seek to return to our countries. It is an
extremely complex exercise because every situation is
different. In the case of France in particular, there are
many women and children to be taken into consideration.
We must be able to respond to that challenge; we are
working on to address it.

08/06/2017

Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to express
appreciation to Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey
Feltman for his briefing, which was based on the fifth
report of the Secretary-General on the threat posed
by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) to
international peace and security and the range of
United Nations efforts in support of Member States in
countering the threat (S/2017/467). We found the report
very comprehensive and informative.
ISIL has indeed been under continuous military
pressure, facing several setbacks on the battlefield,
but what remains of serious concern is the fact that the
group continues to inspire a range of attacks outside
of the conflict zone. Returnees and fighters who
relocated from conflict zones to other regions now pose
a considerable threat to international security. Let me
say in parenthesis that that has been a major problem
in our region for a very long time — long before it was
drawn to the attention of the Security Council.
With regard to East Africa, we already see ISIL
cells in Somalia. The report acknowledges emerging
ISIL affiliates operating in Puntland and in parts of
southern Somalia. That certainly complicates the
challenge of the terrorist threat posed by Al Qa’ida’s
affiliate Al-Shabaab, which remains a major threat
to the region and beyond, as the report has quite
rightly noted. There are also interesting reports by the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, which
reinforce those findings and provide useful insights.

Finally, we must continue and step up the fight
against ideas. Since terrorists use digital technology
to their advantage, we must also change the way we
respond. Combating Da’esh via the Internet is a new
element in our fight. We must therefore continue to have
frank discussions with major Internet groups on ways to
counter deadly Da’esh propaganda. Above and beyond
the commitment from Governments, the effectiveness
of our efforts also depends on the participation of
civil society. The contradictions espoused by terrorist
groups must be explained on the ground.

ISIL has found a foothold in North Africa in reaction
to the continuous pressure in Iraq and the Syrian Arab
Republic and has also become a source of concern
in that region. As Under-Secretary-General Feltman
stated, although ISIL in Libya has weakened after
losing a significant portion of the territory it controlled,
the threat persists in that country and the wider region.
It is impossible to state that the trajectory is promising.
The organization of Al Qa’ida in the Islamic Maghreb,
the Islamic State in the Greater Sahara and factions
of Al Qa’ida affiliates, such as Boko Haram and the
number of terrorist attacks attributed to them show how
ISIL is expanding in the wider region.

To counter those who wish to destroy our way of
life, freedom and democracy, let us all be resolute in
our multi-pronged fight, while maintaining respect for
our values and the law. That will show that the United
Nations is also engaged in the fight against terrorism
and Da’esh.

Restoring peace and stability in Libya, Mali and
the Lake Chad basin is indeed critical to denying ISIL
safe haven. What complicates the challenge in West
Africa and North Africa is the link between terrorist
groups and organized criminal networks involved
in trafficking, in particular of weapons and related

12/19

17-16188

08/06/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

material. That is why there should be renewed efforts to
develop concrete regional and international cooperation
to counter the threat posed by ISIL in those regions.
Enhancing the capacity of countries of the Lake
Chad basin region, will continue to be very significant
in countering ISIL and its affiliates operating in
the wider region. In that regard, we reiterate our
appreciation to the efforts of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force in assisting countries of
the region to develop a counter-terrorism strategy and
enhance their counter-terrorism capacity.
ISIL in Yemen continues to conduct deadly
extensive multi-pronged attacks. ISIL in Afghanistan
has also been trying to establish itself in a number of
areas. The rise of ISIL groups in South East Asia has
been of growing concern. The latest attack, in Tehran,
which we condemn most vehemently, underscores the
extent of the common danger that the world faces:
terrorist-financing risks, the threat posed by foreign
terrorist fighters and returnees, terrorist exploitation of
information and communication technologies and social
media and the internet. They are the new frontiers, as
the representative of France pointed out. Vulnerabilities
in certain sectors, including non-profit organizations
and money remitters, remain serious challenges.
Such a huge challenge ought to compel the United
Nations, Member States and regional, subregional
and international organizations to forge meaningful
cooperation, strengthen existing tools and develop new
ones to address the rapidly evolving threat posed by ISIL
and other terrorist organizations and their affiliates.
One thing cannot be denied, namely, the world has yet
to agree in a transparent manner on making the fight
against terror a common top priority. We are not there
yet. We should not kid ourselves on that point. Without
a doubt, the case at hand is one of not putting one’s
money where one’s mouth is.
In that connection, on 22 June, Ethiopia, together
with Italy, will organize an Arria Formula meeting on
the theme “Preventing terrorism and violent extremism
in the Horn of Africa — enhancing partnership for
regional efforts”. We hope that the meeting will
help enhance awareness about efforts being made
in the prevention of, and the fight against, terrorism
and violent extremism in the Horn of Africa and
strengthen cooperation and collaboration among the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the

S/PV.7962

United Nations and other partners. We look forward to
the members’ active participation.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-Genera Jeffrey Feltman for briefing
us on the findings of the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2017/467) on the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL). We are pleased that the Secretary-General has
resumed the practice of providing a comprehensive
review of this terrorist organization’s presence
throughout the world, which is important for a better
understanding of an evolving threat posed by ISIL and
its affiliates.
I join others in noting encouraging signs that
resolute international efforts have become detrimental
for ISIL. It is continually losing ground in Iraq and
Syria due to heightened military pressure. I want to
commend the Iraqi security forces and the international
counter-ISIL coalition for their efforts to bring the
liberation of Mosul to a successful conclusion. The
crackdown on the terrorist stronghold in Raqqa, Syria,
is the next decisive step towards ensuring the waning of
ISIL’s influence.
Ongoing problems in generating revenue have
forced ISIL to cut support to its affiliates, thereby
downscaling their abilities to expand their presence
and to carry out massive attacks. Their attempts to
move funds abroad open up opportunities for the
international community to further deplete its financial
resources by intercepting couriers and money transfers.
A decrease in the numbers of foreign terrorist fighters
travelling to Iraq and Syria and a diminished capability
by ISIL to control its fighters have become tendencies
that limit its manpower. Many States have started to
review their national counter-terrorism legislation,
including their respective strategies, the mobilization
of resources and the establishment of specialized
counter-terrorism units.
I would now also like to address a number of points
of particular concern for us.
On the evolution of the threat, recent terrorist attacks
across the world reveal a new trend, that is, to inspire
rather than send fighters to carry out impromptu attacks
in their own countries on behalf of ISIL. Such attacks
are extremely hard to prevent. It is known that ISIL has
established online groups to recruit and indoctrinate,
as well as to disseminate operational strategies through
private channels. How can we counter such threats?

17-1618813/19

S/PV.7962

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

08/06/2017

First, we can eliminate drivers fuelling
radicalization and by promoting social cohesion, which
will allows States to greatly complicate terrorist tasks.
Secondly, the development of counter-narratives will
curb terrorist recruiters’ efficiency in attracting new
followers. Thirdly, fostering close contacts with local
communities will go a long way in helping to identify
radicalized elements early and to take necessary actions
in order to disrupt terrorist plots.

address and resolve the root causes that instigated
ISIL’s creation in order to prevent its resurrection.

With regard to terrorist financing, the SecretaryGeneral’s report indicates that there has been a
significant decrease in ISIL’s revenues from the illicit
trade in hydrocarbons, largely due to military operations
targeting related infrastructure. Yet the smuggling of
natural resources continues and we lack information
on the overall effectiveness of neighbouring countries’
efforts to arrest vendors and identify buyers who
contribute to financing terrorist activities. We would
appreciate it if the Secretary-General could expand on
that issue in his next reports.

Recently, Egypt, Afghanistan, the United
Kingdom, France and Iran suffered terrorist attacks.
The attacks caused enormous civilian casualties
and significant property losses. Terrorism is a
common enemy of humankind and its impact goes
beyond borders. No country can respond to terrorism
singlehandedly or insulate itself from the scourge. The
international community should embrace the concept
of a community bound by a common destiny, identify
new trends and patterns in the evolution of terrorism,
enhance cooperation and work collectively to respond
to the threat.

As to returning foreign terrorist fighters, returnees
undoubtedly pose a real threat, as they possess lethal
skills and can put them to use with dire consequences.
Therefore, there is a growing need to ensure a wider
criminalization of foreign terrorist fighters and conduct
an exchange of evidence of their crimes. Otherwise,
they could be released and be free to travel. Another
worrying fact is that some States deport foreign terrorist
fighters to their countries of origin without informing
the latter.
Rapid information-sharing, especially of the
biometric data of foreign terrorist fighters, as well
as the effective use of respective Interpol databases,
should become a priority if we are to stem the flows
of such fighters. Their abuse of asylum systems also
constitutes a major problem at a time when the huge
waves of migrants arrive from conflict zones in order
to find shelter. It is time to take a more thorough look at
that very serious and, at the same time, human rightssensitive issue.
Recently, ISIL has suffered numerous setbacks
and defeats on the battlefield. However, we are still
far from completely eradicating ISIL. The terrorist
organization has demonstrated its ability to regenerate
and change shape, moving underground and resorting
to asymmetric attacks when it is weakened. Therefore,
the international community has to draw lessons from
this and develop a viable “day after” strategy that will
14/19

Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman for
his briefing.
China welcomes the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2017/467) on the threat of the Isalmic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) to international peace and security.

First, we must garner international consensus on
the fight against terrorism. Terrorism represents a
threat to humankind. The international community
should uphold unified standards, adopt a zero-tolerance
approach without any distinction. Regardless of a
terrorist’s location, their pretexts, which country they
are targeting or which tactics they use, terrorism must
be fought with resolve. International counter-terrorism
efforts must respect the sovereignty of the countries
concerned, which bear the primary responsibility of
fighting terrorism. Those efforts must also defer to
the leading role of the United Nations and the Security
Council and abide by the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. Terrorism shall not be
associated with any specific ethnicity or religion.
Secondly, we must eliminate breeding grounds of
terrorism. At present the major terrorist elements and
forces are entrenched in conflict zones, including Iraq
and Syria, benefiting from regional turmoil, launching
terrorist attacks in regions beyond conflict zones
and threatening regional and international peace and
security. The international community should address
regional hotspots with a heightened sense of urgency,
encourage the relevant parties to resolve regional
conflicts through political processes and dialogue,
maintain regional peace, stability and development,
and eradicate the causes of terrorism at an early date.
17-16188

08/06/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Thirdly, we must disrupt the terrorist transit
network. With continuous progress being made in
international counter-terrorism efforts, terrorist fighters
are travelling to or returning to other countries in the
relevant regions and beyond, seriously threatening the
security of countries of destination, transit and origin.
The countries concerned must enhance cooperation in
the fields of border control and law enforcement, share
information and intelligence, disrupt terrorist transit
networks and respond collectively to the threat posed
by returning terrorists.
Fourthly, we must cut off the financing channels for
terrorist activities. These are increasingly diversified
and include the plundering of natural resources;
narcotics and human trafficking; and the smuggling
of cultural relics, with the funds raised being used
for terrorist activities. The international community
must take countermeasures and implement the relevant
Security Council resolutions, including resolutions 2199
(2015) and 2253 (2015); enhance financial regulations
and enforcement cooperation; and crack down on all
forms of financing by terrorist organizations.
Fifthly, it is important to suppress the use of
the Internet by terrorist organizations. Terrorist
organizations are using the Internet and social media
as a platform to spread their violent and extremist
ideologies and to disseminate terrorist propaganda
as well as engage in financing, recruitment and the
incitement and planning of terrorist activities. All
States must fully implement the relevant Security
Council resolutions and enhance cyber legislation,
enforcement and regulation. The United Nations
should play a coordinating role in the international
community’s efforts to carry out pragmatic cooperation
and collectively crack down on the use of the Internet
for terrorist purposes.
China is an important member of the international
force against terrorism. In recent years China has
participated in meaningful ways in multilateral counterterrorism mechanisms, including the United Nations,
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and the Global
Counterterrorism Forum. China will continue to
participate and to promote multilateral and bilateral
counter-terrorism cooperation, enhance the sharing of
counter-terrorism intelligence, and provide counterterrorism supplies and capacity-building to developing
countries to the extent of our ability.

S/PV.7962

China stands ready to work with all countries
to respond collectively to the threat of terrorism and
violent extremism and to maintain international peace
and stability.
Mr. Awad (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I should like
to thank the Under-Secretary-General for his briefing.
The fifth report of the Secretary-General on the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) (S/2017/467)
covers many important aspects related to international
counter-terrorism efforts. It includes specific
proposals, but also reflects the existence of a number
of gaps that should be focused on in future. We call on
the Secretariat and the members of the Council to pay
attention to them.
Allow me to summarize these gaps through a
number of queries and observations.
First, paragraph 5 of the report notes that the flow
of foreign terrorist fighters from many regions to Iraq
and Syria has slowed and that the return and relocation
of foreign terrorist fighters from conflict zones to
other regions poses a threat to international security.
We would like to have greater elaboration and more
detail on these two points, in particular, how do foreign
terrorist fighters still manage to reach Syria and Iraq?
Which routes do they follow to get there, and how
do they go from Syria and Iraq to other countries or
regions? These are questions that should be answered.
Secondly, in the context of the problem of foreign
terrorist fighters, paragraph 48 mentions that transit
States are facing a challenge as they cannot detain,
prosecute or extradite suspected foreign terrorist
fighters on their territory in the absence of sufficient
legal grounds and admissible evidence, and that there is
therefore a risk that foreign terrorist fighters stopped in
transit States will remain free to travel to other places.
The question here is, how can the Security Council
address these security and legal gaps in its counterterrorism efforts? We look forward to receiving
specific proposals from the Secretary-General and the
Secretariat as soon as possible.
Thirdly, paragraph 6 of the report refers to the use
by ISIL of the Internet and social media for terrorist
purposes. There is also a general recommendation
in paragraph 61 on the importance of effectively
monitoring the exploitation by terrorists of information
and communications technologies. In this respect, there

17-1618815/19

S/PV.7962

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

should be specific recommendations to stem the flow of
terrorists and stop the capacity of terrorists to recruit.
Fourthly, the report also indicates that although
ISIL’s financial situation has steadily declined over
the past 16 months, it continues to rely on the same
two revenue streams, in particular hydrocarbons and
taxation. If ISIL is continuing to trade in hydrocarbons,
who is consuming this oil? What are the means of
moving oil from Syria and Iraq to the consumer or the
buyer? We would also like information on the nature of
financial transactions related to these activities.
Fifthly, pursuant to Security Council resolutions,
including resolutions 2161 (2014), 2199 (2015) and 2253
(2015), all Member States have an obligation to prevent
terrorists from benefiting, directly or indirectly, from
ransom payments or from political concessions. In that
vein, it is everywhere in the news that Qatar paid up
to $1 billion dollars to a terrorist group active in Iraq
in order to obtain the release of members of its royal
family who had been kidnapped and detained in Iraq by
that group while they were on a hunting trip. If proved
to be correct, that alleged violation of Security Council
resolutions will definitely have a negative bearing on
counter-terrorism efforts on the ground. It represents
clear support for terrorists. We therefore would like to
know the Secretariat’s view on the matter, namely, a
Da’esh-linked group gaining access to such a sum of
money at a time when efforts are being undertaken to
liberate Mosul. We also want to know how the Security
Council will respond to such flagrant violations of
its resolutions. We propose that the Council launch a
comprehensive investigation into the incident and other
similar incidents. We look forward to incorporating the
results of such investigations into the sixth report of the
Secretary-General on the efforts to counter Da’esh.
Finally, my delegation wishes to see greater
accuracy in the use of terms and concepts that have
been heard recently at the United Nations. One term
that has not appeared in our documents is “Islamic
extremism”. We hope that everyone realizes that there is
no such thing as Islamic extremism. Islam is a religion
that does not know extremism. There are individuals
who use religion — the religion of Islam, or any other
religion — as a cover for the terrorist ideology they
wish to espouse. We therefore believe that the Council
has taken a very important step in countering such
ideology through the adoption of resolution 2354 (2017)
and the Comprehensive International Framework to
Counter Terrorist Narratives.
16/19

08/06/2017

Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): Joining previous
speakers, I wish to offer Kazakhstan’s deepest
condolences to the Government and the people of Iran
for the horrific terrorist attack that took place in Tehran
on 7 June. We extend our sympathies to the bereaved
families of the victims and wish a speedy recovery to
the injured.
I thank the Bolivian presidency for convening
today’s briefing, and Secretary-General Guterres for
his comprehensive report (S/2017/467) on the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL/Da’esh), Al-Qaida
and their associates. I also wish to express appreciation
to Under-Secretary-General Feltman for his insightful
remarks. My delegation would like to make the
following observations and recommendations.
Terrorism today has become one of the main
threats to international peace and security. While the
military pressure in Syria and Iraq may have somewhat
reduced the strength and numbers of militants in
centralized locations and caused their financial
revenues to diminish, ISIL/Da’esh and Al-Qaida
have intensified their terrorist activities across the
world. The most recent terrorist acts have been as
widespread in Europe — Saint Petersburg, Stockholm,
London — as in Africa, with the attack in Alexandria,
in Asia, with the attacks in Kabul, Manila and Tehran,
and in Oceania, with the attack in Melbourne. They
have all caused unspeakable human suffering and
resulted in appallingly high losses of life.
Kazakhstan condemns terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations. We reiterate that all acts of
terrorism — wherever, whenever and by whomsoever
committed — are criminal and unjustifiable, regardless
of their motivation. We therefore call for rigorous
concerted action to control and prevent such brutal acts.
We call for the breaking up of terrorist networks and
the bringing to justice of the perpetrators, organizers,
financiers and sponsors of such violence.
We are seeing members of terrorist groups
relocating to the different parts of the world, including
to the Sahel region, South-East Asia and Afghanistan.
We are also seeing closer interaction and cooperation
among terrorist groups with different ideological
platforms. The recent tragic events show that, at an
increasing rate, foreign terrorist fighters are going from
hot spots to other States or returning to their homeland.
More challenging are the perpetrators who, without
ever leaving their home countries, have become self17-16188

08/06/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

radicalized as “lone wolves” or have made contact with
terrorist facilitators and have copied scenarios they
have found on the Internet.
We fully support Secretary-General Guterres’ vision
of giving priority to a preventive agenda and taking
comprehensive measures at international, regional and
national levels to prevent the dissemination of radical
ideology and thereby effectively counter terrorism. We
are convinced that the establishment of a single United
Nations structure for countering terrorism will give a
new impetus for a systematic approach and increase the
effectiveness of United Nations activities in this area.
In his policy address to the United Nations entitled
“Kazakhstan’s Concept and Vision on Sustaining Global
Partnerships for a Secure, Just and Prosperous World”,
dated 10 January 2017, the President of Kazakhstan, His
Excellency Mr. Nursultan A. Nazarbayev, underlined
that countering terrorism is one of the priority axes
of Kazakhstan’s membership in the Security Council.
He called for unity among Member States and the
establishment of a global anti-terrorist coalition under
the auspices of the United Nations.
Soon after the adoption of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in 2006, Central
Asia was the first region to develop a joint plan of action
for its implementation, which was a good model for
cooperation and one that could be applied in other parts
of the world. We have successfully completed phases I
and II of our plan of action and are going to launch phase
III at the High-level Dialogue on the Implementation of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
for Central Asia, to be held on 13 June in Ashgabat.
We are honoured to welcome the presence of SecretaryGeneral Guterres at that event. As of today, Kazakhstan
has donated $300,000 to support activities of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Centre in Central
Asia, which is more than 10 per cent of the funding
for the project. We are therefore both a sponsor of the
Strategy and the leading donor country in the region.
It is crucial to mobilize the United Nations
and all stakeholders, including intergovernmental
organizations and non-governmental organizations,
as well as international, regional and private banks, in
consolidating, integrating and exchanging information
on early-warning signals, financial intelligence,
movements of terrorists and the financing of terrorism.
Equally important is taking further comprehensive
measures to shut down the channels of illegal

S/PV.7962

transportation of hydrocarbons and the smuggling of
artefacts and other valuables from Syria and Iraq. It is
also crucially important to fully implement Security
Council sanctions resolutions and regimes.
To that end, inter-State cooperation is most
essential. We appreciate the noble efforts of the United
Nations system in that regard. Along with monitoring
progress on resolution 2253 (2015), it is equally
important to monitor progress in the implementation
of related resolutions, namely, resolution 2341 (2017),
on protecting critical infrastructure from terrorist
attacks, resolution 2347 (2017), on the destruction and
trafficking of cultural heritage by terrorist groups in
situations of armed conflicts, and resolution 2354
(2017), on countering extremist narratives.
We need to deter the increasing number of
sympathizers of terrorism, who are lured by false
propaganda utilizing sophisticated digital technologies
and social media. The challenge is not only to achieve a
true balance between the rights and duties of citizens, but
to halt such influences. The use of military action alone
will be ineffective. Through interpersonal interactions
and online communication, new revised and inspiring
messages must be presented to the younger generation.
That calls for working with parliamentarians, religious
leaders, educators, the private sector, civil society
and the media. Much work has to be done in families,
schools, communities and prisons, the latter being
a fertile environment for radicalization. Partnering
with deradicalized extremists, who after conversion
can become powerful allies and agents of change, will
improve public diplomacy.
Kazakhstan is fully committed to being a most
engaged partner in the multilateral action to combat
terrorism through the effective implementation of
resolution 2253 (2015).
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the
outset, allow me to commend the Bolivian presidency
for organizing this important meeting. I should also
like to thank the Under-Secretary-General for his
comprehensive briefing of the fifth report of the
Secretary-General on the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) (S/2017/467).
It appears that significant progress has been
achieved in the struggle against ISIL, in particular
in Iraq, Syria and Libya. That reflects the significant
efforts undertaken by Member States to contain the
terrorist threat with a view to ultimately stamping it

17-1618817/19

S/PV.7962

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

out. Clearly, the contribution of the United Nations
Secretariat to that progress has been decisive, thanks
in particular to the efforts of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) and of the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team
aimed at bolstering international cooperation in
counter-terrorism.
However, as is underscored in the report, the
challenges posed by international terrorism remain
concerning. That was tragically underscored in the
attacks that took place recently. The Senegalese
delegation would therefore like to reaffirm its firm
condemnation of the terrorist attacks that recently
took place through the world, in particular in London,
Kabul and Tehran. Those acts reveal the perpetrators’
enduring capacity to cause harm and only heighten our
concerns with regard to the consequences of the use
of international organized crime for the financing of
terrorist activity. It also reflects the degree to which
it is critical to implement resolution 2195 (2014) and
2347 (2017).
The persistence of the challenge of international
terrorism is a further reminder of the overriding need
to redouble efforts to counter the phenomenon of
foreign terrorist fighters, whose return poses a grave
threat to international peace and security, especially in
areas of conflict where the State is struggling to assert
its authority. The persistent challenge of terrorism
furthermore requires an urgent establishment of peace,
security and stability within countries and regions in
crises, which have become safe havens for terrorists.
With regard to the African continent, the situation
in Libya has been marked by a deadlock in the political
process, which, more than ever before, remains troubling
in the light of the threat being posed throughout the
Sahelo-Saharan strip. The same applies to the Lake
Chad basin, which remains unstable despite significant
progress reported in combating Boko Haram. However,
in Somalia, Al-Shabaab remains a major threat to peace
and security throughout the Horn of Africa.
All of that is to say that we must undertake even
greater efforts in countering terrorism financing, in
particular by seeking better cooperation with regard to
financial intelligence in counter-terrorism strategies. In
that regard, I welcome the cooperation of the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team with Senegal,
which has led to the holding, in Dakar in December
2016, of the second meeting of intelligence service
18/19

08/06/2017

directors of West Africa, Central Africa and North
Africa with a view to strengthening their coordination.
It is also critical to adopt reintegration strategies
for former foreign terrorist fighters in order to put an
end to the phenomenon of violent extremism, which is
a real phenomenon and exists even in prisons. In that
regard, the recent adoption by the Council of resolution
2354 (2017) is an important tool to stamp out extremist
rhetoric and discourse and a decisive step forward
in the right direction. Likewise, the joint briefing
(see S/PV.7936) held last month by the Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004)
is an important example of a synergy of action in a
context punctuated by the pressing need to step up
international cooperation to prevent and combat the
possession of weapons of mass destruction by terrorist
organizations, but also to ensure the protection of critical
infrastructure against terrorist attacks. In that regard,
I would like to reiterate Senegal’s firm condemnation
of the use of chemical weapons in Syria and recall the
need to conduct the necessary investigations in order to
ensure accountability for the perpetrators.
In conclusion, I commend the ongoing commitment
of States members of the Council to combat terrorism.
I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate the
firm determination of Senegal to remaining steadfastly
engaged in this common cause.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Plurinational State of Bolivia.
Bolivia wishes to thank Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs Jeffrey Feltman for his briefing on
the fifth report (S/2017/467) of the Secretary-General
on the threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL)/Da’esh to international peace and
security and the range of United Nations efforts in
support of Member States in countering the threat.
As I was listening, I heard many of us remembering
the areas that have been targets of terrorist attacks
in recent months: Berlin, Istanbul, Kabul, Baghdad,
Melbourne, Mogadishu, Saint Petersburg, Stockholm,
Alexandria, Manchester, Paris, Manila, London and
Tehran. Remembering the places in which hundreds of
people have lost their lives and others have been injured
reminds us of the fact that we are facing a global threat
that requires a global response. The briefing by UnderSecretary-General Feltman, which showed that ISIL
17-16188

08/06/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

has suffered setbacks in many areas of conflict, was
very timely.
Bolivia is increasingly alarmed about the new
ways in which ISIL/Da’esh is developing in terms of
how it is carrying out its attacks and the countries
in which it is doing so, above all with regard to
financing. We must remember that ISIL/Da’esh has
used its propaganda and information technology in
order to attract sympathizers and to mount attacks in
countries where it resides, focusing on methodologies
to develop improvised explosive devices. The finances
of Da’esh have been reduced somewhat, but they
have compensated by imposing additional taxes over
the populations it controls and via trafficking in
smuggled antiquities and agricultural products, selling
electricity, extracting minerals, “foreign donations”
and kidnapping for ransom and human trafficking, in
addition to selling hydrocarbons.
We also condemn the destruction of, and trafficking
in, cultural heritage — directly or indirectly — as well
as, among others, the destruction of archeological sites,
museums and libraries, which generates income for this
terrorist group’s recruitment and strengthening. It is all
the more worrying that the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
has documented cases of “selling, gifting and trading”
of women and children among fighters. We therefore
urge Council members to join efforts to combat that
human scourge.

S/PV.7962

We welcome the fact that United Nations Member
States and regional, subregional and international
organizations are continuing to develop and strengthen
new tools to improve the response to those rapidly
evolving threats from ISIL/Da’esh and from foreign
terrorist fighters. However, we believe that is not enough.
We urge that States provide adequate humanitarian
protection and assistance to refugees fleeing from
conflict zones, including support in connection with
the increase in migratory flows owing to the impact of
ISIL/Da’esh in such areas.
Finally, Bolivia supports the various initiatives put
forward at this meeting, in particular those relating to
cutting off financing for terrorism. In that connection,
we highlight the fact that there is a need to focus on
investigations into the use of financial safe havens
for the funding of terrorism. In addition, we should
take effective measures with regard to returning
foreign terrorist fighters, as well as on countering
terrorist propaganda.
At the same time, however, we think it is crucial
that we not forget some of the structural causes of
terrorism and the evolution, in this instance, of ISIL/
Da’esh. Interventionist and regime-change policies
are among the causes behind the wave of terror we are
experiencing in many countries today.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The meeting rose at 11.50 a.m.

17-1618819/19
