United Nations

A/RES/66/237

General Assembly

Distr.: General
9 February 2012

Sixty-sixth session
Agenda item 143

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 24 December 2011
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/66/628)]

66/237. Administration of justice at the United Nations
The General Assembly,
Recalling section XI of its resolution 55/258 of 14 June 2001, its resolutions
57/307 of 15 April 2003, 59/266 of 23 December 2004, 59/283 of 13 April 2005,
61/261 of 4 April 2007, 62/228 of 22 December 2007, 63/253 of 24 December 2008,
64/233 of 22 December 2009 and 65/251 of 24 December 2010, as well as its
decisions 63/531 of 11 December 2008 and 65/513 of 6 December 2010,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on administration of
justice at the United Nations 1 and on the activities of the Office of the United
Nations Ombudsman and Mediation Services, 2 the report of the Internal Justice
Council on administration of justice at the United Nations, 3 the letter dated
4 November 2011 from the President of the General Assembly to the Chair of the
Fifth Committee 4 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 5
1.
Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General on administration of
justice at the United Nations1 and on the activities of the Office of the United
Nations Ombudsman and Mediation Services;2
2.
Reaffirms its resolutions 61/261, 62/228, 63/253, 64/233 and 65/251
regarding the establishment of the new system of administration of justice;
3.
Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,5 subject to
the provisions of the present resolution;

_______________
1

A/66/275 and Corr.1.
A/66/224.
3
A/66/158.
4
A/C.5/66/9.
5
A/66/7/Add.6.
2

11-47304

*1147304*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/66/237

I
System of administration of justice
4.
Notes with appreciation the achievements produced since the inception
of the new system of administration of justice in regard to both the disposal of the
backlog and the addressing of new cases, despite the numerous difficulties faced
during the implementation of the new system of administration of justice;
Acknowledges the evolving nature of the new system of administration of
5.
justice and the need to carefully monitor its implementation to ensure that it remains
within the parameters set out by the General Assembly;
Stresses that all elements of the new system of administration of justice
6.
must work in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and the legal and
regulatory framework approved by the General Assembly;
Emphasizes the importance of the principle of judicial independence in
7.
the system of administration of justice;
8.
Reaffirms its decision, contained in paragraph 4 of resolution 61/261, to
establish a new, independent, transparent, professionalized, adequately resourced
and decentralized system of administration of justice consistent with the relevant
rules of international law and the principles of the rule of law and due process to
ensure respect for the rights and obligations of staff members and the accountability
of managers and staff members alike;
Also reaffirms that, in accordance with paragraph 28 of resolution
9.
63/253, the United Nations Dispute Tribunal and the United Nations Appeals
Tribunal shall not have any powers beyond those conferred under their respective
statutes; 6
10. Affirms that recourse to general principles of law and the Charter by the
Tribunals is to take place within the context of and consistent with their statutes and
the relevant General Assembly resolutions, regulations, rules and administrative
issuances;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to make every effort to institutionalize
good management practices in order to address the underlying factors that give rise
to disputes in the workplace;
12. Stresses the importance of ensuring access for all staff members to the
new system of administration of justice, regardless of their duty station;
13. Invites all who are involved in the implementation and functioning of the
system of administration of justice, including managers and staff members, to
recognize that the system of administration of justice has been made possible by
contributions from the Member States aiming to ensure that it has a positive impact
on staff-management relations and improves the performance of both staff and
managers;
14. Recalls paragraph 46 of its resolution 65/251 and paragraphs 247 to 293
of the report of the Secretary-General on administration of justice at the United
Nations,1 and requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly, for

_______________
6

2

Resolution 63/253, annexes I and II.

A/RES/66/237

consideration at the main part of its sixty-seventh session, an updated report on
issues relevant to its review of the statutes of the Tribunals;
II
Informal system
15. Recognizes that the informal system of administration of justice is an
efficient and effective option for staff who seek redress of grievances;
16. Reaffirms that the informal resolution of conflict is a crucial element of
the system of administration of justice, emphasizes that all possible use should be
made of the informal system in order to avoid unnecessary litigation, and in this
regard requests the Secretary-General to recommend to the General Assembly at its
sixty-seventh session additional measures to encourage recourse to informal
resolution of disputes and to avoid unnecessary litigation;
17. Takes note of the reference in paragraph 5 of the report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions5 to a “culture of litigation”,
endorses the remainder of the paragraph, and stresses the importance of developing
a culture of dialogue and amicable resolution of dispute through the informal
system;
18. Recalls paragraph 18 of its resolution 65/251 regarding the establishment
of a single integrated and decentralized Office of the Ombudsman for the United
Nations Secretariat, funds and programmes, and acknowledges that progress has
been made in this regard;
19. Requests the Secretary-General to work with the United Nations funds
and programmes in order to finalize, as early as possible, revised terms of reference
for the Office of the United Nations Ombudsman and Mediation Services that reflect
the responsibility of the United Nations Ombudsman for the oversight of the entire
Office and enhance the coordination among the three pillars of the Office, and to
submit to the General Assembly at the main part of its sixty-seventh session a report
thereon;
20. Recalls paragraph 29 of resolution 65/251, welcomes the information
provided informally by the Office of the United Nations Ombudsman and Mediation
Services on the financial and administrative implications resulting from settlements
reached through informal dispute resolution, and requests the Office to provide to
the General Assembly at its sixty-seventh session another informal briefing on such
implications;
21. Welcomes the recommendations made by the Office of the United
Nations Ombudsman and Mediation Services to address systemic and cross-cutting
issues, and requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at the
main part of its sixty-seventh session a report containing his views on the
recommendations;
22. Also welcomes the establishment, in 2010, of the seven regional offices
of the United Nations Ombudsman and Mediation Services in Bangkok, Geneva,
Nairobi, Santiago and Vienna and in the peacekeeping missions in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Sudan, and their initial positive impact;

3

A/RES/66/237

III
Formal system
23. Takes note of paragraph 7 of the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,5 and requests the Secretary-General to
explore all possible ways to bring about more coherent representation and efficient
use of resources, taking into account the specificities of representation of the
Secretary-General at the Tribunals, and to report thereon at the main part of its
sixty-seventh session;
24. Stresses the need for the construction of fully equipped courtrooms for
the Tribunals, and requests the Secretary-General to provide functional courtrooms
with adequate facilities, as a matter of urgency;
25. Emphasizes that the formal system of administration of justice must be
adequately resourced with regard to posts, travel, hearing/conference rooms,
videoconferencing, sound recording, communications systems and up-to-date
computer hardware and software;
26. Notes the important role played by the Office of Staff Legal Assistance in
providing legal assistance to staff members in an independent and impartial manner,
and also notes that the Office currently represents staff members in cases before the
Dispute Tribunal in New York, Geneva and Nairobi and before the Appeals
Tribunal;
27. Decides that, pending further consideration of this issue by the General
Assembly at its sixty-seventh session, the role of the Office of Staff Legal
Assistance shall continue to be that of assisting staff members and their volunteer
representatives in processing claims through the formal system of administration of
justice, including representation, within the financial parameters agreed upon in the
present resolution;
28. Also decides to revert, at its sixty-seventh session, to the issue of the
mandate, scope and functioning of the Office of Staff Legal Assistance, and in this
regard requests the Secretary-General to submit, after consultation with the Internal
Justice Council and other relevant bodies, a comprehensive report proposing
different options for the representation of staff members before the internal
Tribunals, taking into account all relevant resolutions and reports, including the
letters of the Sixth Committee to the Fifth Committee, and the relevant
recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions contained in its report, including a detailed proposal for a mandatory
staff-funded mechanism, reflecting, if necessary, the implications of the different
proposals, for consideration by both the Fifth Committee and the Sixth Committee,
in their respective capacities, at the sixty-seventh session;
29. Recalls article 2 of the statute of the United Nations Dispute Tribunal, 7
and affirms that an action instituted against the Secretary-General under the statute
is an action against the Secretary-General as the Chief Administrative Officer of the
United Nations, responsible for administrative decisions taken by or on behalf of the
Organization by staff appointed by the Secretary-General;

_______________
7

4

Ibid., annex I.

A/RES/66/237

30. Also recalls article 7 of the statute of the Dispute Tribunal and article 6
of the statute of the United Nations Appeals Tribunal, 8 and requests both Tribunals
to review their procedures with regard to the dismissal of manifestly inadmissible
cases;
31. Decides to amend article 7, paragraph 1 (c), of the statute of the Appeals
Tribunal to extend the deadline for filing appeals of Dispute Tribunal judgements
from 45 days to 60 days and to establish a 30-day deadline for filing appeals of
interlocutory orders;
32. Recalls paragraph 54 of resolution 62/228, and decides that the time limit
for completing management evaluations may be extended by the Dispute Tribunal
for a period of up to fifteen days in exceptional circumstances when both parties to
a dispute agree;
33. Also recalls paragraph 28 of resolution 63/253, reaffirms article 10,
paragraphs 5 (b) and 7, of the statute of the Dispute Tribunal, endorses the practice
under the previous United Nations Administrative Tribunal to limit awards in any
one case normally to a total of no more than two years net base salary for
compensation and in exceptional cases to no more than three years net base salary,
and reaffirms the requirement in article 10, paragraph 5 (b), that in all cases where
the Dispute Tribunal orders the payment of a compensation higher than two years
net pay, the Tribunal must provide clear and well-documented reasons for that
decision;
34. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the General Assembly at the
main part of its sixty-seventh session with a report on the practice of tribunals in
other international organizations and in Member States comparable to the Dispute
Tribunal and the Appeals Tribunal regarding the awarding of exemplary or punitive
damages, including their practice with regard to awards for moral damages,
emotional distress, procedural irregularities and violations of due process;
35. Recalls article 11, paragraph 3, of the statute of the Dispute Tribunal, and
affirms that judgements of the Dispute Tribunal, including judgements, orders or
rulings, imposing financial obligations on the Organization are not executable until
the expiry of the time provided for appeal in the statute of the Appeals Tribunal or,
if an appeal has been filed in accordance with the statute of the Appeals Tribunal,
until the Appeals Tribunal has completed action on such appeal in accordance with
articles 10 and 11 of its statute;
36. Also recalls article 7 of the statute of the Dispute Tribunal and article 6
of the statute of the Appeals Tribunal, and encourages the Tribunals to continue and
expand, as appropriate, their practice of consultation in the process for developing
amendments to their rules of procedure; 9
37. Further recalls section I, paragraph 5, of its resolution 53/221 of 7 April
1999, in which it underlined its full respect for the prerogatives and responsibilities
of the Secretary-General under the Charter, and reaffirms that the resolutions of the
General Assembly and the decisions of the International Civil Service Commission
are binding on the Secretary-General and on the Organization;

_______________
8
9

Ibid., annex II.
Resolution 64/119, annexes I and II.

5

A/RES/66/237

38. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at the
main part of its sixty-seventh session a report providing:
(a) A proposal for implementing the proposed mechanism for expedited
arbitration procedures for individual contractors and consultants provided in
annex II to the report of the Secretary-General on administration of justice,1
including the cost implications for various aspects of the proposal;
(b) An analysis of the policy and financial implications in the event that
individual contractors and consultants covered by the proposed expedited arbitration
procedures were to be permitted access to mediation under the informal system;
39. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at
the main part of its sixty-seventh session a report on access to the system of
administration of justice for different categories of non-staff personnel who are not
covered under the dispute resolution mechanism proposed in annex II of the report
on administration of justice;
40. Further requests the Secretary-General to include in the report requested
in paragraph 39 above information on measures to be made available with regard to
the informal and formal aspects of the system of administration of justice in order to
assist such non-staff personnel to address disputes that may arise;
41. Recalls paragraph 89 of the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, and requests the Secretary-General to
include in his report on administration of justice, to be submitted to the General
Assembly at its sixty-seventh session, information on the concrete measures taken to
enforce accountability in cases where contested decisions have resulted in awards of
compensation to staff;
IV
Financial implications and cost-sharing arrangements
42. Takes note of paragraphs 19 to 21 of the report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,5 decides to extend the
mandate for the three ad litem judges of the Dispute Tribunal for one year, subject to
review and possible extension for a further year, and also decides to approve, under
general temporary assistance, three Legal Officer (P-3), two General Service (Other
level) and one General Service (Local level) positions to support the ad litem judges
for the same period;
43. Requests the Secretary-General to make every effort to expedite the
finalization of an agreement on a cost-sharing arrangement for the totality of the
internal justice system and to report thereon, including on the expected
reimbursement of approximately 6.8 million United States dollars from the
participating United Nations entities, to the General Assembly at the main part of its
sixty-seventh session;
V
Other issues
44. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at
the main part of its sixty-seventh session a report providing proposals and analysis
for a mechanism for addressing possible misconduct of judges, as well as additional

6

A/RES/66/237

views or analysis with regard to the proposals contained in the reports of the
Secretary-General on administration of justice at the United Nations 10 and in the
reports of the Internal Justice Council, 11 as well as other proposals, including a
proposal for a new mechanism for addressing such misconduct, consisting of one
jurist from the highest judicial tribunal drawn from one Member State from each of
the five geographical regions appointed or elected by the General Assembly to serve
when and as needed;
45. Stresses that the Internal Justice Council can help to ensure
independence, professionalism and accountability in the system of administration of
justice, and requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Council with including the
views of both the Dispute Tribunal and the Appeals Tribunal in its annual reports;
46. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at the
main part of its sixty-seventh session, in consultation with the Internal Justice
Council and other relevant bodies, a report providing his recommendations and
analysis regarding the proposal in the report of the Council to the General Assembly
at its sixty-fifth session on a code of conduct for legal representation; 12
47. Also requests the Secretary-General to provide the reports requested in
paragraphs 14, 16, 19, 21, 23, 28, 34, 38, 39, 43, 44 and 46 above in a single
comprehensive report on administration of justice to be submitted to the General
Assembly at the main part of its sixty-seventh session;
48. Invites the Sixth Committee to consider the legal aspects of the report to
be submitted by the Secretary-General, without prejudice to the role of the Fifth
Committee as the Main Committee entrusted with responsibilities for administrative
and budgetary matters.
93rd plenary meeting
24 December 2011

_______________
10

A/63/314, paras. 73–79, and A/66/275 and Corr.1, paras. 55–60.
See A/65/304, para. 40, and A/66/158, para. 7.
12
See A/65/304, para. 41.
11

7
