S/PV.8260

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8260th meeting

Wednesday, 16 May 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Wronecka . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Poland)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Djédjé
M. Ndong Mba
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Skoog
Ms. Pierce
Ms. Eckels-Currie

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-14999 (E)
*1814999*

S/PV.8260

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.

The Israeli authorities claim that they were responding
to Iranian forces firing rockets from Syrian territory
at Israeli military targets in the occupied Syrian
Golan. Iran condemned the Israeli strikes and denied
those claims.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Syria, to participate in this meeting.
Mr. De Mistura is joining today’s meeting via
video-teleconference from Geneva.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. De Mistura.
Mr. De Mistura: When I last briefed the Security
Council on 9 April, it was at an emergency meeting (see
S/PV.8225). On that occasion, I warned of the threats
to regional and international peace and security arising
from developments in or related to Syria. I know that
today it is not an emergency meeting. However, the
circumstances of an emergency very much remain. I
do not need to remind members that tensions are high
and regional and international confrontations have
occurred several times. Allow me to highlight some
recent events since 9 April.
On 13 April, the United States, France and the
United Kingdom conducted missile strikes in response
to the allegations of the use of chemical weapons in
eastern Ghouta. Those countries say that the strikes
targeted three research and production facilities near
Damascus and Homs.
On 29 April, strikes were reported on Syrian
Government military facilities in Hamah and Aleppo.
Some media outlets attributed those strikes to Israel,
alleging that those killed included Iranian personnel.
Neither Israel nor Iran responded to those claims.
On 8 May, strikes were reported just south of
Damascus. Syrian State media attributed those strikes
to Israel. Israel did not confirm that claim. Israel then
said that it had detected “irregular Iranian activity” in
the occupied Golan, which it put on high alert.
Between 9 and 10 May, Israel carried out dozens
of strikes against presumed Iranian and Syrian
Government military targets across southern Syria.
2/12

16/05/2018

We are not is a position to independently verify
every aspect of those incidents. However, even an
incomplete picture shows the troubling trajectory
of the increasingly frequent and ever more intense
international confrontations over Syria, unprecedented
since 1973.
As the Security Council knows, the SecretaryGeneral has followed those developments with great
concern and called for restraint by all parties in order
to avoid any acts that could escalate the situation
and worsen the suffering of the Syrian people. The
Secretary-General stressed that the United Nations
has a
“duty to remind Member States that there is
an obligation, particularly when dealing with
matters of peace and security, to act consistently
with the Charter of the United Nations, and with
international law in general.” (S/PV.8233, p. 2)
On the issue of chemical weapons, let me again echo
the Secretary-General’s call for the Security Council to
“agree on a dedicated mechanism for ensuring
effective accountability for the use of chemical
weapons in Syria” (ibid.).
As the Council well knows, as of now, we await the
results of the ongoing investigation by the Fact-finding
Mission of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons following its visit to Douma, with
a report to be issued to States parties to the Chemical
Weapons Convention.
However, we have also seen worrying developments
elsewhere in Syria. Evacuations from eastern Ghouta
were similarly repeated in the eastern Qalamoun area,
southern Damascus and northern rural Homs.
First, on the military escalation, the pattern has
been one of incoming air strikes and artillery and
outgoing mortars and rockets towards Damascus. Then
there was a negotiation, followed by an agreement
for the evacuation of those civilians and fighters
unwilling to remain under Syrian Government
control or Russian Federation protection guarantees.
We have also seen similar evacuation agreements
18-14999

16/05/2018

The situation in the Middle East

being discussed in Idlib province but in a completely
different format — the reverse format. This time we
are talking about civilians and fighters in Governmentcontrolled areas, namely, Kafraya and Fo’ah, while
considering evacuations — beginning with medical
evacuations — following the three-year siege and
intermittent attacks from armed groups surrounding
that area.
Let me share with the Council a recurrent concern
that I know that all members have. If civilians and fighters
are simply funnelled into northern Syria — mostly into
Idlib — then that might only postpone another conflict
affecting many additional people, which I will discuss
later. Therefore, it is important to keep close watch
on future developments in Idlib province. Meanwhile,
civilians continue to pay a terrible price. To be precise,
110,000 people have been evacuated to north-western
Syria and Operation Euphrates Shield areas in the past
two months. Many of them are reportedly traumatized
and in urgent need of assistance and protection.
Humanitarian partners are overwhelmed and stretched
quite thin by the scale of those evacuations, but continue
to do their utmost to respond to the growing needs, with
the Council’s assistance.
Returning to the topic of Idlib, if a Ghouta
scenario were to play out there, the situation could be
six times worse, affecting 2.3 million people, half of
whom are already internally displaced and would have
nowhere else to go. But that is not purely a question
of the Syrians’ suffering. We fear that any substantial
escalation in Idlib, Dar’a or in the north-east might
also result in risks not only to Syrian civilians, but
also for international peace and security. As we know,
many of those areas contain external and international
forces. Conflict there might entail confrontations with
those forces, thereby leading us down a slippery slope
towards regional or potential international conflict.
Therefore, discussions at the international level on how
to prevent that and on de-escalation are needed, and,
although they are taking place, they also need to be
very intensive.
I was therefore very encouraged to see concrete
discussions on de-escalation when I attended the ninth
high-level Astana meeting yesterday, which covered
the issue of Idlib in particular, as the three guarantors
have a say and the means to avoid it. That round of
discussions in Astana saw constructive discussions
on how that might be achieved. While fully stressing
the need to respect Syria’s sovereignty, independence

S/PV. 8260

and territorial integrity, we saw at first-hand the
parties engage actively on how to avoid a worst-case
scenario in Idlib. Moreover, the working group, of
which the United Nations is a member and a proactive
supporter — as hundreds of thousands of people in
Syria expect of us — held its second meeting on the
release of detainees, abductees and bodies, and on
the identification of missing persons. The members
of the working group held constructive discussions
on practical and concrete steps to address that key
humanitarian issue. The guarantors informed us that
they have secured the parties’ support — which, if
confirmed, is good news — for the activities taking
place under the auspices of the working group, which is
a positive development. As it is a matter of preliminary
discussions, I hope that we will see progress with
regard to that complex issue at the working group’s next
meeting, which we understand will be held in Ankara.
De-escalation is indispensable, as the Syrians
themselves are telling us, but it is only one of the
ingredients necessary to move forward the political
process. We also need to overcome concrete challenges
to meaningfully follow through with the Geneva
process so as to implement resolution 2254 (2015). As
instructed by the Secretary-General, I have consulted
with a broad spectrum of relevant stakeholders and
proactively identified options for a meaningful
relaunch of the United Nations-facilitated Geneva
process. Over a period of two weeks, I conducted an
exhaustive tour of consultations with members of the
League of Arab States; representatives of Saudi Arabia,
Egypt, Jordan and Iraq; the European Union (EU)
High Representative; representatives of several key
European countries, Turkey, the Russian Federation
and the Islamic Republic of Iran; and all members of the
Council, during what I believe was a very productive
and useful retreat in Sweden; United States authorities
during my visit to meet with them in Washington, D.C.,
several days ago; and also the Syrian Government
and the opposition, with whom I had constructive
discussions on the sidelines of the Astana meeting over
the past two days. My deputy, Mr. Ramzy, was also in
the region this past weekend in continuous political
contact with regional stakeholders, and my chief of
political affairs, Mr. Robert Dann, is visting China
as we speak to exchange views with officials of that
important member of the Security Council.
What did I learn from that long tour? Not
surprisingly, I returned to Geneva with a mixed picture.

18-149993/12

S/PV.8260

The situation in the Middle East

Clearly, significant differences remain, but there is
also much common ground and interest on the need,
first, to de-escalate, secondly, to form a constitutional
committee under the auspices of the United Nations,
thirdly, to facilitate the establishment of a safe, calm and
neutral environment — leading to our shared goals in
the political process — and, fourthly, to respect Syria’s
sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence.
However, those commonalities risk getting glossed
over, especially in the absence of serious international
dialogue. I will say more on that later. During my tour,
my message to all was the need — now more than
ever — for robust, strong, proactive and urgent dialogue
and consensus at the international level to create the
minimum conditions necessary for a realistic and
credible political process. As we know, much water has
flowed under the bridge and much has happened since
resolution 2254 (2015) was adopted. We are therefore
becoming increasingly realistic and know that we need
a credible political process that takes into account the
current situation and does not forget resolution 2254
(2015).
As the Secretariat, we are not sitting idle in that
regard. We are assessing a number of creative options
to update, revive and advance the Geneva-based
political process. Let me state for the record that the
United Nations remains ever-mobilized and -ready to
work on the formation of a constitutional committee
in accordance with the final statement of the Syrian
National Dialogue Congress in Sochi. I therefore
welcome the intention of the Astana guarantors to
actively and regularly engage with the United Nations
in Geneva so as to see through a concrete follow-up
to the statement since its adoption three and a half
months ago.
I was also pleased to see a significant number of
Member States reaffirm the primacy of the United
Nations-led Geneva process, in general, and the need
for a constitutional committee working under United
Nations auspices, when I was at the EU-United Nations
Brussels conference from 24 to 25 April. Those at the
conference nearly unanimously reiterated the message
that the only solution to the crisis will be political and
that only such a political solution will pave the way for
reconstruction efforts. Also in Brussels, we saw the
entire United Nations system highlight the increasing
needs of millions of Syrians, including internally
displaced persons (IDPs) and neighbouring countries
hosting refugees.
4/12

16/05/2018

Let me also note the important contribution of
Syrian civil society in Brussels, in particular during a
side event organized by the EU and my own Office.
Those present did not shy away from debating with
one another constructively and intensively on complex
issues, such as transitional justice and sanctions. They
all demanded the release of all detainees, abductees and
missing persons. They all affirmed that any political
solution must protect the right of refugees and IDPs.
Despite their differences, Syrians — Syrian civil
society — displayed a genuine commitment to dialogue
and a spirit of negotiation that I hope can be replicated
in the formal negotiations.
In Brussels I also met with a group of Syrian
women activists who stressed that not enough has been
done to secure the direct participation of Syrian women
in the political process. I committed to translating our
collective commitment to that inclusion into concrete
measures, and I will count on the Council’s support to
keep that promise. For instance, in future intra-Syrian
talks, I will insist that the relevant number of seats be
reserved exclusively for Syrian women. When I am
criticized, I hope that the Council will support me. I
know it will not be popular, but it needs to be done.
Let me briefly touch on an issue that was raised
by the civil society in Brussels and by many Syrians
elsewhere who have been writing to us, that is, the
possible implications of the newly adopted Law No.
10. We are quite aware of the concerns surrounding
that law. We, as well as other United Nations partners,
are seeking clarifications on the law’s goals and
repercussions, especially for refugees and IDPs who do
not have access to legal documentation.
Let me conclude with two bottom lines.
First, de-escalation is critical between the Syrian
and international stakeholders, both regional and global.
We hope that the relevant players can re-establish some
overarching rules of the road in that regard. We stand
ready to facilitate such a discussion, with focused
support from the Council and key countries for the
good offices of the Secretary-General and myself.
Secondly, we must revive the political process in
terms of the constitutional committee, as well as in
terms of some initial steps towards the establishment
of a safe, calm and neutral environment. We stand
ready to facilitate discussions on both. Let me stress
that a critical component of either aspect of the political
process is active, continuous and positive United
18-14999

16/05/2018

The situation in the Middle East

Nations engagement with the Syrian parties. I repeat
once again that we stand ready, today as always, to
engage with the Syrian Government in Damascus. We
will also continue our contacts with the opposition and
Syrian civil society.
To unlock and lock those two aspects, careful
diplomacy is required more than ever — careful, but
proactive diplomacy, including at a high level. Hence,
we look with interest to the forthcoming visits to
Moscow and meetings of Chancellor Merkel and, later
on, President Macron with President Putin, which
undoubtedly will not avoid the issue of a political
process in Syria. The United Nations believes that
there is an urgent need for high-level diplomacy to
support de-escalation, avoid any miscalculation and
ensure a genuine communication system about a
sustainable end to the conflict. With the support of the
Secretary-General, we will increase our own efforts
to contribute to that endeavour, including by offering
further ideas and —if required, which we hope it will
be — bridging proposals.
The President: I thank Mr. De Mistura for
his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council who wish to make statements.
Ms. Eckels-Currie (United States of America):
Since this is my first opportunity to congratulate you
upon assuming the presidency, Madam President, I
would like to do so at this time. I also thank Staffan for
his briefing.
Last week the world witnessed a new and extremely
dangerous escalation in Syria. It should not surprise
anyone on the Security Council that Iran was responsible.
Iranian forces operating from Syrian territory launched
a rocket attack against Israeli citizens — citizens of
a sovereign State Member of the United Nations. The
United States strongly supports Israel’s right to act in
self-defence. Iran’s reckless and provocative acts last
week prove what we have been saying: wherever Iran
shows up in the Middle East, chaos follows. Last week’s
rocket attack against Israel is the latest in a pattern
of destabilizing behaviour that is a dire threat to the
region’s stability.
Iran’s rocket attack against Israel shows something
else too. It puts to bed any myths about why Iran is
present in Syria, or what its true objectives might be.
The fact is that Iran has installed offensive rocket

S/PV. 8260

and missile systems in Syria aimed at Israel. Iran has
introduced those threats that were not present in Syria
before the conflict; they are now. Iran, together with
Hizbullah and other militias, is taking advantage of
Syrian territory to establish bases and training camps.
They are moving ever closer to Israel. The United States
calls on Iran, Hizbullah and their other proxies to take
no further provocative steps. If they do, Iran will bear
full responsibility for its actions.
It is also important to emphasize that Iran’s actions
do not serve the interests of the Iranian or the Syrian
people. The Syrian people get no say in whether Iran
threatens war against Syria’s neighbours, but it is they
who have to live with the consequences.
All of us on the Security Council have an important
choice to make: we can stay quiet and watch as Iran
builds up the infrastructure to create another Hizbullah
in Syria, or we can speak up and take steps to put
real pressure on Iran to stop. For our part, the United
States refuses to stay quiet. Russia in particular has a
special responsibility here. Its troops are on the ground,
sometimes alongside Iran’s. Russia must know that
Iran’s provocative actions do nothing to help resolve
the war in Syria. Russia must know that Iran’s actions
do just the opposite. They only inflame, prolong and
widen the conflict.
We heard once again from Staffan today that there
has been very little progress on the political track. There
has been no progress at all in Geneva, or following
Russia’s own conferences in Astana and Sochi. Since
January, the United Nations was supposed assemble a
new constitution drafting committee that would help
kick off a new round of talks. The United Nations was
supposed to have the ability to choose which people
would serve on the committee, and the United Nations
was supposed to be empowered to facilitate those talks.
Instead, the Al-Assad regime has backtracked, stalled
and then refused to cooperate.
At the same time, the Syrian regime escalated its
brutal military campaign. It seized eastern Ghouta, at
the cost of thousands of lives and tens of thousands
displaced. It used chemical weapons in Douma. Just
yesterday, the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons Fact-finding Mission released
a report determining that chlorine was used during
attacks on 4 February in Saraqib.
As reported by the Fact-finding Mission, the facts
of that chemical-weapons attack bear the hallmarks

18-149995/12

S/PV.8260

The situation in the Middle East

of similar attacks conducted by the Al-Assad regime.
As we have said before, the United States assesses
that the Syrian regime has used chemical weapons
well over 50 times since the start of the civil war. The
Al-Assad regime, with Iran’s and Russia’s full support,
is choosing to pursue a military solution instead of a
political solution, and that goes against everything we
should stand for as the Security Council.
In the aftermath of eastern Ghouta, the need for a
real ceasefire could not be more obvious. Already, we
see the Al-Assad regime launching new attacks in Idlib
and the south-west. As Staffan noted, a Ghouta scenario
in Idlib would be six times worse than the horror we saw
in recent months in Ghouta. Air strikes in the southwest have tripled in the last month, even though that
area is part of a de-escalation zone. Russia is supposed
to be a sponsor of that zone. It must urgently meet its
commitments to prevent the regime from carrying out
attacks and stop Iranian militias from expanding their
foothold in the south.
Members of the Security Council — all of
us — must push the political process forward. There
is Council unity behind that goal. There is a clear
blueprint for a political solution in resolution 2254
(2015), which we adopted unanimously. We have to
send a clear message to the Al-Assad regime and its
backers: the end of the conflict can be reached only via
the United Nations-led political process. There must be
constitutional reform and free and fair elections under
United Nations supervision. If the Al-Assad regime
does not comply, we need to be prepared to impose real
costs on it for its years of defiance and the devastation
it has wrought in Syria. If we take those steps, we can
start to change the calculus of the Al-Assad regime
and its allies in Syria. We can show them that further
conflict is not in their interests and that it is time for
them to genuinely commit to a political solution. But
as we saw last week, the longer we wait, the greater the
risk of confrontation. Now is the time to act to reduce
tensions and address Iran’s designs in Syria. That is
how we can prevent further escalation and even worse
suffering. There is no time to waste.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. De Mistura for his briefing. We
can see that his personal participation in the meeting
on Syria in Astana enabled him to make it a substantive
one. We appreciated his call for active diplomacy, which
Russia has advocated for from the very beginning.
We continue to make significant efforts to facilitate a
6/12

16/05/2018

political settlement in Syria despite the undermining
effects of the aggressive action by the United States, the
United Kingdom and France in April against a number
of civilian structures in Syria. I discerned no sympathy
about what happened there in the statement by my United
States colleague, despite the fact that it was a blatant
breach of international law and did absolutely nothing
to advance any kind of a settlement. Furthermore, her
statement had an odd, confrontational tone that I felt
certainly did not correspond to the message that Mr. De
Mistura wanted to convey to all of us today, which is
that it will be important for diplomacy to function if
the peace that the Syrians have awaited for so long is to
finally be established on the ground.
Unlike some Security Council member States,
which prefer taking unilateral measures to finding
ways to solve problems, Russia is focusing on steps
to genuinely improve the situation on the ground and
advance the prospects for a political settlement. As
Mr. De Mistura already noted, the ninth meeting of the
participants in the Astana process concluded yesterday
in the capital of Kazakhstan, and the guarantors adopted
a joint statement. We are grateful to the leadership of
Kazakhstan for its steadfast support. The meeting in
Astana considered concrete measures for resolving
a number of political and humanitarian issues and
analysed the situation in the de-escalation zones, which
play a key role in maintaining the ceasefire regime,
reducing the level of violence and generally stabilizing
the situation in Syria. The importance was noted
of increasing efforts to help all Syrians and restore
normal civilian life and, to that end, of providing fast,
safe and unhindered humanitarian access and essential
humanitarian and medical assistance, and creating the
conditions needed to enable the safe and voluntary
return of refugees and internally displaced persons to
their homes, as well as people’s freedom of movement.
A second meeting was held of the working group on
the liberation of detainees and hostages to discuss the
handover of the bodies of the dead and the search for
missing persons, with the participation of experts from
the United Nations and the International Committee
of the Red Cross. The importance of continuing
joint efforts with the aim of building trust among
the conflicting parties in Syria was emphasized. The
Syrian Government declared its willingness to engage
with the working group and decided to appoint a special
representative on issues related to its work.
18-14999

16/05/2018

The situation in the Middle East

In line with the provisions of resolution 2254 (2015),
the meeting affirmed its determination to continuing to
promote a political settlement by helping to implement
the recommendations of the Syrian National Dialogue
Congress held in Sochi. The consultations with the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General and the Syrian
parties will continue, with a view to establishing
the conditions conducive to starting the work of a
constitutional committee in Geneva as soon as possible,
whose parameters will have to be agreed on by the
Syrians themselves. We will get nowhere without their
consensus, so there is no point in proposing artificial
frameworks for the process, especially if they are based
on provisional plans of some kind. Thanks to the Astana
process, we have succeeded in generating momentum
for a political process based on intra-Syrian talks
under the auspices of the United Nations, although, as
we have noted, the triple alliance’s aggression against
the Syrian Arab Republic has significantly limited the
room for manoeuvre in that regard.
Concerted efforts by the guarantor countries are
bringing us steadily closer to eliminating the presence
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), Jabhat
Al-Nusra and other terrorist groups altogether. The
recent situation in Syria has continued to be difficult.
The guarantor countries’ efforts are certainly not being
helped by provocative initiatives from external actors,
which merely strengthen radical sentiments among
groups opposing the legitimate Government and fuel
their reluctance to work for negotiated solutions.
In Damascus, the operation to liberate the southern
regions and suburbs of the capital from ISIL-affiliated
groups continues, but Yalda, Babila and Bayt Saham
are now fully under the Syrian authorities’ control
and civilian life there is returning. Russian specialists
are helping the Syrian authorities to restore civilian
infrastructure. Mines are being cleared, socially
significant facilities are being rebuilt and electricity
and water services are being restored. In eastern
Ghouta, some 65,000 residents previously evacuated
from the area have returned to their homes. However,
in some other regions where the Syrian Government
lacks access, the situation has continued to deteriorate.
That is especially true of the Rukban and Al-Tuwaihina
refugee camps, as well as the former ISIL capital,
Raqqa, where the humanitarian situation is disastrous.
Measures must be taken to rectify it without delay. The
solution is simple — restore Damascus’s sovereignty
over those territories as soon as possible.

S/PV. 8260

Government forces and Palestinian volunteers,
with aerial and artillery support, have continued to
combat fierce resistance from terrorist detachments in
the Palestinian refugee camp in Yarmouk. The militias
wounded several dozen civilians in mortar strikes on
residential areas in the north-east area of the camp. In
the past week, the territory held by the illegal armed
groups in Yarmouk has been significantly reduced.
The Syrian army’s assault on ISIL positions
in Deir ez-Zor province has also been ramped up.
ISIL’s adherents have incurred considerable losses in
manpower and equipment and have been driven out of
an area of about 1,500 square kilometres. A large-scale
operation to eliminate ISIL is being conducted in the
eastern part of Syria with the aim of completely defeating
the terrorists based in hard-to-reach desert areas, who
have been increasing their attacks on Government
forces in the Euphrates region and Homs province.
We will continue the difficult work of restoring
peace in Syria. Frankly, we are disturbed by some
international and regional actors’ disrespectful attitude
to the issue of Syrian sovereignty, of which we have
recently seen alarming manifestations. It is important
to understand that this will not help to normalize
the situation in Syria or the region as a whole. It
fuels the conflict and reduces the prospects for a
political settlement. For example, how can we be sure
that reckless and illegal actions similar to those that
occurred a month ago will not be repeated on some
other trumped-up pretext? The reckless conduct of a
number of international and regional players who claim
to have common sense has considerably slowed progress
regarding a settlement of the situation in Syria. If they
cannot or will not help us with that, they should at least
not interfere.
In conclusion, I would like to touch briefly on the
remarks by my American colleague. Basically, more
than half of her statement was about Iran, not Syria,
and Syria is the item on our agenda today, after all. I
would also like to ask the Americans some questions
we have about that. Before they blame Russia or Iran,
I would like to ask what the reason is for the presence
of United States forces in Syria and what their real
objective is. The territories under their control have
become grey areas where extremists of various stripes
and real terrorists roam freely. In particular, what is
going on with the several hundred ISIL followers who
are being held by forces loyal to the United States
under United States oversight in the region beyond the

18-149997/12

S/PV.8260

The situation in the Middle East

Euphrates? They are not being investigated, and nor are
they being returned to their countries of origin. We are
worried that ISIL will re-emerge in those areas when
the United States withdraws from them, which it must
do sooner or later.
In conclusion, I would like to once again assure
the Council of Russia’s willingness to support any
diplomatic efforts that can bring an end to the miseries of
the Syrian people and peace to that long-suffering land.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to begin by thanking Mr. De Mistura,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, for
his briefing. I appreciate his tireless efforts to find a
political solution to the conflict.
In recent weeks various members of the international
community have made tremendous efforts to restore
momentum in the political process. China welcomes the
latest round of Astana talks and its joint communiqué,
and salutes Russia, Kazakhstan, Turkey and Iran for
their efforts. We hope that this dialogue will continue
to play a positive role in helping to maintain a ceasefire
in Syria and advance the Geneva negotiations.
China has always maintained that a political
solution is the only possible option where the issue
of Syria is concerned, and that achieving that goal
will require efforts on the international, regional and
national fronts. First, the international community
should continue to give its support to the United
Nations, as the main channel for mediation, and to
Mr. De Mistura’s efforts to relaunch the Geneva
negotiations as soon as possible, on a basis of full
respect for Syria’s sovereignty, independence, unity
and territorial integrity and with a view to helping the
conflicting parties to engage in negotiations on political
governance, the Constitution, elections and counterterrorism. The Council should remain united in moving
the Syrian political process forward.
Secondly, the countries involved in the region
should take the country’s long-term interests and
stability into consideration and play a constructive role
in helping to find a political solution. China notes that
there have been attacks on targets inside Syria. We
hope that the parties concerned will remain calm, show
restraint and work together to maintain regional peace
and stability.
Thirdly, both the Syrian Government and the
opposition, based on concern for the future of their
8/12

16/05/2018

country and the fundamental interests of their people,
should proceed to participate in the Geneva negotiations
without preconditions, in accordance with the principle
of a dialogue that is Syrian-owned and -led, and on the
basis of resolution 2254 (2015), with a view to actively
engaging in gradual efforts to reach a settlement that is
acceptable to all the parties.
For its part, China has been working relentlessly to
find a solution. On 13 and 14 May, in the first instance
of such an event being held on Syria in China, we
hosted an international symposium in Shanghai on
the prospects for a political settlement to the Syrian
issue. It was attended by Xie Xiaoyan, China’s Special
Envoy for Syria, a representative of the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General, and the Special Envoys of the
United Kingdom and France for Syria, as well as experts
and scholars from many countries. Participants held
in-depth discussions on the prospects for a solution, the
factors bearing on a political settlement and the role
of the international community. Our Special Envoy
remains in close contact with the parties concerned
in his continuing efforts to help reach a solution.
Together with the rest of the international community,
China stands ready to continue to play a positive and
constructive role in finding a political solution to
the issue.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank the Special
Envoy for Syria, Mr. De Mistura, for his update, and we
were glad to hear some encouraging notes of optimism
in his briefing.
Despite the numerous problems on the humanitarian
and political fronts in Syria, Kazakhstan believes that it
is imperative to continue to promote a settlement of the
crisis while implementing resolution 2254 (2015). We
are glad that at their meetings held on 14 and 15 May in
Astana, the representatives of Syria’s Government and
opposition, along with those of the guarantor States,
unanimously confirmed the importance of continuing
the process. Among other issues, they addressed the
importance of increasing efforts to ensure compliance
with the various agreements reached during the
previous eight rounds of the Astana talks. On the other
hand, they also agreed that Geneva should remain the
main international platform from which to seek and
implement a political settlement of the Syrian crisis. It
will also be important to continue to support the aims
of the Astana talks and further Geneva negotiations,
while ultimately merging those important platforms
with the aim of achieving positive results.
18-14999

16/05/2018

The situation in the Middle East

We thank the Special Envoy for his consultations
with various Foreign Ministers at the recent summit of
the League of Arab States, as well as with Ms. Federica
Mogherini, the European Union’s High Representative
for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy. His high-level
meetings in Moscow, Tehran, Riyadh and Ankara,
as well as his consultations with several European
ministers and senior representatives of the United
States, are also commendable. We are encouraged by
his summary today of his meetings and the outcomes of
the Astana process, and we note his hopes for progress
and his readiness to increase his own efforts and those
of several of the principal stakeholders to revive the
political process.
We can all see that de-confliction and the
precautionary measures to safeguard protected sites
under humanitarian law are working. So far this
year, 500 additional sites have been de-conflicted, as
the process is known. Their coordinates have been
voluntarily submitted through the United Nations, and
today the total number of sites stands at 661.
We are hearing a number of continuing questions
and concerns about the outlook for Idlib, which should
certainly be our top priority, simply because it has
such a large population of vulnerable ordinary citizens.
We agree with Mr. De Mistura that since Idlib is six
times larger than eastern Ghouta, and therefore has
six times more civilian residents, it is in an extremely
vulnerable position. We cannot afford a war in Idlib
and we therefore call on the main stakeholders with an
influence on the conflicting parties to hold negotiations
at the national and local levels and in the wider region
in order to mitigate the potential tensions.
We are impressed by the courageous stance of and
the sacrifices made by the United Nations, the Red
Crescent, the International Committee of the Red Cross
and the Norwegian Refugee Council, which are serving
under the most challenging circumstances.

S/PV. 8260

who should begin to shape the future political system
of the Syrian State, with the necessary legislative
reforms, its territorial and administrative structure, and
presidential and parliamentary elections, in accordance
with resolution 2254 (2015).
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We express our gratitude
for the briefing that we heard from Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Syria, to whom we reiterate our support in the
discharge of his duties.
Once again we cannot but express our sorrow at the
fact that this conflict has gone on for six years now and
we are still witnessing the ongoing siege and violence
suffered by the Syrian people, mainly children, who, in
addition to living with the psychological aftermath of
the situation, are also in urgent need of humanitarian
assistance. We deplore any act of violence that puts
human lives at risk and therefore call for an end to
the violence and urge the parties to refrain from any
hostile, provocative or unilateral actions, in order to
prevent any further suffering of the Syrian people and
any further destabilization of the region.
We welcome the holding of the summit of the three
ceasefire guarantors in Ankara, Turkey, in March. We
will be focusing closely on the next summit, which
will be sponsored by the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Likewise, we welcome the recent Astana meeting. We
deem its outcome positive, as were the agreements
reached one year ago exactly, when the important
de-escalation zones were established. We believe that
that international initiative has served to reduce the
level of violence and has facilitated, and will continue
to facilitate, the path to peace and stability in Syria.

To conclude, we also hope that the Brussels
Conference, held on 24 and 25 April, will help to
generate conditions conducive to the peaceful resolution
of the Syrian crisis.

We therefore call for greater coordination among
the local authorities within the de-escalation zones,
humanitarian agencies and the Syrian Government,
which will make it possible to improve the living
conditions of the local population, with a view to
contributing to international efforts to end the conflict
in Syria.

Finally, we emphasize once again that the most
important condition for the settlement of the Syrian
crisis is a political process, through direct dialogue and
the use of confidence-building measures among the
parties, without which there can be no lasting results.
We should not forget that it is the Syrians themselves

We call once again for efforts to continue with
respect to the full implementation of resolution 2401
(2018), so as to ensure safe, sustained and unhindered
humanitarian access to all those who require it. The
protection of the civilian population and civilian
infrastructure must also be a priority within the

18-149999/12

S/PV.8260

The situation in the Middle East

16/05/2018

framework of respect for international law and
international humanitarian law.

independence and territorial integrity, without any
external pressure or interference.

We deem imperative the voluntary return of
internally displaced persons in a safe and dignified
manner, as soon as the situation permits. For that to
happen, demining will be vital in those areas where it
is necessary. We would urge that the political dialogue
agenda continue to focus on the release of detainees and
abductees, as well as on the identification of missing or
deceased persons.

We reiterate that the only way to resolve the
conflict in Syria is through a Syrian-owned and
Syrian-led political process that is inclusive and based
on consultation and dialogue and that will allow for a
peaceful solution to be reached among all the parties
involved.

We stress the efforts made towards the voluntary
return of thousands of people to eastern Ghouta and
other cities north and south of Damascus and their
subsequent full return. My delegation would draw the
attention of the Security Council to the need to protect
thousands of innocent civilians, including children and
the elderly, and move them to Idlib. It is urgent and
pressing that peace be maintained and any escalation
of violence avoided in that area, as the aftermath could
be tragic.
We believe that measures must continue to be taken
to reduce the level of violence on the ground, promote
confidence among the parties involved, alleviate the
humanitarian situation and promote ongoing initiatives
aimed at finding a peaceful political solution. The
process must take place on the basis of the various
initiatives taken and meetings held at different levels.
We therefore underscore once again the commitments
made at the Syrian National Dialogue Congress, held in
Sochi on 30 January, with a focus on strengthening the
United Nations-led political process in the framework
of the road map set out in resolution 2254 (2015), in
particular through the drafting of a new constitution
and the establishment of a constitutional committee,
which we believe must be representative and impartial.
We hope that the work of that committee, in Geneva,
should start as soon as possible and should be active
and dynamic and include the participation of all parties
to the conflict.
We welcome the good offices and mediation of
the Secretary-General and his close collaboration with
the members of the Security Council in the quest for a
peaceful solution to the crisis in Syria.
To conclude, we reject any attempt to divide
or fragment Syria along ethnic lines or to foster
sectarianism there. It is the Syrian people themselves
who must freely decide their future and their political
leadership, in the framework of their sovereignty,
10/12

Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I had not intended
to speak today in the Chamber, but I wanted to respond
to some of the things that we have just heard. I will
therefore take this opportunity to thank Staffan de
Mistura and his team for all their work, which is not
proving as fast or as productive as all of us would like,
but I think that we are very grateful to Staffan for all
his efforts. I was also interested to hear the Chinese
account of the work of their envoy.
We all know what needs to be done. We have had
very many discussions in this Chamber and in the
Consultations Room about Syria. I think that what we
struggle with is how to get it done and how to take the
next step, so I hope that when we leave the Chamber and
go next door into closed consultations, we can actually
have a proper discussion, without polemics, about what
it will take to get the constitutional committee up and
running; what are the concrete steps that need to be
taken and how we as the Council can best facilitate and
support that; and what it takes to get Idlib protected.
Lots of speakers today have referred to Idlib; I think
that we all know its importance, scale and significance.
I would urge those Astana progenitors to do what they
can to ensure that on the ground, people in Idlib are
safe and that we avert a humanitarian catastrophe there.
But I would like to have a proper discussion next door
about how the Council can actually support that.
I wanted to turn to the issue of the Syrian
Government engaging with the United Nations.
The Russian representative referred to backsliding
from a political settlement and entrenching Syrian
unwillingness for a negotiated solution. I think that
those two statements are very damning, but they are not
damning about us; they are damning about the Syrian
regime. We really need all those with influence on
Syria, including Russia and Iran, to encourage it to set
aside a military strategy as a way to resolve the conflict
and to engage with the United Nations across the board,
so that we can get back to Geneva and to a political
settlement. It is not we in the West who are stopping
18-14999

16/05/2018

The situation in the Middle East

that happening. The onus is truly on Syria to follow
the will of the Security Council and its resolutions and
to allow the United Nations to do its work to help the
people of Syria. Those are the main things I wanted to
say, but I would like to touch on three more points as
well, if I may.
We support what the Special Envoy said about
bringing women in, which I think is long overdue, and
he can count on the United Kingdom’s full support for
that. I would also like to refer to Iran and the strikes
on Israel from Syrian territory, on which we are in
full agreement with the United States representative’s
comments and have been very vocal about in public. I
also want to comment on the Russian representative’s
remarks about the air strikes. I will not rehearse why
France, the United States and the United Kingdom
took the action we did, except to say that we did it to
avert a humanitarian catastrophe, and in doing so we
helped to protect civilians on the ground, deterred and
degraded Syria’s ability to use chemical weapons and
thereby upheld the global prohibition on weapons of
mass destruction.
While I think those things remain very important,
they should not be used by anyone on the Council as
a reason to let the Syrian Government off the hook
where engaging with the United Nations on the political
process is concerned. The political process has been
essential since 2012, when the Geneva talks were
started. It has been increasingly essential since then,
and it continues to be essential now. I therefore hope
that when we go next door we can have a very detailed
discussion about how we as the Council can get back
to the spirit of Sweden and actually help Staffan de
Mistura and his team do something concrete to achieve
that, and have no more mud-slinging.
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to
participate in this meeting.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): To begin with, the delegations of the United
States and the United Kingdom have tried to promote
false claims justifying their aggression against
sovereign States, particularly my country, Syria, with
the aim of concealing their direct involvement in
terrorism and their part in the responsibility for the

S/PV. 8260

bloodshed in Syria. I would like to say to them that
the testimony, as cited in the media, of the thousands
of Syrians who have escaped the blockades of armed
terrorist groups in eastern Ghouta, has proved that
those countries have been involved in making those
citizens suffer through their support of those terrorist
groups. Through their positions, their malicious acts
and their illegal occupation of various areas of Syria,
they have shown that, contrary to their claims, they
cannot let go of their history of greed, occupation and
imperialism. When speaking in the Council, they claim
falsely that they are trying to find a political solution to
the situation in Syria, but let me point out, briefly, that
we have been able to defeat their agenda in Aleppo and
eastern Ghouta, and we will be able to ensure that they
cannot win in any part of my country.
For the past seven years, since the beginning of the
terrorist war in Syria, the United States, Britain and
France have been working relentlessly to support and
help conduct that war. They have also used the United
Nations as a political tool to put pressure on the Syrian
Government to implement their hegemonic agenda,
interfere in our internal affairs and destabilize my
country. They have not used the United Nations to fight
terrorism and its sponsors or to help Syria overcome
the suffering inflicted on it by armed terrorist groups,
which should have been the goal.
The Special Envoy devoted part of his statement to
discussing the humanitarian situation. In that regard,
I want to reiterate that the Syrian Government gives
priority to providing every kind of humanitarian
assistance to all Syrians in need, wherever they are in
Syria. That is our duty, and we are doing our duty. The
legal and constitutional obligations established under
international decisions and Security Council resolutions
on combating terrorism obliged my Government to
undertake military operations in eastern Ghouta in
order to rescue civilians from the armed terrorist
groups holding them hostage and using them for
years as human shields. In that regard, I want to state
that contrary to some false narratives, the successful
military operations conducted by the Syrian Arab
Army and its allies against the armed terrorist groups
controlling a number of areas that the United Nations
has classified as besieged or hard to reach — along with
the settlement and reconciliation agreements — have
all mitigated civilians’ suffering, reduced the numbers
of those areas and facilitated humanitarian access to
them, including eastern Ghouta.

18-1499911/12

S/PV.8260

The situation in the Middle East

We deplore the fact that the United States speaks of
its eagerness to reach a political agreement while it has
been committing acts of aggression against my country
based on lies, simply because it is working to give
support to the armed groups because they have suffered
losses in eastern Ghouta. It was the United States that
supported Israel’s aggression on 9 May when Israel
was unable to protect its own proxy terrorist groups
and implement its conspiracy against my country’s
unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity. Israel has
continued its dangerous acts of aggression, which
would not have been possible without the continuing
unstinting support of the United States Government,
because it enjoys impunity as a result of the support
it has from the United States in the Security Council,
enabling Israel to continue its terrorist acts threatening
international peace and security in the region and the
world. The Syrian Arab Republic reaffirms that through
its military and armed forces it is able and ready to fend
off all acts of aggression against its sovereignty and
independence. However, we want to reiterate that any
attempts to support this failing terrorism will not work.
Such flagrant violations will not present obstacles to
us in combating terrorism throughout Syrian territory.
Yesterday we concluded round nine of the Astana
process, and we are pleased with the results. We thank
the delegations of Russia, Iran and the host country,
Kazakhstan, for making the Astana process a success
with regard to combating terrorism. The outcome
document of the meeting stresses the unity, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic
against any external entities that attempt to violate
them.
In cooperation with our friends and allies, the
Syrian army has succeeded in liberating eastern Ghouta
and the southern area of Damascus, making the capital
and its surrounding areas safe. With the cooperation
of our friends and brothers, we have also expelled
the terrorists from the northern area of Homs and the
southern area of Hama. Today we reaffirm that we will
continue to fight terrorism and to work to liberate each

12/12

16/05/2018

and every part of our territory from terrorism and from
countries that seek to undermine our sovereignty.
In conclusion, the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic will spare no effort to support all genuine
efforts to arrive at a political solution whereby Syrians,
and only Syrians, will decide their future and make
choices aimed at safeguarding Syria’s sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity.
The President: The representative of the United
Kingdom has asked for the floor to make a further
statement.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I just wanted to
comment on the Syrian representative’s last statement,
in which he said that the Syrian Arab Republic will
spare no effort to arrive at a political solution. That
is obviously a welcome statement. I would like to ask
him if he could tell the Council, or is willing to say
today, that Syria will put the same amount of effort
into engaging with the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Syria and with the Council in order to take
concrete steps to get the Geneva process to work and
to get a constitutional committee off the ground. If
Syria were able to make that commitment today in the
Chamber, I believe that would unlock a lot of things for
the Council.
The President: The representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic has asked for the floor to make a further
statement. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): We have said time and again that we are
working with the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Syria. A delegation from the Syrian Arab
Republic is working directly with him. We are eager, as
we have said repeatedly, to find a peaceful, Syrian-led
solution to the Syrian crisis.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.25 a.m.

18-14999
