UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1994/61
21 October 1994
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3444th meeting of the Security Council, on 21 October 1994, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Mozambique", the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has been following closely the progress made by
the Government of Mozambique and the Resistência Nacional Moçambicana
(RENAMO) towards the implementation of the general peace agreement for
Mozambique. It commends them and the people of Mozambique for what has been
achieved.
"The Security Council believes that the necessary conditions have now
been established for the holding of free and fair elections on 27 and
28 October 1994 under effective national and international monitoring.
These elections, by providing the Mozambican people with an opportunity
fully to exercise their right to vote, hold out the prospect of securing
for them lasting peace, stability and democracy.
"The Security Council appeals to all concerned to ensure that the
election campaign and the subsequent voting are conducted in a calm and
responsible manner; that the elections are held freely and fairly; that
those in authority act with complete impartiality in order to avoid any
allegation of fraud; and that the election days and their aftermath are
characterized by the absence of violence or the threat of violence. It
also appeals to all parties to respect the safety and security of the
officials of the National Elections Commission and the international
election observers and to assist them to carry out their mandate.
"The Security Council reiterates its intention to endorse the results
of the elections should the United Nations declare them free and fair, and
reminds the parties of their obligation, under the general peace agreement,
fully to abide by the results.

94-41108 (E)

211094

/...

S/PRST/1994/61
English
Page 2

"The Security Council trusts that the parties will be guided, after
the elections, by the spirit of reconciliation as well as the principles of
democracy and the need to work together in harmony to reconstruct their
country, thereby enabling the international community to continue to
support Mozambique as it pursues rehabilitation and reconstruction.
"The Security Council takes this opportunity to express its
appreciation to the Secretary-General, his Special Representative and the
personnel of the United Nations Operation in Mozambique (ONUMOZ) and calls
upon the parties to continue to cooperate with them to ensure the
fulfilment of the ONUMOZ mandate, including verification of their complete
demobilization and disarmament."

-----
