S/PV.7892

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7892nd meeting

Tuesday, 28 February 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Yelchenko. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ukraine)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. Vaverka
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Klein
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-05282 (E)
*1705282*

S/PV.7892

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Implementation of the note by the President of the
Security Council (S/2010/507)
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
I would like to draw Council members’ attention
to a letter from the President of the Security Council
dated 9 February 2017, inviting States Members
and Permanent Observers of the United Nations
to communicate to the presidency, if they so wish,
suggestions regarding issues concerning the work of
the Security Council during the month of February to
be proposed for consideration at our meeting today.
I would like to thank the Member States that have
submitted contributions to us. We were happy to see
that they came from various regions of the world.
The questions and proposals suggested concerned
both substantive agenda items and the Council’s
working methods, and in our opinion deserve our
serious consideration. An informal list of all the
communications received was brought to Council
members’ attention. We hope that delegations will
address the issues that were raised in their statements
today. In the view of the presidency, establishing such
a practice could contribute to enhancing the interaction
between the Council and the general membership of the
United Nations.
I now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.

28/02/2017

believe it represents an important opportunity for
Council members to go on the record with reflections
on the work of the Council during the past month.
On behalf of the African members, I would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your stewardship
of the Council, and for a job well done during a very
busy month, with many achievements.
The African members of the Council would like to
highlight the following conclusions based on the work
of the Council since the beginning of the year.
During the past month, the Security Council has
continued to deal with an evolving set of complex
conflicts and unresolved disputes on its agenda. Those
evolving and emerging challenges will require a more
robust, coherent and comprehensive approach on the
part of the Security Council if they are to be resolved.
Speaking from an African perspective, we feel that
it would be very timely for the Council to adopt the
concept of sustaining peace, in a practical and applied
manner, as a target and process. We continue to believe
that the Council is still far from achieving that target.
There is a need for a paradigm shift in mentality, from
one focused on managing conflicts to one that addresses
their root causes, in accordance with their various
contexts, ensuring national reconciliation and moving
towards recovery, reconstruction and development.
The set of tools available to the Council should be used
judiciously, pursuant to varying contexts and realities
on the ground. That will require enhanced analysis
capacities and orchestrated engagement with various
United Nations bodies by furthering the bridging and
advisory role of the Peacebuilding Commission.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the African
countries that are members of the Security Council,
that is, Egypt, Ethiopia and Senegal.

Against that backdrop, and while regional and
international efforts in South Sudan have fallen short
of assisting South Sudan to restore peace and achieve
national reconciliation, now there are nonetheless good
prospects following the joint meeting at the initiative
of the Secretary-General of the United Nations,
the African Union (AU) and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, on 29 January in Addis
Ababa, to revitalize the peace process with a view
to ending the vicious cycle of violence and achieve
national reconciliation. It is critical that the people
of South Sudan, while respecting their diversity, also
honour and foster their unity.

I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing today’s meeting to consider the
implementation of presidential note S/2010/507. We

Together with addressing the root causes by
contributing to the building by the South Sudanese
of their national institutions of governance, the

Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I have
been speaking in Arabic during our meetings because
it is the official language of my country, but today I
will speak in English, because I am speaking on behalf
of all of my colleagues, and Ethiopia and Senegal
in particular.
(spoke in English)

2/16

17-05282

28/02/2017

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

Council should seriously enhance its consultation and
coordination with regional actors, in line with the
joint statement of 29 January, in order to ensure that
all South Sudanese recommit to peace and end the
violence. In that vein, empowering President Konaré’s
efforts is important and cannot be overemphasized. We
see the national dialogue as a crucial opportunity to
redirect the parties’ attitude towards ending violence.
The national dialogue should go beyond power-sharing
arrangements and be conducted in an inclusive,
transparent and credible manner so as to represent a
real opportunity for peace and inclusivity.
The three African members of the Security
Council reiterate their commitment to the prevention
of conflicts, and in that regard stress the effective
engagement of the Council in Gambia’s political crisis
between December 2016 and January 2017, which
led to the peaceful handover of power to the current
President, Mr. Adama Barrow. The African members
commend the Council’s approach, which culminated
in the unanimous adoption of resolution 2337 (2017).
The resolution was a manifestation of the prevention
of conflict in action. It was also a result of a strong
partnership between the United Nations, the AU and
the subregional organization — namely, the Economic
Community of West African States — as well as
a testimony to the complementary roles played by
the Security Council and the African Union Peace
and Security Council in maintaining regional and
international peace and security. After that milestone
achievement, the African members would like to
highlight the need to continue to extend support to the
new Gambian authorities in order to sustain peace and
consolidate efforts towards Gambia’s development.
The Council followed closely developments that
took place in Somalia. It adopted presidential statement
S/PRST/2017/3 on February 10, welcoming the
conclusion of the electoral process, which culminated
with the election of PresidentMohamed Abdullahi
Mohamed “Farmajo”. Furthermore, the statement
underscored major upcoming benchmarks, in particular
building a strong Somali national army, functioning
State institutions capable of delivering basic services,
establishing law and order, and the launching of the
constitutional review process. The three African
members reiterate the need for the Security Council to
continue closely monitoring the situation in Somalia and
for the international community to enhance its support

S/PV.7892

for Somali and African efforts with regard to stabilizing
Somalian institution-building and economic revival.
Furthermore, in a press statement on 20 February
(SC/12722), the President of the Council condemned the
heinous terrorist attack that shook a Mogadishu market
on 19 February, leaving around 40 dead and many
more injured. This incident is a stark reminder of the
continuous and precarious threat posed by Al-Shabaab
to the fragile accomplishments achieved in Somalia. In
this regard, the African members firmly believe that
this challenge can be tackled only by rallying support
for the African Union Mission in Somalia and the
Somali national forces to rid Somalia and the region
of the scourge of terrorism. The African members
also note the importance of adopting a comprehensive
and holistic approach to combating terrorism that is
not limited solely to military and security means but
extends to other relevant dimensions, including the
economic, social, cultural and religious.
The three African members welcome the recent
decision of the Security Council to visit the countries
of the Lake Chad basin — namely, Cameroon, Chad,
the Niger and Nigeria — from 2 to 7 March, with the
objective to strengthen its support to the victims and
affected countries in their efforts to address the threats
posed by the terrorist groups Boko Haram and Da’esh,
as well as to mitigate the humanitarian situation
related thereto.
Once again, on behalf of the African members
of the Security Council, we thank you, Sir, and we
look forward to the United Kingdom presidency
and to cooperating and supporting it in ensuring a
successful outcome.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): Under your
impetus, Sir, the Security Council’s work in February
was marked by very rich activity on all the subjects on
its agenda, from Africa to the Middle East and Europe.
More sadly, this month was also tragically marked by
the sudden loss of the Permanent Representative of
Russia, Vitaly Churkin, to whom we again pay tribute.
I would like to refer first to the meetings we have
held on crises in Africa.
The consultations of 3 February with the SecretaryGeneral upon his return from the African Union
Summit in Addis Ababa were a highlight of this month.
They provided an opportunity for an informal and
in-depth exchange with the Secretary-General, who

17-052823/16

S/PV.7892

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

expressed his willingness to make the strengthening
of the relationship with the African Union a priority.
We share his desire to continue to work better with the
African Union and are committed to continuing this
effort, both with the proposals to be submitted on the
basis of resolution 2320 (2016), as well as with a view to
future joint consultations between the Security Council
and the African Union Peace and Security Council.
Several country situations in Africa also caught the
attention of the Council this month, In particular, at the
8 February meeting on Côte d’Ivoire (see S/PV.7880),
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Côte d’Ivoire
confirmed that the country continues to consolidate
peace and stability and to make progress in areas
related to national reconciliation and social cohesion.
In that context, the transfer of the responsibilities of
the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire to the
Ivorian authorities continues, in accordance with the
mission’s withdrawal plan. That meeting also recalled
the enduring challenges. As illustrated by the incidents
in January and February within the armed forces,
more efforts are needed to reform of the security
sector. President Ouattara’s commitment is particularly
encouraging. In this and other areas, the United Nations
country team will continue to support the authorities’
efforts towards stability and development. We hope
that the international community will provide financial
support for the transition plan presented last fall.
As regards the Central African Republic, we
must remain vigilant. President Touadera and his
Government, with the support of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) and other
partners, are pursuing their efforts on behalf of stability
and reconcilation, but they face armed groups that refuse
to participate in good faith in dialogue and reform, and
that pursue criminal activities. That is unacceptable at a
time when the Central African Republic has the historic
opportunity to move towards long-term stability. In
that context, we welcome MINUSCA’s affirmation
of its posture and strengthening of its credibility.
Armed groups must understand that pursuing criminal
activities at the expense of State-building and suffering
imposed on civilians will lead them nowhere .
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Council met last week at our initiative to discuss
the situation in Kasai and the lack of progress in the
implementation of the 31 December political agreement.
4/16

28/02/2017

Testifying to our shared concern, the members of the
Security Council adopted a press statement (SC/12734)
calling on the Congolese Government to immediately
conduct a credible and impartial investigation and
to bring to justice those responsible for the violence.
The statement also calls on the Congolese parties to
implement without delay the agreement of 31 December,
in particular by appointing a Prime Minister. Two
months after the signing of the agreement, it is more
necessary than ever to maintain the good political will
that made the agreement possible if more insecurity is
to be avoided in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The statement also reflects the Council’s willingness
to closely monitor developments in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and — most importantly — to
take action against Congolese actors whose statements
or conduct would undermine the proper application of
the agreement and the organization of elections.
At the initiative of the presidency, the activities
of the Council have also been marked by several
European dossiers, starting with the ministerial debate
on European conflicts (see S/PV.7886), as well as the
annual briefing by the chairmanship-in-office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
presented by the Austrian Minister for Foreign Affairs
(see S/PV.7887) and, yesterday, the briefing on the
situation in Kosovo (see/SPV.7891). As members know,
France is deeply committed to a resolution of the
crisis in Ukraine, which must include re-establishing
Ukraine’s control over the entirety of its internationally
recognized borders, including in Crimea. Along with
our German partners, France remains determined to
pursue its efforts under the Normandy format. Every
result achieved on the ground matters. In our view,
there is today no alternative solution but to support
the implementation of the Minsk agreements, which
is the only way to make progress towards a peaceful
resolution of the conflict.
We are also convinced of the central role on the
ground of the Special Monitoring Mission of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
as well as of the need to allow it carry out its mandate
without hindrance. The resumption of fighting in recent
days and the incidents targeting observers should lead
us to step up our engagement on this issue, which the
Security Council must continue to follow closely.
I should now like to turn to some issues relating
to the Middle East that continue to be of concern to
us. Turning first to Libya, the Council’s consultations
17-05282

28/02/2017

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

S/PV.7892

on 8 February made it possible to express a solid
convergence of views among members of the Council
with regard to supporting the efforts of Prime
Minister Faiez Mustafa Serraj to make the institutions
established under the Skhirat Agreement more effective
and representative, with heightened positive support
from neighbouring countries and with the full support
of United Nations mediation, which remains central.
We hope that this positive momentum will be pursued
in support of a political solution that is fully inclusive.
We welcome the fact that the Secretary-General and the
Council are fully engaged to that end. France will not
let up in its efforts in that regard.

Another area of major concern with regard to
Syria has to do with the fact that it continues to be
a theatre for the repeated use of chemical weapons
against civilians. To put an end to that, France and the
United Kingdom, along with the United States, have
strenuously endeavoured in recent months to bring the
Council together around a response to those crimes, and
have prepared a draft resolution on which the Council
will soon act. We hope that the members of the Security
Council, as they did in the case of resolution 2118 (2113),
will assume their responsibilities and sanction the
perpetrators of those criminal acts in violation of the
universal prohibition on the use of chemical weapons.

With regard to the peace process in the Middle East,
the two-State solution has never been so threatened.
The recent announcements by the Government of Israel
concerning the settlement policy — announcing the
construction of more than 6,000 new housing units — and
the adoption by the Knesset of a law retroactively
legalizing previous settlements on Palestinian land
give rise to great concern. France hopes that the next
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of resolution 2334 (2016) will make it possible to take
stock of the consequences of those announcements to the
contiguity of and accessibility to Palestinian territories.

Allow me to conclude by once again commending
you, Mr. President, for the professionalism with which
you have led the work of the Council during the month
of February. I should also like to highlight the ongoing
efforts of the successive presidencies to improve the
working methods of the Council, both in terms of
effectiveness and transparency. In that regard, we
welcome the numerous elements to the press that have
been agreed, which have made it possible for everyone
to better understand the Council’s deliberations in
private consultations. We know we can count on the
upcoming British presidency in pursuing that initiative
and making the Council as effective a tool as possible
in the service of peace and stability.

Lastly, on Syria, after a few weeks’ calm following
the signing of the Russian-Turkish agreement on the
ceasefire, the situation on the ground is once again
deteriorating. The regime and the militias that support
it are once again bombing civilian facilities, including
hospitals, in numerous Syrian locales. Terrorist attacks
are also continuing, in particular in Homs three
days ago. More than 1,000 people have died since
22 December. We therefore hope that the monitoring
mechanism developed in Astana will make it possible
to establish full respect for the ceasefire throughout
the whole of the territory, including full, unhindered
access for humanitarian assistance, especially to the 13
areas still under siege by the regime.
It is against that worrying backdrop that the
intra-Syrian negotiations have resumed in Geneva,
under the auspices of the United Nations and including
representatives of the regime and the opposition.
We hope that the Syrian regime will at last accept to
engage in good-faith discussions on the parameters
for the necessary political transition, in line with
resolution 2254 (2015).

Mr. Bessho (Japan): Allow me first to congratulate
you, Sir, on your excellent presidency during the month
of February, especially today as Japan welcomes
the efforts of the President to make formal wrap-up
meetings more meaningful. I thank the delegations who
made suggestions, and would like to touch upon some
of the points raised.
First, on North Korea, it was significant that
the Security Council, with new members in 2017,
unanimously condemned the 12 February ballistic
missile launch in a timely manner. In 2016 alone, North
Korea conducted two nuclear tests and launched over 20
ballistic missiles, presenting an elevated level of threat.
Such acts constitute blatant violations of the relevant
Security Council resolutions, and are serious and direct
threats to the international community as a whole.
Japan calls upon all Member States, including the
members of the Security Council, to strictly implement
the relevant resolutions so that North Korea will change
its course of action, commit to de-nuclearization, and
return to dialogue.

17-052825/16

S/PV.7892

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

On Syria, Japan believes that the Intra-Syrian talks
must contribute to improving the humanitarian situation
on the ground. At the Council meeting last week (see
S/PV.7888), bureaucratic impediments and the security
situation were raised as obstacles to humanitarian
access. Japan has been urging the Syrian Government
to simplify procedures, and we have received a written
confirmation from the Government in that regard.
However, that must be implemented on the ground.
With regard to the draft resolution on Syrian chemical
weapons, the Council needs to show its determination
that the parties responsible will be held accountable.
Turning to South Sudan, the continuing violence
and worsening humanitarian situation, exacerbated
by the famine, are serious concerns. The national
dialogue should be truly inclusive and widely embraced
both domestically and internationally. Japan urges
the South Sudanese Government to take concrete
actions, including on the deployment of the Regional
Protection Force and unhindered access for the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan and for humanitarian
aid workers.
Japan has been making efforts to ameliorate the
situation, including by dispatching our Prime Minister’s
Special Envoy, to urge the South Sudanese Government
on the points I have mentioned and by providing
financial assistance for humanitarian purposes
through United Nations agencies as well as through the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development.
I would particularly like to express my gratitude to
those delegations that showed interest in presidential
note S/2010/507. Discussion is under way at the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and other
Procedural Questions with a view to updating the note
based on the views and proposals expressed at the open
debate (see S/PV.7740) on working methods last July
under Japan’s presidency and on other occasions. Thus
far, the Working Group has discussed such matters as
reporting cycles, wrap-up sessions and Security Council
missions. On 24 February, we discussed how we can
improve the way we conduct the informal consultations
of the whole. The goal is to make progress on the actual
working methods of the Council. I cannot stress enough
the importance of implementation, particularly by the
Permanent Representatives of the Council.
Concerning the annual report of the Security
Council, Japan is working with all countries that served
6/16

28/02/2017

on the Council during the 17-month reporting period to
prepare the report to the General Assembly.
Lastly, with regard to the lessons learned on the
process of selecting a Secretary-General, I issued
a note in my personal capacity with some concrete
suggestions, including on announcing the results of
the Council’s consideration of the candidates in order
to increase transparency. I hope that the note will be
useful in five or 10 years.
Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): I join my colleagues in
the Security Council in reaffirming our commitment
to all issues addressed during the month of February.
However, I would like to focus on three items that
appeared on the agenda in February and to which
Kazakhstan is making a contribution: Central Asia,
Syria and counter-terrorism.
My first point relates to the United Nations
Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central
Asia. Although the situation in Central Asia is relatively
stable, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Petko Draganov has indicated various vulnerabilities
that make it fragile. Kazakhstan is therefore focusing the
attention of the Council on the importance of building
social and economic stability to promote long-term
sustainable development in Afghanistan. Investment is
being made in the education, health care, transport and
communications sectors. Other Central Asian countries
are also joining hands in that endeavour for a peaceful
and secure Afghanistan. As a country representing
Central Asia, Kazakhstan will pay great attention to
preventive measures to ensure peace and security in
Afghanistan and the region.
Secondly, with regard to Syria, Kazakhstan
supports the measures taken by the United Nations,
the Russian Federation, Turkey, Iran, with some Arab
countries, the United States, the European Union and
other international stakeholders, together with the
Syrian Government and its opposition. Seen as a neutral
bridge-builder, my Government has been trusted by
all sides of the conflict. My Government hosted the
meeting on Syria on 15 and 16 February in Astana to
pave the way for inter-Syrian negotiations in Geneva.
We were able to contribute to discussions on the release
of detainees and abductees, the exchange of prisoners
and bodies, the identification of missing persons, the
provision of unhindered and sustainable humanitarian
access, with the free movement of civilians and, finally,
the implementation of the ceasefire regime and the
17-05282

28/02/2017

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

setting-up of a joint operations group, with a view to
consolidating efforts. The involvement of Jordan, which
hosts hundreds of thousands of Syrian refugees, was a
move in the right direction and the Astana process is
therefore an important step forward.
Thirdly, with regard to counter-terrorism, as Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban
and associated individuals and entities, we convened
a meeting on 3 February at which the Committee
members discussed the comprehensive report of
the Ombudsperson on retaining a petitioner on the
sanctions list. The Committee has also considered the
nineteenth report of the Monitoring Team (S/2017/35)
and noted that, notwithstanding the sustained
military pressure from the international coalition and
Government troops in Syria and Iraq, the presence of
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and Al-Qaida
affiliates is a continuing threat to international security
in wider regions of the world, especially in SouthEast Asia and West and East Africa. The report of the
Ombudsperson’s investigation on the petitioner, as
well as the conclusions and recommendations of the
Monitoring Team, clearly indicate the fragmentation
and inadequacy of international efforts to defeat global
terrorism. Therefore, we fully support the SecretaryGeneral’s proposals on the United Nations counterterrorism architecture aimed at guiding the States
Members of the Organization to better respond to
terrorist threats and challenges.
Mr. Klein (United States of America): As we look
back on the Security Council’s work in February, first,
once again, I would like to offer the deepest condolences
of the United States to the Russian Federation on the
passing of Ambassador Churkin. We were shocked and
saddened and our thoughts are especially with the team
at the Permanent Mission of the Russian Federation to
the United Nations at this time.
I congratulate you, Sir, and the Permanent Mission
of Ukraine to the United Nations on a successful
presidency, even as your country continues to deal with
the Russian occupation of Crimea and the dire situation
in Eastern Ukraine. That situation necessarily was a
major focus of the emergency meeting on Ukraine (see
S/PV.7876) that you called early in the month and also
your important open debate on conflicts in Europe
(see S/PV.7886). We continue to support the Minsk
agreements and their full implementation as the best path
to resolve the conflict in eastern Ukraine. The United

S/PV.7892

States condemns last month’s targeting of monitors
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) and the seizure of a Special Monitoring
Mission unmanned aerial vehicle by combined Russian
separatist forces. It is imperative that those forces stop
their attacks on civilian infrastructure, including the
Donetsk water filtration station. We call on Russia and
the separatist forces it backs to immediately observe
the ceasefire, withdraw all heavy weapons and allow
full and unfettered access to the OSCE monitors.
It was right and appropriate for Ukraine to draw
attention to the sometimes overlooked danger of
terrorists attacks on critical infrastructure. We welcome
the adoption of resolution 2341 (2017) to help all States
to prevent, mitigate and respond to such attacks and
provide an impetus for Governments to cooperate more
on critical infrastructure protection.
Looking ahead, the United States urges the
Council to strongly condemn the Syrian regime’s
blatant violations of the Chemical Weapons Convention
and of resolution 2118 (2013) and to support the draft
accountability resolution co-authored by the United
States, France and the United Kingdom, which will be
considered right after this meeting. As we move into
March, the Council must remain vigilant on the overall
situation in Syria and support Special Envoy Staffan
de Mistura’s efforts to advance a political solution to
end the rising violence and help ease the enormous
suffering of the Syrian people.
Finally, I would like to highlight the Council’s
upcoming mission to Cameroon, Chad, the Niger and
Nigeria — under the leadership of the United Kingdom,
Senegal and France — to examine the security and
humanitarian impact of the Boko Haram conflict.
The United States welcomes the progress made by
the forces in Nigeria, Chad, the Niger, Cameroon and
Benin, working together as the Multinational Joint Task
Force, to clear the territory of Boko Haram and Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant-West Africa fighters.
We look forward to discussing with the peoples and
Governments of the Lake Chad basin region how
best to support the humanitarian response to meet the
needs of the conflict-affected population, as well as
how best to support military and civilian initiatives in
order to counter violent extremism and restore peace
and stability.
In closing, I would like to thank you, Sir, for an
excellently run month of February and to commit our

17-052827/16

S/PV.7892

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

full support to the United Kingdom as it takes up the
gavel for the month of March.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): At the outset, allow me to
commend you, Sir, on your initiative to make the
formal wrap-up sessions more interactive by inviting
the membership to ask the presidency questions that
Security Council members may attempt to answer
during the meeting. This is a positive step towards
updating and improving our working methods.
Before briefly addressing some of those questions,
allow me to focus on one issue that has emerged as a
common theme in many of our meetings this month
and in January — illicit trafficking, including in
cultural property, arms, drugs and human beings. In
the first two months of our term, my delegation has
consistently raised that issue and proposed language on
it as appropriate in consultations, and when negotiating
products of the Council. We have brought it up, for
example, in our debate on Western Africa and Central
Asia, the terms of reference for the mission to the Lake
Chad basin, Guinea-Bissau, counter-terrorism efforts
and the priorities of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe. We must be well aware
of the challenges that illicit trafficking poses to the
international community and of its dual nature as a
potential cause and consequence of conflicts.
We are concerned about the growing links
between transnational organized crime and terrorist
organizations. Illicit trafficking has become a growing
source of revenue for terrorists. It exacerbates conflict
and fuels insecurity and instability. Trafficking in
human beings offends our collective engagement and
may amount to war crimes when committed in conflict
situations, or crimes against humanity. This is why my
delegation welcomes the Council’s strong involvement
with the issue, particularly in areas affected by
conflict, as underlined most recently in the presidential
statement contained in document S/PRST/2015/25 and
resolution 2331 (2016).
My delegation has consistently raised this challenge
when discussing a specific country or region so as to
emphasize the complexity of the security scenario and
the critical importance of consolidating our joint efforts
to prevent and tackle all forms of illicit trafficking and
its impact on international peace and security. Allow
me to recall in particular the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel and resolutions 2195 (2014) and
2331 (2016), which stress the direct linkages between
8/16

28/02/2017

trafficking and large movements of persons and aim
to prevent the financing of terrorism through all forms
of illicit trafficking. Looking ahead to the visit of the
Security Council to the Lake Chad basin, we are eager
to hear assessments on the effectiveness of measures
to prevent trafficking in weapons to armed groups and
any other forms of trafficking.
Naturally, international cooperation is crucial since
it is simply beyond the capacity of any single State to
take on pre-emptive action to address a problem that
typically involves different countries of origin, transit
and destination. This is why we believe Council
involvement is so important. In this respect, Italy is
also promoting the organization of high-level debate on
the Palermo Convention and its implementation, which
will be held at the United Nations in New York in June.
Turning briefly to some of the questions raised by
the membership, in particular on working methods, and
offering our perception as an incoming member — we
have been here for two months — I must say that I
have found the Security Council to be very effective
and more united than I had been told it would be. Of
course, political differences do remain, and Japan,
incidentally, is working very hard with the assistance
of all delegations to improve and update our working
methods, which is a crucial element in our endeavours.
With regard to consultations, I have found Council
members to be very constructive. Everyone is well
aware of the need to manage time efficiently and
has an interest in having an interactive discussion,
going beyond talking points, thus enabling a better
understanding of where delegations stand on the issues
being debated. Preparing briefers in advance for a
focused discussion and summing up the meeting with
press elements are good examples of how we are trying
to improve our working methods. I think both the
Swedish presidency and that of Ukraine have been very
effective in this regard.
In our view, a game-changer has been the
Secretary-General’s direct involvement in Council
proceedings and the Secretariat’s taking a more
proactive role in providing policy options to Council
members. The meetings with the Secretary-General on
3 and 24 February on his recent trips to Africa and the
Middle East stand out, in our view, as best practices
that the Council should pursue as often as possible in
order to make its proceedings more goal-oriented and
policy-driven.
17-05282

28/02/2017

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

S/PV.7892

In closing, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
and congratulate you on your stewardship of this stillunfinished, very busy month of February. At the same
time, we of course wish all the best to the incoming
United Kingdom presidency.

radicalization and extremism, and restoring trust among
States. We would like to see the further development
of cooperation between the United Nations and the
OSCE, including in the interest of this major European
organization implementing United Nations decisions.

Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The past month has been a very full one for
the Security Council. In particular, there have been
several meetings on regional and general issues.

With respect to the unabated threat posed by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, Jabhat Al-Nusra,
Al-Qaida and their enablers, the Security Council
should focus on the pressing issue of counter-terrorism.
It is high time to establish a broad counter-terrorist
coalition and improve measures to combat the fuelling
and ideology of terrorism. The thematic meeting of the
Security Council on 13 February on the protection of
critical infrastructure from terrorists (see S/PV.7882)
and the content of resolution 2341 (2017) unfortunately
could hardly be considered evidence of priority being
given to counter-terrorism. The discussions brought
no new elements to the work of the Council or its
existing decisions.

I would now like to talk about the three important
thematic debates that took place on the situation in the
Eurasian region: on the activities of the United Nations
Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central
Asia (UNRCCA), on conflicts in Europe (see S/PV.7886)
and the Austrian Chairperson-in-Office’s briefing on
the priorities for the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) (see S/PV.7887).
The outcome of the briefing by the head of
UNRCCA, Mr. Draganov, on 2 February, led the Russian
delegation to distribute a draft Security Council press
statement. Unfortunately, due to the stubborn refusal
of some delegations to recognize the close cooperation
of UNRCCA with regional organizations, including
the OSCE, the Commonwealth of Independent States
and the Collective Security Treaty Organization, the
text was not agreed for the fourth time in a row. The
lack of reaction on the activities of UNRCCA not only
hurts the image of the Security Council but also has
a negative impact on cooperation between the Centre
and countries of the region. It also fails to convey the
right message to the Secretary-General of the United
Nations who has made preventive diplomacy the crux
of his activities.
We had hoped that during the 21 February
meeting (see S/PV.7886), the Security Council would
constructively discuss ways to react collectively to
European challenges. Indeed, refutation of the policy
of indivisible security has caused protracted conflicts
and triggered new ones in Europe. We also had hoped
that we would jointly convince Kyiv of the need to
implement the Minsk agreements. Many delegations
spoke of that at that time and today. However, we have
to note that these hopes were dashed.
We share the priorities set out by the OSCE
Chairperson-in-Office — the Foreign Minister of
Austria, Mr. Kurz — on 22 February (see S/PV.7887).
We would like to see constructive cooperation in
such key areas as conflict resolution, combating

The discussion of the issue of the Middle East
conflict on 16 February (see S/PV.7885) showed
that the Palestinian-Israeli conflict continues to be
marked by destabilizing factors, including repeated
acts of violence, tensions around Gaza and settlement
activities. We are convinced that there is a need today
more than ever to take practical measures to unblock
the peace process. Our proposal to conduct meetings
with Messrs. Netanyahu and Abbas in Moscow remains
on the table. We would like to see the Palestinian sides
implement the agreements achieved during the meeting
in Moscow from 15 to 17 January.
We
nevertheless
note
a
new
positive
feature — consultations on 3 February, where the new
Secretary-General, upon his initiative, briefed the
Security Council on his participation at the African
Union (AU) summit. We note Mr. Guterres’ intention
to scale up cooperation with the AU and other African
organizations with a view to settling conflicts on the
continent. We support his intention to seek African
solutions to African problems, with the whatever
assistance is needed from the United Nations.
In conclusion, we would like to wish every success
to the delegation of the United Kingdom, which will be
heading the Council in the month of March.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, I too would like to begin by expressing
our heartfelt congratulations to you and your team on
your leadership of the work of the Security Council this

17-052829/16

S/PV.7892

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

month, which theoretically — well, not theoretically, as
February is in fact the shortest calendar month of the
year — could mean less work, but the intensity of the
work has in no way diminished, and your delegation
has been in continuous motion and provided very
able leadership.
The month of February has also brought us an
absence, in the form of the death of our colleague
Ambassador Vitaly Churkin. This event affected us all,
and once again we wish to reiterate our condolences
to his family and to the Government of the Russian
Federation, as well as to our colleagues at the
Russian Mission.
In February, the Council has adopted a number
of resolutions, on terrorist attacks against critical
infrastructure (resolution 2341 (2017)), the renewal of the
mandates of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau (resolution 2343 (2017)) and
of the Panel of Experts on the Sudan (resolution 2340
(2017)), and on the 2140 (2014) Committee’s sanctions
on Yemen (resolution 2342 (2017)). We also adopted a
presidential statement on Somalia in the wake of that
country’s elections (S/PRST/2017/3). We have adopted
a number of press statements and, as has unfortunately
been the trend at to date, some of them have been in
response to terrorist attacks.
With regard to Security Council meetings, I do
not want to talk about each meeting but would like to
refer to several, particularly those that were not public
and to which the general membership did not have
access. I will of course respect the confidential nature
of consultations.
I would like to begin by mentioning a consultation
that took place on 3 Februay in which the SecretaryGeneral participated in person and discussed his
participations at the African Union summit. We thank
the Secretary-General for sharing first-hand with
Council members the details of his busy agenda in Addis
Ababa. That was the first time that I participated in the
Council, and it was a very open initiative in which the
Secretary-General gave a very comprehensive overview
not only on the meeting that he held in Addis Ababa
but also on the political context of the situation in the
region. It was extremely useful to have that exchange
with him and exhange views.
The Council also discussed a number of issues
under the agenda item of “Any other business”. Uruguay
called for one of those meetings on the United Nations
10/16

28/02/2017

Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara. As a
troop-contributing country, Uruguay places a very high
importance on respect by the parties of Security Council
mandates, as well as with with regard to documents
that have been signed with Secretariat. Unilateral
measures not only affect peacekeeping operations and
set a dangerous precedent for the peacekeeping system,
but they can they can also create risks to international
peace and security.
I would be remiss if I did not mention the
questions that the Security Council received from the
membership in response to Ukraine’s initiative to hold
the wrap-up session. My response will not cover all of
the questions, but I will attempt to comment on several
of them in connection with the code of conduct of the
Accountability, Coherence, and Transparency Group
with regard to genocide, crimes against humanity
and war crimes. I do not recall the code as having
been invoked as an instrument for addressing specific
situations. What I can affirm is that those of us who
signed that code must act in concert and in a spirit
of shared responsibility to prevent and combat such
serious crimes from occurring.
In the case of South Sudan, the Council is seeking
to achieve results, but as we know, in some respects it
is united and in another it is not. An example of that
was the draft resolution of an arms embargo on South
Sudan in December that could not be adopted and that
Uruguay, moreover, supported.
In response to a question that was asked by a
non-member of the Security Council concerning
working methods, I reiterate the idea that the briefingconsultations format provides us all — members and
non-members of the Security Council — with the
opportunity to achieve greater transparency through
using the meeting to read out statements made in a
national capacity publicly and to save consultations for
more sensitive issues within a more interactive dynamic.
However, with regard to consultations and the
agenda item of “Any other business”, I would like to
mention the issue of documentation. It is crucial to have
as much information as possible from the Secretariat
during those closed meetings, including illustrative
documents, such as detailed maps, when we discuss the
situation in a particular region.
It is also necessary for the members of the Council
to be able to obtain from the Secretariat the required
documentation before those meetings so that members
17-05282

28/02/2017

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

can fully acquaint themselves with the issues at and
make the appropriate decisions. It therefore is totally
unacceptable for the Secretariat to deny access to
documentation that is indispensable for Council
members to be able to take a position and the necessary
actions in order to fulfil their commitments. That is an
extremely delicate issue, and in my view needs to be
carefully considered by the Council.
Mr. Zhang Dianbin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China welcomes the convening of this meeting by
Ukraine and appreciates that country’s leadership
as President of the Security Council in guiding the
Council’s work for the month February. We once again
convey to the delegation of the Russian Federation our
condolences on and sadness felt over the passing of
Ambassador Churkin.
With regard to this month’s work, I would like to
focus on the following three issues.
The first concerns the situation in Europe. This
month, the Council held a ministerial meeting on
conflicts in Europe (see S/PV.7886) and held briefings
on the work of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and the question of Kosovo.
Recent years have witnessed general stability in Europe
and progress on some hotspot issues. But complicated
and uncertain factors remain, and conventional and
unconventional challenges are increasing. All that
calls for the concerted and united efforts of countries
in addressing them. China hopes that the European
countries will establish a new type of international
relations featuring win-win cooperation, enhance their
cooperation with each other and remain committed
to the peaceful resolution of their differences and to
comprehensive, just and lasting solutions to issues.
The second issue concerns the prevention of
conflicts. Peace has been the common aspiration and
lofty goal of humankind. China stands for resolutely
defending the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and for establishing a new
type of international relations featuring win-win
cooperation and developing a shared, comprehensive,
cooperative and sustainable security vision. The roles
of the United Nations and the Council in stopping war
and peacekeeping should be fully utilized. We must
address the underlying causes of conflicts for the
sake of development. We should also scale up efforts
for preventive diplomacy and peacebuilding. We must

S/PV.7892

remain committed to solving differences through
political means.
The third issue concerns combating terrorism. This
month, the Council held an open debate on the protection
of critical infrastructure from terrorist attacks (see
S/PV.7882). At a time when the fight against terrorism is
facing increasing challenges, infrastructure has become
an easier target for terrorist attacks. The international
community should pay great attention to that and be
united in its efforts. Terrorism is the common enemy of
humankind, and China advocates a unified criterion in
our fight against terrorism in which we fully leverage
the leading role of the United Nations and the Council,
while abiding by the purposes and principles of the
Charter and enhancing coordination and scaling up
cooperation in the fight against terrorism so as to
jointly maintain world peace and security.
In conclusion, I wish the United Kingdom all the
best in its Presidency for the month of March.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to begin by congratulating you, Sir,
personally, as well as your delegation, for your leadership
of the Security Council the month of February.
As we take stock of the Council’s work for February,
it has not been a simple straightforward month. There
have been some very positive developments, but there
have also been some very bitter moments, such as the
regrettable passing of Ambassador Vitaly Churkin. In
that regard, I would like to take this opportunity once
again to express our deepest condolences to Ambassador
Churkin’s family, the Mission of the Russian Federation
and the Governnment and the people of Russia on
the loss of one of their most brilliant ambassadors.
Ambassador Churkin not only worked diligently to
defend his country’s interests, but he also worked in
the context of very complicated negotiations so that
political dialogue might prevail. That is the case of the
ceasefire agreement in Syria, which we hope will be
accompanied by a political agreement that would be the
result of ongoing talks within the framework of United
Nations efforts.
On another note, one of the most significant
positive efforts from this month that we wish to point
out is the fact that the Security Council was able to
reach unanimous agreement on several fronts. That
was the case with the adoption of resolution 2340
(2017) on South Sudan, resolution 2341 (2017) on the
protection of critical infrastructure, resolution 2342

17-0528211/16

S/PV.7892

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

(2017) on the situation in Yemen, and resolution 2343
(2017) on the situation in Guinea-Bissau, which, I
repeat, were adopted unanimously by the Council,
and which were the result of dialogue and negotiation.
Everyone contributes to the negotiation of resolutions
in the General Assembly, adding to the text of such
resolutions. I believe that logic was applied here in the
cases I mentioned.
With respect to the issues raised by some Member
States here today, I wish to point out and join in the
proposal of one those Missions that open debates be
compiled and summarized with a view to having a
record of State participation in open debates convened
by the Security Council. That would increase the
transparency of its work.
Other Member States have referred to the
prerogative of the Secretary-General to appoint
Secretariat officials. We agree that no State can
undermine that prerogative and power of the SecretaryGeneral. However, at the same time, we call attention to
the declaration of Heads of State and Government of the
Group of 77 and China, which represents, as I believe
everyone knows, two-thirds of the membership of the
Organization. In that statement, the Group called for
continued efforts to revitalize the General Assembly, to
reform the Security Council, increasing — among other
things — the amount of representation of developing
countries, in particular in higher categories, and to
improve geographical representation in the Secretariat.
In that regard, all divisions that promote the increased
participation of members should be encouraged by the
Council and by the entire Organization in general.
In addition, I would like to highlight the leadership
of Japan in the transformation and reform of our
working methods. As a relatively new member of the
Council, we have benefited from a variety of decisions
that have allowed us to plan our participation in the
Council’s work ahead of time.
We join the representative of Uruguay in voicing
concern over the lack of transparency of the Secretariat.
In several instances, access to some documentation was
not allowed. Ensuring that all information is available
to all members of the Council is essential to our ability,
as equal members, to make decisions.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I will remember
February 2017 as the month in which my friend and
colleague, Vitaly Churkin, passed away. I wish to once
12/16

28/02/2017

again pass on my condolences to the Russian team and
to his family.
February was also a month in which Ukraine did an
excellent job presiding over the Security Council, and I
want to commend you, Mr. President, and your team, for
the way in which you did that. I think a number of the
working methods that you instigated should be continued.
For example, your efforts to ensure the transparency of
our work have been very effective. And, in response to
the question posed by the representative of France, your
involvement of civil society has been noteworthy, and
something that the United Kingdom will continue next
month. You have also made sure that we were focused
on action and that, in particular, some sort of action
came of our conversations in the closed consultations
room, whether that was a bilateral meeting between
you and the Permanent Representative of a country
that we had been discussing, press elements or press
statements. Very clearly, pursuing an action-oriented
approach is something the United Kingdom would like
to follow as well. Moreover, I think you did a good
job of bringing difficult and at times divisive issues to
our attention, including the conflicts in Europe, from
which your country is suffering most particularly. The
manner in which you did that was highly effective, and
I congratulate you and your team.
In addition to our working methods, I would also
like to say a few words about what we do and the content
of our work, and to look both backward to February
and forward to the British presidency in March. The
overarching theme for next month will be preventing
conflicts in Africa. That is something on which the
incoming Secretary-General has placed significant
focus. I strongly agree with him that prevention is
better than the cure, and that investing upstream before
things worsen is a good thing to do in terms of time,
energy, effort and resources, all in the pursuit of saving
lives and preventing threats to international peace and
security from spiralling out of control. We have already
had both good and bad examples of that in 2017.
The Gambia provides a good example from January,
wherein the United Nations, the African Union and
the Economic Community of West African States all
came together in a highly effective way to prevent a
conflict there. On the other hand, in February we have
heard that the situation in South Sudan has got even
worse and that, on top of the political complexity of
that country and the risk of genocide, there is now a
certified famine — only the second famine anywhere
17-05282

28/02/2017

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

in the world to have been declared since the year 2000.
One hundred thousand people are starving in South
Sudan, and 1 million are on the brink of famine. So,
building on the work of this month, I think we need
to do even more next month to ensure the Security
Council is doing its utmost to support the efforts of the
Secretary-General to bring peace to South Sudan. We
will be holding a high-level briefing on that issue on
23 March.
In February, we have also heard about the worrying
scale of violence against civilians in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which is another example of
an area where preventing things from getting worse
should absolutely be at the top of the Council’s list of
priorities. In that regard, it is vital that those who are
responsible for such violence be held accountable for
it, and that we see progress in the political process. We
look forward to considering those issues further during
the British presidency.
In all of these issues related to the continent
of Africa, cooperation with the African Union and
subregional bodies will be absolutely crucial. As I
said, that was one of the things that made the Gambian
example a positive one, and it is one of the things that
we are seeking to do in South Sudan.
I would also like to mention Somalia. In March the
United Kingdom will be hearing from representatives
of both the United Nations and the African Union about
progress in that country. And, of course, tomorrow
night, we will be setting off on a visit to the Lake Chad
Basin to have a look at four countries: Cameroon, Chad,
the Niger and Nigeria, where there are a whole set of
factors — political, security, governance, terrorism,
environmental and surely many others — that we need
to re-examine, working in concert with our colleagues
from the African Union. I hope that gives an idea of
some of the highlights — both of this month and next
month — in terms of how we have been working
closely together.
There is one final part of the British presidency
in March that I wanted to mention — the open debate
to be held here on 14 March on modern slavery. That
speaks to the point made by our Chinese colleague
on understanding the root causes, getting underneath
the skin of issues, and trying to find the link between
development issues and security issues. The scourge
of modern slavery is a good example of an issue that
touches on a very wide range of other issues of concern

S/PV.7892

to the Security Council, and is absolutely a threat to
international peace and security.
I would like to thank everyone for the good wishes
for next month. I look forward to working with everyone
and carrying on Mr. Yelchenko’s highly effective
working methods.
Mr. Vaverka (Sweden): I would like to start by
joining other Council members in paying tribute
to you, Mr. President, and to your team for your
excellent stewardship of the Council during the month
of February. The Council’s most important task is to
address threats to international peace and security
in an effective way, and we therefore welcome the
presidency’s commitment to continuing our efforts to
make the work of the Council more result-oriented,
transparent and inclusive. Your innovation for today’s
wrap-up meeting, providing the wider membership
with an opportunity to pose questions to the Council, is
another step in that direction.
The Council members who have spoken before me
have comprehensively addressed the important issues
that have been on the Council’s agenda this month, and
I do not wish to expand or elaborate a great deal further
on them, other than highlighting a few points without
going into too much detail. We had a constructive
discussion of the situation in the Middle East; we have
focused a lot of attention on the security situation in
Europe, which is, of course, of significant importance
to Sweden; and we have looked at a number of issues in
Africa and Asia. We have challenges ahead of us, and
rather than repeating what has been eloquently discussed
by other Council members, I will cut my statement a
little short and perhaps address a few of the questions
that have been raised by the wider membership, which
has seized the opportunity presented by the Ukrainian
presidency to give the Council some food for thought.
First, with regard to the issue of working methods,
for the elected members the work done by the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions, including presidential note
S/2010/507, is key. Those notes provide useful guidance
while retaining the degree of flexibility that the Council
needs. We heard Ambassador Bessho of Japan describe
the agenda of the Informal Working Group for this
year, and I would like to say that we wholeheartedly
support those efforts. In fact, many of the ideas needed
to make the Council more effective are already there.
Individual Council members should make use of them,

17-0528213/16

S/PV.7892

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

and the presidency has a special responsibility for
putting them into practice. The Ukrainian presidency
has demonstrated that in an excellent way.
To be truly successful, however, the support of
all Council members is required, and we are pleased
to note that the beginning of this year has seen us
coming together behind those efforts. In that regard,
two points stand out. First, as some of my colleagues on
the Council have mentioned, the greater use of agreedon press elements after consultations is not only a way
to increase transparency but also helps the Council to
summarize the salient points of discussions and think
about how best to address the issues further. Secondly,
the inclusion of relevant representatives of regional
organizations and civil society as briefers has brought
a field and regional perspective that has improved the
Council’s understanding of the full picture and thereby
enriched the quality of its deliberations and decisions. I
think we have seen that on several occasions this month
as well.
That brings me to the issue of prevention, which
was also raised by a Member State in the questions
posed to the Council. Prevention is at the heart of
the new sustaining peace agenda. The need for a
strengthened relationship on prevention between the
Security Council and the Secretary-General was one of
the key messages that emerged from the open debate on
10 January on conflict prevention and sustaining peace
(see S/PV.7857). In February, Ukraine has ensured that
this strengthened relationship has come to life. Council
members greatly appreciated the Secretary-General’s
interactive briefing of the Council on his return from
the African Union Summit, during which he touched on
several initiatives being taken to reinvigorate processes
aimed at preventing relapses into conflict. That kind
of interaction should continue, and I think that with
a concerted effort between us — the Council — and
the Secretary-General, we will be able to do that in a
meaningful way.
To address a question raised about the subsidiary
organs, I would like to mention that as Chair of the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict
established pursuant to resolution 1612 (2005), I was
pleased that the Working Group has already adopted
speedy conclusions on the situation of children and
armed conflict in Colombia, the first negotiated under
our chairship. We will next focus on negotiating
conclusions on children and armed conflict in Somalia.
14/16

28/02/2017

In conclusion, I would like to respond to a question
on the perceptions so far of the 10 newly elected
non-permanent Security Council members and their
short-term priorities. After two months on the Council,
our overall perception is that at the moment there is
positive momentum within it. The relationship between
the Secretary-General and the Council is becoming
stronger, and there is a commitment on both sides to
working constructively together, with a renewed focus
on prevention and sustaining peace. While there were
some differing views, I believe that the idea of focusing
on how we can prevent conflict — addressing root
causes and looking at sustainable development, human
rights, humanitarian challenges and issues of peace
and security together — is increasingly becoming
part of the Council’s conversation. Encouraging that
approach, including by engaging in dialogue with all
Council members, is both a short-term and long-term
priority for Sweden. We look forward to supporting
and working closely with our colleagues from the
United Kingdom as we continue those conversations in
March. The Council trip to the Lake Chad basin region
starting tomorrow will enable us to put that perspective
into practice.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Ukraine.
Last year the Council organized meetings on the
implementation of presidential note S/2010/507 just
five times, and today is the first time this year that we
have held a meeting on the subject. I believe that we
should not judge the interest in the subject by those
numbers, since all of us are aware of the acute interest
in the Council’s work on the part of the United Nations
general membership, which is very much apparent in
the corridors adjacent to this Chamber. We therefore
see real added value in endeavouring to improve the
format of the preparations for such meetings if we are
to make our deliberations more efficient and relevant.
In that spirit, the presidency has sought the input of
Member States to shape today’s discussion. We leave
it up to future presidencies to continue and build on
the practice.
Despite the fact that February is the shortest
month of the year, it has been densely packed with
meetings and discussions, both in the Council and in
its subsidiary bodies. One of the highlights of our work
this month was the initiative that the Secretary-General
took to brief us on his participation in the African
Union Summit. Without going into the details of the
17-05282

28/02/2017

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

briefing, which was very informative and useful, we
believe that holding such meetings on a regular basis
would immensely strengthen the relationship between
the Council and the Secretary-General and thereby
benefit the whole United Nations family. We are also
looking forward to seeing the Secretary-General
continue to play a more proactive role in bringing
important issues of peace and security to the Security
Council’s attention.
On 13 February, the Security Council held an open
debate (see S/PV.7882) on how we, as the international
community, should provide a fitting response to the
threat of terrorist attacks on critical infrastructure.
We hope that resolution 2341 (2017), adopted at that
meeting, will helpt to increase the effectiveness of
States’ efforts in that area, and in particular in the
framework of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy. The subsequent discussion
clearly reflected demands from Member States for
significant improvements in the protection of critical
infrastructure — especially aviation and maritime
transportation, the nuclear industry, the finance sector
and cross-border projects — from terrorist threats both
physical and cyber. The question now is how thoroughly
we can all implement the resolution and what further
steps should be taken at the national, regional and
international levels. I take this opportunity to inform
the United Nations community that my country has
already started the process of implementing the
resolution through respective decisions of the President
and the National Security and Defence Council of
Ukraine from 16 February.
On 21 February, the Council engaged in another
open debate (see S/PV.7886) on the subject of conflicts
in Europe. While it is quite obvious that, at the moment,
it is rather hard to expect unity on the subject, a very
real deterioration of the security situation on the
European continent, with far-reaching repercussions
for global stability and security demands the most
urgent attention. We cannot afford to carry on in
blissful ignorance, hoping that somehow the problems
in question will simply disappear; they will not. Unless
diligently and properly addressed, they will continue
to fester and poison relations among States, further
endangering international peace and security.
Responding to inquiries from our colleagues
outside the Council on the work of the subsidiary
bodies, I will say a few words in the capacity of the
Chair of the Committee established pursuant to

S/PV.7892

resolution 1591 (2005) concerning the Sudan and the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2127
(2013) concerning the Central African Republic. In
leading said Committees, I always strive to increase
efficiency and transparency of their work, maintain
constructive engagement with the Governments of
countries concerned through their Permanent Missions
here in New York, facilitate the work of their respective
Panels of Experts and keep communication channels
open with all interested parties. One of my most
immediate plans at this point is to conduct a visit to
Darfur to have discussions with Sudanese authorities
and United Nations entities on how to further improve
the Committee’s work.
Following respective requests by a number of
Member States, allow me to make several comments
regarding the working methods of the Security Council
in February. Like many others, Ukraine is quite
concerned that despite the commitment to making
greater use of open meetings, there is a marked increase
in the number of informal consultations that the Council
holds. From the very beginning of preparing the
programme of work for February, my delegation strived
to plan most of the briefings in open Chamber. While
in the end, it was not possible to change established
practice, we are grateful to Council members for their
general support for such an approach and we hope that
in the future, the format of consultations will gradually
become less of a rule and give way to open meetings.
As one of my colleagues pointed out during one
of the consultations, abstaining from communicating
States’ positions in public statements in the Chamber on
any given subject can send the wrong signal to parties
concerned. Sometimes, that kind of silence from the
Council can be misinterpreted, resulting in unintended
consequences. The Council has to find a balance
between the confidentiality of informal consultations
and the need to maintain a maximum degree of openness.
Therefore, in line with President’s note S/2015/507, we
encourage future presidencies to continue briefing the
media and the public after informal consultations with
short summaries. We have tried to do so throughout the
month and we would like to encourage those following
us to further perfect that practice.
In preparation for Council’s country-specific
deliberations in February, I held meetings of the
presidency with parties concerned before the
Council’s meetings or consultations. We consider it
very important for the presidency to hear their views,

17-0528215/16

S/PV.7892

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

concerns, ideas, requests or expectations, as such
advanced knowledge would contribute to shaping the
Council’s discussions accordingly.
In conclusion, I thank Council members for their
kind words addressed to my team and me. If we were
successful in presiding over the Council, it is because
we enjoyed its cooperation and had its support. To
my friend Ambassador Matthew Rycroft, as well as

16/16

28/02/2017

the delegation of the United Kingdom, who will be
moving into this seat of responsibility in a few hours, I
would like to convey a message of our unequivocal and
full support.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The meeting rose at 11.25 a.m.

17-05282
