United Nations

A/RES/65/152

General Assembly

Distr.: General
16 February 2011

Sixty-fifth session
Agenda item 20 (a)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 20 December 2010
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/65/436/Add.1)]

65/152. Implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the
Further Implementation of Agenda 21 and the outcomes
of the World Summit on Sustainable Development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 55/199 of 20 December 2000, 56/226 of 24 December
2001, 57/253 and 57/270 A of 20 December 2002 and 57/270 B of 23 June 2003, as
well as its resolution 64/236 of 24 December 2009 and all other previous resolutions
on the implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further Implementation
of Agenda 21 and the outcomes of the World Summit on Sustainable Development,
Recalling also the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development, 1
Agenda 21, 2 the Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21, 3 the
Johannesburg Declaration on Sustainable Development 4 and the Plan of
Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development (“Johannesburg
Plan of Implementation”), 5 as well as the Monterrey Consensus of the International
Conference on Financing for Development, 6 the Doha Declaration on Financing for
Development: outcome document of the Follow-up International Conference on
Financing for Development to Review the Implementation of the Monterrey
Consensus 7 and the outcome document of the High-level Plenary Meeting of the
General Assembly on the Millennium Development Goals, 8
0F

1F

2F

3F

4F

5F

6F

7F

_______________
1
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June
1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and
corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
2
Ibid., annex II.
3
Resolution S-19/2, annex.
4
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September
2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
5
Ibid., resolution 2, annex.
6
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18–22 March
2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
7
Resolution 63/239, annex.
8
See resolution 65/1.

10-52166

*1052166*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/65/152

Recalling further the Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of
Small Island Developing States, 9 the Declaration and state of progress and
initiatives for the future implementation of the Programme of Action for the
Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, 10 the Mauritius
Strategy for the Further Implementation of the Programme of Action for the
Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States 11 and the outcome
document of the High-level Review Meeting on the Implementation of the Mauritius
Strategy for the Further Implementation of the Programme of Action for the
Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, 12
8F

9F

10F

1F

Reaffirming the commitment to implement Agenda 21, the Programme for the
Further Implementation of Agenda 21, the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation,
including the time-bound goals and targets, and the other internationally agreed
development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals,
Recalling the 2005 World Summit Outcome, 13
12F

Reaffirming the decisions taken at the eleventh session of the Commission on
Sustainable Development, 14
13F

Recalling that the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation designated the
Commission to serve as the focal point for discussion on partnerships that promote
sustainable development and contribute to the implementation of intergovernmental
commitments in Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further Implementation of
Agenda 21 and the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation,
Noting with satisfaction that the Commission, at its eighteenth session,
undertook an in-depth evaluation of progress in implementing Agenda 21, the
Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21 and the Johannesburg Plan
of Implementation, focusing on the thematic cluster of issues, namely, transport,
chemicals, waste management, mining and a ten-year framework of programmes on
sustainable consumption and production patterns, taking into account their
interlinkages as well as addressing the cross-cutting issues, including means of
implementation, and identified best practices, constraints and obstacles in the
process of implementation,
Reaffirming that eradicating poverty, changing unsustainable patterns of
production and consumption and protecting and managing the natural resource base
of economic and social development are overarching objectives of and essential
requirements for sustainable development,
Recognizing that eradicating poverty is the greatest global challenge facing the
world today and an indispensable requirement for sustainable development, in
particular for developing countries, and that although each country has the primary
responsibility for its own sustainable development and poverty eradication and the
_______________
9

Report of the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States,
Bridgetown, Barbados, 25 April–6 May 1994 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.94.I.18 and
corrigenda), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
10
Resolution S-22/2, annex.
11
Report of the International Meeting to Review the Implementation of the Programme of Action for the
Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, Port Louis, Mauritius, 10–14 January 2005
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.05.II.A.4 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
12
See resolution 65/2.
13
See resolution 60/1.
14
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2003, Supplement No. 9 (E/2003/29), chap. I.

2

A/RES/65/152

role of national policies and development strategies cannot be overemphasized,
concerted and concrete measures are required at all levels to enable developing
countries to achieve their sustainable development goals as related to the
internationally agreed poverty-related targets and goals, including those contained
in Agenda 21, the relevant outcomes of other United Nations conferences and the
United Nations Millennium Declaration, 15
14F

Recalling that the Economic and Social Council should increase its role in
overseeing system-wide coordination and the balanced integration of economic,
social and environmental aspects of United Nations policies and programmes aimed
at promoting sustainable development, and reaffirming that the Commission should
continue to be the high-level body responsible for sustainable development within
the United Nations system and to serve as a forum for the consideration of issues
related to the integration of the three dimensions of sustainable development,
Recognizing that good governance within each country and at the international
level is essential for sustainable development,
Noting with appreciation the offer of the Government of Panama to host, in
January 2011, the intersessional meeting of the Commission on sustainable
consumption and production patterns,
Noting with appreciation also the offer of the Government of Japan to host, in
February 2011, the intersessional meeting of the Commission on sustainable waste
management and that the Governments of Chile and Morocco hosted, in November
2010, the intersessional senior expert group meeting on the topic “Sustainable
development of lithium resources in Latin America: emerging issues and
opportunities” and the intersessional consultative meeting on the topic “Solid waste
management in Africa” respectively,
Recalling its decision to hold the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development in Brazil in 2012, 16
15F

Expressing deep concern that the resources available in the Commission trust
fund are insufficient to fund the participation of delegates from developing
countries, as well as representatives of major groups, in the meetings of the
preparatory process of the Conference and in the Conference itself,
Takes note of the report of the Preparatory Committee for the United
1.
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development on its first session; 17
16F

2.

Also takes note of the report of the Secretary-General; 18
17F

3.
Reiterates that sustainable development is a key element of the
overarching framework for United Nations activities, in particular for achieving the
internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development
Goals, and those contained in the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation;5
4.
Calls upon Governments, all relevant international and regional
organizations, the Economic and Social Council, the United Nations funds and
programmes, the regional commissions and specialized agencies, the international

_______________
15

See resolution 55/2.
See resolution 64/236.
17
A/CONF.216/PC/5.
18
A/65/298.
16

3

A/RES/65/152

financial institutions, the Global Environment Facility and other intergovernmental
organizations, in accordance with their respective mandates, as well as major
groups, to take action to ensure the effective implementation of and follow-up to the
commitments, programmes and time-bound targets adopted at the World Summit on
Sustainable Development, and encourages them to report on concrete progress in
that regard;
Calls for the effective implementation of the commitments, programmes
5.
and time-bound targets adopted at the World Summit on Sustainable Development
and for the fulfilment of the provisions relating to the means of implementation, as
contained in the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation;
Reiterates that the Commission on Sustainable Development is the high6.
level body responsible for sustainable development within the United Nations
system and serves as a forum for the consideration of issues related to the
integration of the three dimensions of sustainable development, and underlines the
need to further support the work of the Commission, taking into account its existing
mandate and the decisions taken at its eleventh session;14
0H

7.
Emphasizes the importance of a consensus outcome and action-oriented
policy sessions;
8.
Recalls the decision of the Commission at its eleventh session that
activities during Commission meetings should provide for balanced involvement of
participants from all regions, as well as for gender balance; 19
18F

9.
Encourages donor countries to support the participation of representatives
from developing countries in the nineteenth session of the Commission, inter alia,
through contributions to the Commission trust fund;
10. Reaffirms the objective of strengthening the implementation of
Agenda 21,2 including through the mobilization of financial and technological
resources, as well as capacity-building programmes, in particular for developing
countries, and in this regard invites donor Governments and international financial
institutions, together with the international community, to support the efforts of
developing countries to overcome barriers and constraints identified during the
review year in the thematic cluster of issues, namely, transport, chemicals, waste
management, mining and a ten-year framework of programmes on sustainable
consumption and production patterns;
11. Also reaffirms the objective of enhancing the participation and the
effective involvement of civil society and other relevant stakeholders, as well as
promoting transparency and broad public participation, in the implementation of
Agenda 21;
12. Requests the secretariat of the Commission to coordinate the
participation of the relevant major groups in the thematic discussions at the
nineteenth session of the Commission and the reporting on the fulfilment of
corporate responsibility and accountability with respect to the thematic cluster of
issues, in accordance with the provisions of the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation;
13. Reaffirms the need to promote corporate social responsibility and
accountability as envisaged by the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation;
_______________
19
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2003, Supplement No. 9 (E/2003/29), chap. I,
sect. A; see also Economic and Social Council resolution 2003/61, para. 2 (j).

4

A/RES/65/152

14. Requests the secretariat of the Commission to make arrangements to
facilitate the balanced representation of major groups from developed and
developing countries in the sessions of the Commission, and in this regard invites
donor countries to consider supporting the participation of major groups from
developing countries, inter alia, through contributions to the Commission trust fund;
15. Reiterates its invitation to the relevant United Nations funds and
programmes, the regional commissions and specialized agencies, the international
and regional financial and trade institutions and the Global Environment Facility, as
well as the secretariats of the multilateral environmental agreements and other
relevant bodies, within their mandates, to actively participate in and to effectively
contribute to the work of the Commission at its nineteenth session;
16. Encourages Governments and organizations at all levels, as well as
major groups, to undertake results-oriented initiatives and activities to support the
work of the Commission and to promote and facilitate the implementation of
Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 213 and the
Johannesburg Plan of Implementation, including through voluntary multistakeholder partnership initiatives;
17. Underlines the importance of setting aside, at the nineteenth session of
the Commission, adequate time for all activities envisaged in the policy sessions,
including negotiations on policy options and possible actions, and in this regard
notes the importance of having all required documents, including the draft
negotiating document of the Chair, made available for consideration prior to the
beginning of the session;
18. Reaffirms its decision to hold the United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development in Brazil in 2012;16
1H

19. Endorses the recommendations contained in chapter IV, “Organizational
and procedural matters: report of Contact Group 1 on the review of the preparatory
process, including organizational and procedural matters, leading up to the United
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development in 2012”, and annex II to the
report of the Preparatory Committee for the Conference on its first session;17
20. Requests the Secretary-General to provide all appropriate support to the
work of the preparatory process of the Conference and of the Conference itself and
to ensure inter-agency cooperation and effective participation and coherence within
the United Nations system, as well as the efficient use of resources, in order to
address all the objectives and themes of the Conference;
21. Invites Governments and all relevant stakeholders, including regional
commissions, United Nations organizations and bodies, other relevant
intergovernmental and regional organizations, international financial institutions and
major groups involved in sustainable development, to participate fully and
effectively at all levels and to provide ideas and proposals reflecting their
experiences and lessons learned as a contribution to the preparatory process of the
Conference, as agreed in the preparatory process by Member States;
22. Encourages Governments to actively involve and to coordinate inputs
from all national agencies responsible for economic development, social
development and environmental protection in their national preparations for the
Conference;

5

A/RES/65/152

23. Encourages the United Nations development system to support, as
appropriate, national country preparations for the Conference, upon the request of
national authorities;
24. Calls upon international and bilateral donors and other countries in a
position to do so to provide voluntary contributions to the Commission trust fund,
requests the Secretary-General to make further efforts to use the limited resources in
the trust fund in an efficient and effective way in order to enhance the active
participation of representatives from developing countries in the preparatory process
of the Conference and in the Conference itself, and in this regard encourages the
Secretary-General, when using the resources of the trust fund, to prioritize the
coverage of economy class air tickets, daily subsistence and terminal expenses;
25. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-sixth session,
under the item entitled “Sustainable development”, the sub-item entitled
“Implementation of Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further Implementation of
Agenda 21 and the outcomes of the World Summit on Sustainable Development”,
and requests the Secretary-General, at that session, to submit a report on the
implementation of the present resolution, including on the progress of the
preparations for the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development.
69th plenary meeting
20 December 2010

6
