S/PV.9113

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9113th meeting

Tuesday, 23 August 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Dai Bing. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Samson
Mr. Biang
Mr. Korbieh
Mr. Raguttahalli
Mr. Ryan
Ms. Nyakoe
Mr. Arrocha Olabuenaga
Ms. Heimerback
Mr. Leonidchenko
Ms. Shaheen
Mr. Wickremasinghe
Mr. Mills

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-46912 (E)
*2246912*

S/PV.9113

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

activities to make sure we deliver on the mandate that
the Council gave us 17 years ago.

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Karim
Khan, Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court,
to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Khan.
Mr. Khan: It is a great honour to have the
opportunity to brief the Security Council once again.
I want to give my very sincere thanks to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Sudan,
Mr. Volker Perthes, to the United Nations Development
Programme for facilitating this video-teleconference
from Khartoum and, of course, to the Government of
the Sudan for supporting this briefing.
This is the first time in the history of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) that the Prosecutor
of the Court is briefing the Council from a situation
country. It is the first briefing from the Sudan. I am
delighted that, over the past few days, I have been joined
by my Deputy Prosecutor, Ms. Nazhat Shameem Khan,
who is just off-camera. While I was in Darfur, she spent
the past couple of days meeting senior members of the
Government here in Khartoum.
I came back from Darfur yesterday. In South
Darfur, I had the opportunity to meet the Wali, or the
Governor, of South Darfur, and visited the very large
Kalma refugee camp. I then flew to Central Darfur and
also met the Governor of that province, as well as the
members of his security committee. I visited another two
camps there, namely, Hassahissa camp and Hamidiya
camp. It really was a very impactful experience that
reinforced my resolve that the Sudan situation needs
to be properly prioritized and that it fully justifies and
requires proper resources, as well as a proper focus of
2/16

23/08/2022

The simple truth is that the nightmare for
thousands of Darfuris has not ended. The nightmare
of their experiences continues, in large part, because
meaningful justice and accountability have not been
felt in the manner that is required or, in my respectful
view, which was anticipated by the Council in 2005.
Kalma camp is a good example. It was established
in 2004. Today 300,000 people live there, most of them
as a result of the activities that compelled the Council
to refer the Darfur situation to my Office. Generations
have passed away, and children have been born in
that camp.
As I left the metalled road from Nyala, I took mud
roads, navigating donkeys, traversing pools filled with
water from the very heavy rainfall that the region had
endured and crossing railway tracks. After quite some
distance — a very long walk for many — we were met
by an advance team of people from the camp. They were
rejoicing and welcomed us with typical Sudanese and
Darfuri hospitality, chanting “Welcome, ICC!” They
ushered us in to a camp that was a throng of humanity,
with slogans raising from their lips about the need for,
and their belief in, justice.
I took the liberty of telling them that, while they
may be cut off from roads, their actions and their belief
in accountability manifestly demonstrate that they
are not cut off from hope. It was a moving sign and,
indeed, it left quite a deep impression. But one thing is
clear: despite the heavy rains that were apparent in their
environment, they are still extremely thirsty — not for
water, but for meaningful justice.
As a very well-known phrase that is now deep in
Security Council convention, recalling resolution 1593
(2005) is perhaps not always the same as remembering
the circumstances that compelled the Council to refer
the situation in Darfur to the ICC in 2005. Perhaps
we should take a moment to reflect and perhaps, in
our minds’ eyes, we can recall seeing those pictures
of devastation — the caravan of humanity that was
that exodus within Darfur to the camps where many
thousands remain today and out into the region and the
allegations that the Council would remember of rapes
and killings and the destruction of property.
I hope that I did not speak out of turn when I
mentioned the members of all three camps that I
22-46912

23/08/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

visited in both provinces of Darfur. I also hope that the
members of the Council will not forget the people of
Darfur, because they have not forgotten the Council in
any way. They are extremely grateful to the Council
and have high hopes that together, the Council, the ICC,
the Sudan and certainly the international community
will make sure that our words are not pious hopes but
are actually delivered on.
One of the abiding takeaways from my experience
is how grateful the people of Darfur are for justice,
for being remembered and for being able to believe,
because of the fact that we are speaking about them
today and that a prosecutor came to visit them, that
somehow their lives — and the lives of their lost loved
ones and those who are living with the physical scars
that are there to see — somehow their lives matter, and
justice will not be merely a distant promise. I felt very
moved, because their gratitude was not in proportion
to what we have done as a Court, as a Council, as the
Sudan or as States. We simply still have a great deal to
do. I respectfully submit that resolution 1593 (2005),
the Juba Peace Agreement of October 2020 and the
memorandum of understanding that I signed with
the Government in August last year cannot remain
adornments disguising inaction.
We need collectively to find ways to move forward,
because so many are counting on the Council and on
us collectively. I respectfully suggest, with the greatest
humility, that at an appropriate time the Council
consider holding a meeting in the Sudan. I know
that Council members visited Baghdad during my
previous mandate with the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. I think
the opportunity to learn more and hear from some of
those survivors — the Darfuris in camps who hold the
members of the Council in such high regard and who
have such high hopes for it — would help us reawaken
our commitment to humankind and to the obligations
vested in everyone here, as Council members. One
thing that we have seen time and again, and the
Sudan is no exception, is that if we do not manage to
deal with the historic abuses, the cases that are well
known in the Sudan, the cycle of impunity is likely to
continue and be followed by other cycles of violence.
Why should people comply with the law? Why should
they be concerned about public international law or
international humanitarian law when time and time

S/PV.9113

again they see people doing what they want and getting
away with it? I think this call to action is long overdue.
But in that environment and given all that
experience, as well as the people’s high hopes and the
reality that we have to do more, we do have a glimmer
of hope, which I have seen in the faces of many people
in Darfur and in speaking to them. The fact that in
April I opened the Ali Kushayb case — the case against
Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman, a senior Janjaweed militia
leader — has had a tremendous impact on the people of
Darfur whose importance cannot be overestimated. It is
a massive tribute to the persistence, resilience, courage
and belief of the Sudanese people. But words simply
are insufficient to give those people their due, because
even in the very dark days of non-cooperation with the
Sudan, the people believed that a day would come when
justice would be delivered.
I think that collectively we should pray, and also
act to ensure, that this is not only a new day but that we
will not allow it to become a false dawn. That requires
action, not words. It requires delivery, not promises,
because the people are tired of promises. And I think
this is the time to move forward. The fact that the
case of Ali Kushayb, a senior Janjaweed leader, has
started — and that the evidence that has been presented
to the Court shows that he directly butchered people
and that he and his men threw children to the ground,
violated women and caused so much devastation and
cruelty — has actually given people the space to hope
that tomorrow may be different from yesterday. That
case, which includes 31 counts of war crimes and
crimes against humanity, is now under the supervision
of independent and impartial judges of the International
Criminal Court. The Court has now heard 28 witnesses,
and they are representative of accounts that I have also
heard in the camps — a microcosm of suffering.
I have every confidence that in due course, the
judges of the ICC will properly determine whether
those allegations laid out by my Office are up to the
required standard of beyond reasonable doubt. One of
the reasons I was so eager to give this briefing from
the Sudan was because of the impact we have had on
the people whom we are here to serve collectively, the
people of Darfur and the people of the Sudan. It is why
have repeatedly said that it is essential for the Office
to change its approaches, to be more connected with
people in different parts of the world and to have a field
presence, because that resonates with them. It matters to
them. And it shows that through perseverance, courage,

22-469123/16

S/PV.9113

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

common action, partnerships and stubborn insistence,
justice can be delivered. It can.
At the moment, as I have said, the fact that we
have seen the start of the first trial in the first situation
referred to the Court by the Security Council is a
meaningful one. In part at least, it is an answer to some
who say that international criminal justice is impotent,
that the hurdles are too large and the impact too small.
Much more needs to be done. But I would also suggest
that sometimes we are victims of our own cynicism.
It becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy. We feel that
international justice is not worth the paper it is written
on, that it is all politics and high hopes, and we lose
sight of the people who actually do not care and have
never set foot in the major capitals represented by the
members of the Council that I have the honour to appear
before. Very often people do not leave their own camps,
never mind their own province. But it matters to them.
And for that reason, among many others, it must matter
to all of us.
This is also an important moment for my Office
and its relationship with the Security Council because
we have seen first-hand how our partnership can start
to deliver. We need to accelerate action. We need to
deliver more. It would be a false promise to say that
the whole of the events in Darfur rest on the shoulders
of Abd-Al-Rahman and Ali Kushayb. It will be
adjudicated by judges at the ICC. But there are other
cases for which the judges of the Court have issued
warrants, and we need to make sure there is cooperation
and accountability for them as well.
This afternoon I had the opportunity to meet
General Hamden Dagalo, Deputy Chairperson of the
Sovereignty Council and tomorrow, God willing, I
will be meeting General Al-Burhan. I have and will
continue to emphasize the need for cooperation with
both of them because I am extremely grateful for the
opportunity, and I do not take it for granted as I set foot
in this ancient and very important and noble land. I am
grateful to be able to brief the Security Council. I am
grateful that just a few days ago, multiple entry visas
were granted for the small delegation that is with me
now. I am grateful for the courtesy of being received at
the airport and for the security.
However, as is detailed in my report, by every
other metric, we have taken a step backwards in
terms of cooperation in recent months. That does not
prejudice me. It prejudices the Council’s demand for
4/16

23/08/2022

proper investigation and the Sudan’s responsibility,
by dint of resolution 1593 (2005), to cooperate and by
virtue of the Juba Peace Agreement to make sure that
justice is actually delivered.
In the report, members will see the new benchmarks
that have been detailed, including the requirement to
issue multiple entry visas, to help us open an office
in Khartoum as soon as possible, to hold monthly
meetings with departmental level focal points and
provide multiple entry visas not just for the Deputy
Prosecutor and myself and my immediate mission,
but for the members of the Office who have to collect
evidence and build relationships with the Sudanese
authorities and the victims.
I believe the coming weeks will determine
whether or not the mission is a success. I have been
as transparent and clear as possible with the senior
members of the Government with whom I have had the
opportunity to meet. I would like the Sudan to succeed.
I think we all do. I have made it clear what I expect, and
I remain ready to engage with the Sudan, its people and
the Darfuri people in every way possible. However, the
only thing upon which I must insist is what the Council
has required and what the victims demand, which is
justice. I believe that, if we recommit ourselves and
insist upon cooperation and build trust, hopefully, we
can vindicate fully the decision of the Council to refer
the matter in the first place.
I again thank the Council for the opportunity to
address it today.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Prosecutor Khan for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Arrocha Olabuenaga (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank Prosecutor Karim Khan and his
entire team for presenting his most recent report on the
situation in Darfur, pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005).
We applaud the fact that the report was presented from
the Sudan, which demonstrates that there is cooperation
among the national authorities, local communities and
the International Criminal Court (ICC).
Mexico welcomes the start of judicial proceedings
in the Ali Kushayb case in April. The importance of that
case is not insignificant. It is the first case to be heard
based on a situation that was referred by the Security
Council to the ICC. It has a profound impact on local
22-46912

23/08/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

communities and on the victims, as several of them had
lost all hope of redress after waiting almost 20 years.
Not only has space now been created for catharsis, but
also for justice.
This positive time should be used to further
strengthen cooperation between the Sudan and the
ICC. It helps to strengthen the implementation of the
memorandum of understanding signed between the
two sides and in the establishment of an ICC office in
Khartoum. The team at the Office of the Prosecutor
must always have effective focal points within the
Government in order to continue working, in particular
to ensure the protection of witnesses. We call upon the
Sudanese authorities to address pending requests for
assistance from the Office of the Prosecutor.
In conclusion, we reiterate our support to the
Prosecutor and to the ICC overall. We hope that the
precedent set in the Ali Kushayb case will pave the
way for other cases and ensure that action is taken
on situations referred by the Security Council to the
ICC. As we have mentioned on previous occasions,
expenses incurred in those cases should be covered by
the United Nations.
Ms. Shaheen (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): I thank the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court, Mr. Karim Khan, for his comprehensive
briefing. I also welcome the representative of the Sudan
to today’s meeting. The United Arab Emirates continues
to follow the work of the Court and its activities within
the context of today’s discussion.
We extend our condolences to the Sudan and to
the families of those who lost their lives following the
recent torrential rain and flooding. The United Arab
Emirates will continue to support those affected by
providing them with humanitarian assistance. We are
confident that the Sudan and its fraternal people are
capable of overcoming that situation.
In the light of the exceptional circumstances
currently experienced by the Sudan, the United Arab
Emirates welcomes all efforts to support the trilateral
mechanism in facilitating a Sudanese-led political
process. In that regard, my country underscores the
importance of Sudanese stakeholders engaging in
dialogue through direct talks to reach a common
understanding on the way forward. Such dialogue
should be inclusive, while ensuring the involvement
of young people and the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women.

S/PV.9113

With regard to the deterioration of the security
situation in some areas of Darfur, which has led to
many lives being lost, we note that the Sudan has
responded to the situation and taken several urgent and
important measures to reduce tensions. In that context,
we stress that the full implementation of the Juba Peace
Agreement remains essential to ensuring Darfur’s
sustained security and stability. The international
community must therefore step up its efforts and
provide the necessary technical and financial support
so that the Sudan can fully implement the Agreement.
Despite the challenges faced by the Sudan, it has
continued to tangibly cooperate with the Office of the
Prosecutor, which includes hosting several visits for
the Office, including the current visit, and organizing
meetings with Government officials and other relevant
individuals in the Sudan. Those engagements serve as
an opportunity to deepen the sincere dialogue between
the International Criminal Court and the Sudan, based
on the Court’s principle of complementarity, in line
with national legislation and the Rome Statute.
Lastly, the United Arab Emirates stresses its
strong support for the Sudan’s efforts in implementing
transitional justice mechanisms to help deliver justice
to the victims in Darfur, consistent with the terms of
the Juba Peace Agreement.
In conclusion, my country reiterates its commitment
to the Sudan’s sovereignty, independence, territorial
integrity and national unity.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I would like to
thank China for facilitating this important briefing,
which is a fundamental tool for the international
community to keep track of the follow-up to its referral
to the International Criminal Court (ICC) of serious
violations allegedly perpetrated in Darfur. It was the
first time that the Security Council availed itself of that
power conferred on it by the Rome Statute. This referral
pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005) has unquestionably
been a landmark in the history of international criminal
justice, although it has allowed selective immunity,
which regrettably weakens the ICC’s ability to fully
discharge its duties.
I would also like to thank Prosecutor Karim Khan
not only for the information that he provided today, but
also for his most recent report. I especially welcome his
simple, clear-cut, updated road map for accountability.
It sets tangible goals, deadlines and actions for the
coming months and will therefore enable the Security

22-469125/16

S/PV.9113

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Council to measure the progress achieved in its
implementation in objective terms. I am also pleased to
see the delegation of the Sudan, whose presence in this
Chamber is a positive sign of its engagement with the
cause of justice.
The thirty-fifth report portrays the challenges
that the Office of the Prosecutor currently faces in
the investigation and prosecution of alleged crimes
committed in Darfur. One of them, cooperation with
national authorities, is key. Complementarity is a
fundamental principle of the Rome Statute, and, if
I may put it in these terms, the basis for an effective
result, which is sustainable international justice.
Without strong national institutions able to deliver
justice for local populations and protect them from
further harm, there will always be a higher level of risk
of relapse into instability and conflict and therefore
the perpetration of serious crimes. That is why the
primary responsibility for providing justice belongs to
national States and should remain so, without prejudice
to the complementarity role that the Court must play
when States are unable or unwilling to do so. In that
context, Brazil commends the efforts that the Office of
the Prosecutor and the Court’s Registry are making to
establish a field office in Khartoum. It will bring the
ICC closer to the victims and witnesses, reinforce its
ability to collect evidence and enable it to cooperate
more closely with the Government of the Sudan.
Brazil also deeply appreciates Mr. Khan’s initiative in
reaching out to the communities affected.
The report makes reference to the challenges
represented by limited internal resources. In that
respect, I reiterate Brazil’s insistence on the need for
the expenses incurred by the Court for referrals from
the Security Council to be borne by the United Nations
as well as the States parties to the Rome Statute.
I would also like to mention our concern about the
current political, economic and social situation in the
Sudan. Almost 12 million Sudanese may be facing acute
food insecurity between June and September. The Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs has issued
a thorough emergency-response preparedness plan. The
international community should redouble its efforts to
address the aggravated food insecurity and malnutrition
in the Sudan. Brazil also underlines its support for
the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance
Mission in the Sudan. Dialogue and cooperation among
all Sudanese stakeholders are needed to secure the
6/16

23/08/2022

peaceful, inclusive transition to democracy envisaged
in the draft constitutional declaration.
Brazil is a founding member of the ICC and
has a deep-rooted commitment to international law
and international justice. As a permanent Treatybased tribunal, the ICC represented a breakthrough
in ensuring accountability for the most serious
crimes under international law. Our support and
cooperation are essential to enabling it to fulfil its
crucial responsibilities.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank
Prosecutor Khan for his report and briefing to the
Security Council today on the investigation by the
International Criminal Court (ICC) into the situation in
Darfur, including his moving insights from his visit and
time spent in Darfur and Khartoum. My delegation will
give great consideration to the recommendations that he
has made to the Council today. Let me also say that we
are very grateful for his hard work and for the sustained
efforts of the judges, attorneys and staff of the ICC in
their unwavering pursuit of justice for Darfur.
As a result of the tireless efforts of the Court in
April, the United States welcomed the beginning
of the trial in the case against Ali Muhammad Ali
Abd-Al-Rahman, the former Janjaweed commander
now facing 31 counts of war crimes and crimes against
humanity. At the heart of the case against him is the
testimony of dozens of witnesses, many of whom still
live in Darfur. Over the past several months, a lot of
those witnesses, many of them survivors of violence,
have travelled thousands of miles to The Hague to tell
their stories in their own words. We agree with the
Prosecutor that the Council must honour the witnesses
and survivors by trying its hardest to ensure that their
hopes for justice are realized. Their bravery in speaking
to the widespread killing of civilians and the pillaging,
abuse and destruction of communities in Darfur is
inspiring. Of course, there is no shortage of courage
in the Sudan. Most recently, since the October military
takeover, the Sudanese people have themselves taken to
the streets to demand a better future in which they can
realize their aspirations for democracy and respect for
human rights.
In that regard, I would like to underscore my
Government’s belief that resolving the Sudan’s political
crisis will require the formation of a civilian-led
transitional Government that can work to deliver on the
promises of the 2019 revolution. United international
22-46912

23/08/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV.9113

efforts will be crucial in helping to facilitate an
inclusive Sudanese-led dialogue aimed at restoring
the Sudan’s democratic transition and civilian rule.
The United States commends the efforts of the United
Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission
in the Sudan (UNITAMS), the African Union and
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development in
facilitating dialogue on a way forward towards full
civilian rule. We will continue to support UNITAMS
in the full implementation of its mandate, including the
Juba Peace Agreement.

paragraph 8 of resolution 1593 (2005). I also welcome
the presence of the Permanent Representative of the
Sudan in today’s meeting.

We continue to be alarmed by the violence in
Darfur, which has displaced more than 100,000 people.
Intercommunal violence threatens social cohesion and
diminishes the likelihood of peaceful cohabitation
and the sustainability of the peace process. The
need to protect civilians is urgent, as are inclusive
security-sector reform and the establishment of robust
international monitoring and reporting mechanisms. On
that note, the United States would like to congratulate
the Juba Peace Agreement signatories on the formation
and graduation of forces for the joint security-keeping
force. That is a significant step in improving the
protection of civilians.

The developments in recent months reflect the
inherent challenges in the political transition process
in the Sudan. We continue to believe that the United
Nations-facilitated intra-Sudanese political process
needs to be Sudanese-led and guided by a constructive
approach. The transition process should continue to
address issues related to justice and accountability.
We have welcomed the initiatives taken since May by
the trilateral cooperation mechanism, which consists
of the United Nations, the African Union and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, to
launch indirect intra-Sudanese talks in order to end the
political impasse.

As detailed in the Prosecutor’s report, the Sudanese
authorities have recently facilitated visits by the
Prosecutor and his staff and taken other steps to provide
some assistance to their investigations in Darfur, which
is very welcome news. Such cooperation must continue
and must improve. As the Sudanese stakeholders work
to find a way forward to address the current crisis, we
strongly urge the authorities to continue to comply
with their international legal obligations pursuant to
resolution 1593 (2005) and to cooperate with the ICC.
They must continue to permit ICC teams to travel within
the country and cooperate with requests for evidence
and other information and assistance, including through
unimpeded access to key witnesses and by facilitating
an enhanced ICC field presence. Those who are subject
to arrest warrants by the ICC must face justice and be
transferred to face trial.

The transitional Government of the Sudan
has shown readiness to address issues relating to
transitional justice, including accountability for human
rights violations, through a truth and reconciliation
process. The parties to the Juba Peace Agreement have
also agreed to establish a Truth and Reconciliation
Commission in relation to Darfur and the Special Court
for Darfur Crimes. The jurisdiction of that Special
Court, which will include matters relating to genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes since 2002, is
a step in the right direction.

The United States will continue to stand by the
Sudanese people in support of the ICC’s efforts to
advance accountability.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): Let me begin by thanking
Mr. Karim Khan, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court, for presenting the thirty-fifth report
on the situation in the Sudan, submitted pursuant to

At the outset, I would like to place on record that
India is not a signatory to the Rome Statute and is not a
member of the International Criminal Court.
We have noted the progress made in recent
months, including the first trial in the case of
Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman. We also take note of the
Prosecutor’s recent visit to the Sudan.

Regarding the situation in Darfur, the SecretaryGeneral’s recent report (S/2022/400) noted progress
on the start of the Darfur Permanent Ceasefire
Committee, as well as in relation to the joint securitykeeping force in Darfur, which was agreed in the Juba
Peace Agreement.
Lastly, accountability for serious violations of
international law is a noble objective and needs to be
pursued with due respect for the sovereign equality of
States. The international community should continue
to encourage the States concerned to have in place
an inclusive and transparent process to establish
accountability for serious violations of international

22-469127/16

S/PV.9113

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

law committed within its jurisdiction. The pursuit of
accountability and justice cannot be linked to political
expediencies. We continue to underscore that the
overarching goal of any accountability process is to
enable justice, promote reconciliation and achieve
long-term peace.
In that context, we remain confident that people
of the Sudan will overcome the current challenges and
continue to strive for a stable and prosperous future.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I would like to thank
Prosecutor Khan for his briefing, particularly during
his important visit to the Sudan and Darfur.
Norway welcomes the commencement of the
trial of Ali Kushayb. That is an important landmark
for accountability and a sign of hope for the victims.
We also welcome the renewed strategic approach by
the International Criminal Court (ICC), which we
hope will enable further progress and address the
impediments related to the lack of cooperation by the
Sudanese authorities. However, increased cooperation
from other States and institutions to help the Prosecutor
pursue those investigations is welcome, and we strongly
support a planned, enhanced field presence and call on
the authorities to facilitate that.
As Mr. Khan noted, the referral by the Security
Council cannot be a never-ending story. Almost two
decades since the Security Council first referred the
situation in Darfur, 2021 was a year of major strides
for the Court, thanks to the genuine cooperation of the
Government. But to make progress, that cooperation
must be maintained.
The Council has given the ICC a central role by
referring the situation to the Court and has mandated
the full cooperation of the Government of the Sudan. We
must do everything we can to follow up and ensure that
justice is served. We are concerned that the office of the
Prosecutor in Khartoum has not been given access to
all the witnesses, documents and information they have
requested. That lack of cooperation from the Sudanese
authorities has hampered progress in the investigations.
We again urge the Sudanese authorities to keep
their promises and fulfil their obligations to actively and
meaningfully cooperate with the Court. The victims of
atrocities in Darfur deserve long-overdue justice, and
the perpetrators must be held accountable.
Norway is also seriously concerned by current
reports of intercommunal violence in the Darfur region.
8/16

23/08/2022

The situation is a threat to the safety of civilians, not to
mention its negative operational impact on the ability of
the Court to do its investigative work. Norway strongly
condemns all attacks directed against civilians and
urges all parties to respect international humanitarian
law. We cannot allow another crisis to unfold, and the
violence must stop.
In conclusion, Norway has been a staunch supporter
of the ICC since the beginning. The fight against
impunity remains a central element of our foreign
policy. It is also a fundamental part of the Sudan’s own
2019 revolution and the Juba Peace Agreement, which
must be realized. The Office of the Prosecutor and the
Court can count on Norway’s continued full support
towards accountability.
Mr. Ryan (Ireland): I would like to thank
Prosecutor Khan for his briefing and report. I also
welcome the Permanent Representative of the Sudan to
today’s meeting.
We are gravely concerned that the security
situation in Darfur deteriorated even further over the
reporting period. We have seen large-scale violence
in the west of the region, resulting in the deaths of
approximately 200 people in April. Ireland calls on the
Sudanese authorities to investigate those incidents fully
and ensure accountability for those responsible. As the
Prosecutor said, that is what the people of the Sudan
demand and expect.
Reports of civilian deaths, sexual and genderbased violence, the rape of women and girls, forced
displacement and the destruction of property are deeply
worrisome and include acts that may come within the
jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court (ICC).
Impunity sows the seeds of further violence. Ensuring
accountability for the people of Darfur is therefore
essential if we are ever to stop this cycle of violence.
While the reasons for the deteriorating security
situation are complex, we know that it is linked to the
breakdown in constitutional order at the national level.
Ireland echoes the Secretary-General’s call for a return
to the transition towards a civilian-led democratic
Government through an inclusive, Sudanese-owned
political dialogue. In that regard, we fully support the
efforts of the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan, the African Union
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
in supporting the process.
22-46912

23/08/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV.9113

Twenty years ago last month, international criminal
justice changed for the better, with the entry into force
of the Rome Statute. To mark that important milestone,
Ireland, together with 11 co-sponsors, hosted an Arria
Formula meeting on strengthening the relationship
between the Court and the Council. While there is
considerable scope for improving this relationship, as
the Prosecutor mentioned, the referral of the situation
in Darfur demonstrates what the Council can achieve
in the realm of accountability through cooperation with
the ICC. That action has now led to the opening of the
first prosecution at the ICC arising from a Security
Council referral, against former Janjaweed commander
Ali Kushayb for war crimes and crimes against
humanity in Darfur.

simply not possible without justice for the victims and
survivors of atrocity crimes in Darfur. We hope that the
Prosecutor’s visit will build the necessary momentum
to that end and quench the thirst for justice in the
Sudan, which he mentioned earlier.

Ireland is appreciative of the open approach
to reporting adopted by the Prosecutor in his most
recent report and the development of benchmarks for
this investigation. We also welcome the Prosecutor’s
ongoing visit to the Sudan, particularly to Darfur, and
the support provided by the Sudanese authorities in
facilitating the trip.

The people of the Sudan have injected considerable
investment into their national institutional and legal
frameworks, responding to international efforts under
resolution 1593 (2005) in that regard. The establishment
of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission in relation
to Darfur and the Special Court for Darfur Crimes, under
the Juba Peace Agreement, are among such responses.

However, further progress in the investigation is
now dependent on the Sudan’s cooperation with the
Court, which unfortunately has taken a backward step
since the unfortunate events of October 2021. Prior
to the military coup, there were a number of notable
positive developments, including the conclusion of
a further memorandum of understanding with the
civilian-led transitional Government.

We urge the people of the Sudan to be steadfast in
that resolve, which is critical for their quest for peace
and shared prosperity. But we remain cognizant of
the complex political environment upon which those
efforts are set, especially after the events of October
last year. Therefore, we urge that international efforts
and engagements be mindful of the need to protect
each of the achievements of the Sudan, borne of the
aspirations of its people.

Ireland urges the Sudan to return to the path of
progress and supports the Prosecutor’s request for
unimpeded access to evidence, to Sudanese territory
and to all material witnesses. We also call on the
Sudanese authorities to facilitate the establishment of
a field presence in Khartoum and to ensure prompt
responses to all requests for assistance submitted by
the Prosecutor. Furthermore, we repeat our call on
the Sudan to nominate focal points within relevant
ministries and to ensure the safety of witnesses and
their ability to testify.
Finally, we note that four ICC arrest warrants
remain outstanding. Once again, we urge Mr. Banda
to surrender to the Court and reiterate our call on the
Sudan to surrender the three additional fugitives in
Sudanese custody, in line with its obligations.
The collective goal is to ensure a durable and
sustainable peace in the Sudan. However, that goal is

Ms. Nyakoe (Kenya): I thank Mr. Karim Khan,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, for
his briefing and take note of his thirty-fifth report. I
welcome the presence of the representative of the Sudan
in this meeting.
At the heart of the peace process in the Sudan are a
people whose efforts towards rebuilding peace in their
country is evident. That includes addressing transitional
justice issues and pursuing national reconciliation.

Kenya’s position remains clear. It is important to
invest in strengthening the national judicial and legal
capacity of the Sudan so that it is able to take the lead in
the responsibility of ensuring justice and accountability
in line with the principle of complementarity. To that
end, the Court can do more to support the Sudan.
We also call on the international community to
extend support, including through shared lessons
and best practices in transitional justice, including
accountability for human rights violations. The African
Union has encouraged its members to do so. We urge
that similar investment be made in national dialogue
and reconciliation to guarantee longer-lasting peace.
We note in the Prosecutor’s report the intention
to increase cooperation and dialogue with the African
Union under a renewed strategy. We believe that
regional initiatives and effort are necessary in providing

22-469129/16

S/PV.9113

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

a broader spectrum of practical avenues for justice and
accountability. As envisaged in resolution 1593 (2005),
that should be given more focus. We look forward to
hearing from the Prosecutor about the outcomes of
such dialogue.
Finally, Kenya assures the people of the Sudan of
its continued solidarity and cooperation as they seek
sustainable peace, development and justice for all.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this debate on the
thirty-fifth report of the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) on the situation in Darfur
pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005).
I thank Prosecutor Karim Khan for his edifying
briefing from Khartoum, which is a symbol of the
cooperation between the Sudan and the International
Criminal Court to bring justice for the victims of
atrocity crimes in Darfur.
I welcome the presence at this meeting of the
Permanent Representative of the Sudan.
We note the judicial activities, in particular the
investigations conducted by the International Criminal
Court, during the reporting period in order to strengthen
international criminal justice at the national, regional
and international levels.
We welcome the commitments made by the
Sudanese authorities to cooperate fully with the Court
to support its work, notwithstanding the fact that the
Sudan is not a State party to the Rome Statute. In
the spirit of cooperation, the Sudan authorized the
permanent presence of the Office of the Prosecutor
in the Sudan and, on 12 August 2021, signed a
memorandum of understanding that establishes the
modalities of cooperation between the Sudan and the
Office of the Prosecutor. The agreement allows the
Court to conduct its investigations into allegations of
war crimes, genocide and crimes against humanity. It
represents significant progress against the backdrop of
a political and socioeconomic context weakened by an
acute economic crisis and an uptick in violence.
As we are meeting, the ICC Prosecutor is visiting
the Sudan almost five months after the opening of the
trial in the Ali Kushayb case before the ICC.
We welcome the update by the International
Criminal Court of the Sudan’s commitments in the
context of the memorandum of understanding to
10/16

23/08/2022

maintain the initial momentum and to consider possible
additional accompanying measures. We also welcome
the partnerships that have been established or are in the
process of being established between the ICC and States
parties, non-State parties, civil society organizations
and regional and subregional institutions in the context
of the ongoing judicial investigations.
We encourage the Prosecutor to continue his
efforts to enhance the effectiveness and performance
of his Office, while stressing that the effectiveness of
the ongoing trials depends first and foremost on the
improvement of the political and security situation in
the Sudan. The climate of persistent insecurity in the
country, and in Darfur in particular, hinders the timely
conduct of investigations and creates new victims just
as the Court is struggling to bring justice to the victims
of previous conflicts.
In its efforts to deliver justice for the alleged crimes
committed in 2003, we trust that the Office of the
Prosecutor will take into account the fragile political
situation in the Sudan so as not to further undermine
the country’s stability. To that end, the return to
constitutional order appears to be the appropriate
framework for improved cooperation between the
Court and the Sudanese authorities. The national and
international efforts must come together as a priority
to that end.
Peacebuilding in the Sudan is based on the rule
of law and the fight against impunity, which requires
a legislative environment and institutional landscape
commensurate with the challenges and in line with
international standards. In this regard, the efforts of
the Sudanese authorities to adapt national legislation
to international standards in the fight against atrocities
are a step in the right direction.
Following the revision of the Sudanese penal code
and code of criminal procedure, war crimes, crimes
against humanity and genocide are now punishable
by law. Similarly, the jurisdictional privileges
and immunities originally granted to the security
forces have been abolished. In the same vein, many
perpetrators of crimes in Darfur have been arrested.
In addition, the Commission for the Implementation of
International Humanitarian Law has been restructured
in accordance with international standards. This
considerable progress must be recognized by all and
undoubtedly be consolidated and strengthened by
22-46912

23/08/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

improving the capacity of the Sudanese judiciary and
ensuring the regular functioning of State institutions.
In conclusion, we reaffirm our support for the
efforts of the Prosecutor and his Office and commend
the commitment and efforts of the Sudanese authorities
to cooperate with the Office of the Prosecutor, while
reiterating the importance of respecting the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the Sudan.
Mr. Korbieh (Ghana): I would like to join previous
speakers in thanking Mr. Karim Khan, Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court (ICC), for delivering
the thirty-fifth briefing to the Security Council on the
activities of the Court on the Sudan file. We welcome the
fact that the Prosecutor is at this moment in the Sudan
and believe that the facilitation of his presence there is
a sign of the commitment of the Sudanese authorities
to helping the Court address all outstanding matters. I
also wish to welcome the Permanent Representative of
the Sudan to today’s meeting.
The present report of the Prosecutor to the Council
demonstrates the Court’s seriousness in dealing with
impunity in the Sudan. Of particular note are the
landmark trial proceedings that commenced on 5 April
2022 in the case of Ali Muhammad Ali Abd-Al-Rahman,
which is of significance because it is the first trial at the
Court based on a referral from the Security Council.
Ghana believes that this trial sends a strong signal to all
would-be perpetrators of atrocity crimes that, although
the wheels of justice sometimes grind slowly, at the end
of the day, accountability and justice are inevitable.
As to other aspects of the report, Ghana wishes to
highlight the following three points. First, while calling
on the Court to carry out its mandate enshrined in the
Security Council referral, Ghana notes the challenges
facing the Court in the light of the current complex
political and security situation in the Sudan. However, it
is gratifying to observe the cooperative approach being
taken by the Court in engaging with the competent
Sudanese authorities.
Furthermore, the Court’s engagement with
the relevant national authorities is a positive step
in confidence-building towards desired results.
Ghana has always maintained that it is primarily
the responsibility of States to protect their citizens;
therefore, the State must be consulted in such matters.
However, cooperation should not be subordinated to the
principle of complementarity, which is a core principle
of the Rome Statute. It is therefore worth noting the

S/PV.9113

Court’s willingness to continue with its dialogue and
the exploration of innovative approaches to address
accountability at the domestic level.
We take this opportunity to call on the Government
of the Sudan to show support in that regard. We also
encourage the Court to continue to work with the
Sudanese judicial system and provide the needed
technical and capacity-building support. Certainly,
the independence of these national courts should be
paramount in the capacity-building efforts.
Secondly, the measures being put in place by the
Court to empower victims, witnesses and affected
communities by bringing its work closer to affected
communities through the proposed increase in the
frequency of missions to Darfur — and the enhancement
of the Court’s permanent field presence — are
noteworthy. In that regard, we applaud the Prosecutor
for meeting with victims and survivor groups in
internally displaced persons camps in both South
and Central Darfur States during his ongoing visit to
the Sudan from 20 to 24 August 2022. The proposed
establishment of a field office in Khartoum and of
possible locations for the presence of the Court in the
Sudan are also welcome developments.
Thirdly, we further note with appreciation the
steps being taken by the Court in its renewed strategy
to increase avenues for accountability through
cooperation with third States and international and
regional organizations. Of significance are the steps
being taken to increase cooperation and dialogue with
many African States and the African Union. As noted
in the report, this approach could help address not
only the lack of cooperation between the Court and
the Sudanese authorities, but it could also garner the
broadest support to address issues of accountability in
other cases that the Court is investigating.
I wish to conclude by once again thanking Mr. Khan
for his efforts aimed at fighting impunity by relocating
from The Hague to Khartoum, particularly, for meeting
with victims and survivors of atrocity crimes in Darfur.
This approach will help to demystify the invisibility
of the warlords who are seen as untouchable in their
communities and also give victims and survivors hope
by showing that they have a place — the ICC — where
they can turn for justice in times of need.
Mr. Leonidchenko (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Karim Khan for
presenting the report. We regret that the Office of the

22-4691211/16

S/PV.9113

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court once
again did not meet the set time frame, presenting the
report a month late. It is difficult to understand how this
correlates with the pledge to pay particular attention to
the subjects transmitted to the International Criminal
Court (ICC) by the Security Council.
In spite of the delay, we do not see in this report
any progress in investigating the situation in Darfur. It
is hardly possible to consider the beginning of the first
single-accused trial of the one defendant, 17 years after
the case was transferred to the ICC by the Security
Council, to be a breakthrough. It seems evident
that the ICC, which receives so-called financial and
organizational assistance from Western States to the
tune of millions of dollars to investigate the Ukrainian
dossier, has completely different priorities at this time.
Such a passion for Ukraine is utterly incomprehensible
to us. There are other serious issues on the Court’s
agenda that have either stagnated for years or been
intentionally swept under the rug.
Last month, British Broadcasting Corporation
(BBC) journalists published evidence of the British
military’s involvement in some 50 incidents in
which civilians were killed in 2010 and 2011 in
Afghanistan’s Helmand province. As we know, the
ICC has jurisdiction over the situation. The ability of
Britain’s judicial system to independently bring those
responsible for these disgusting crimes to justice is
highly questionable. And yet more than 10 years have
passed since then and we are still seeing the classic
scenario from all the collective West’s unprovoked,
unjustified and aggressive wars, which is that there are
numerous victims among the civilian population, but
no culprits among the NATO soldiers.
One would think that in this situation the ICC could
not simply stand aside when it should be guided by the
goal of ensuring justice for the victims, and that at the
same time, Great Britain itself should naturally provide
the Court with all possible assistance in punishing the
guilty parties, while other Western countries should
surely allocate no fewer resources to that investigation
than they are doing to the Ukrainian dossier.
Unfortunately, the reality is quite different. Western
countries present themselves as zealots for justice when
it comes to Russia. In the case of crimes committed by
their own military, however, they do everything they
can to avoid responsibility, with excuses, evasions,
bureaucratic red tape, specialized protective legislation,
sanctions and even threats.
12/16

23/08/2022

The Office of the Prosecutor of the ICC, which has
spared no time or effort with regard to the Ukrainian
dossier, even to the detriment of other cases, has
demonstrated no particular zeal in investigating the
crimes of British and American military personnel in
Afghanistan and Iraq. In fact, the new Prosecutor of
the Court has completely deprioritized the relevant
proceedings — in other words, the investigation
into them has stopped. It is unlikely that the BBC’s
sensational revelations will change anything.
The entire history of the ICC shows us that when
accountability for the military of Western States is at
issue, combating impunity becomes quite unnecessary
and even dangerous. The double standards that have
become a common practice for the Court compel us to
doubt its ability to bring about justice and promote a
lasting reconciliation process in the Sudan or any other
situation country.
At one of our previous meetings, Mr. Khan recalled
some words of his late father, who was indeed a very
wise man, saying that if you point a finger at someone,
three fingers will point back at you. That is also true
for those who like to point fingers at my country. The
only difference is that the people in this Chamber
barely have enough fingers on both hands to point to
all the transgressions of these self-proclaimed zealots
for justice.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): Let me begin by thanking
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
(ICC), Mr. Karim Khan, for today’s briefing from a
situation country, and welcoming his visit to the Sudan.
We think it is very important that the meeting is taking
place during the Prosecutor’s visit to the Sudan. As
a signatory to the Rome Statute, Albania reiterates
its full commitment and support to the International
Criminal Court and to Prosecutor Khan for their work
in the Sudan. We hope that after his visit the Sudanese
authorities will hesitate no longer in boarding the train
of justice.
We commend the opening of the trial on 5 April,
which will hopefully serve as an excellent example of
how the process of justice can be achieved. We agree
with Prosecutor Khan when he says that it is precisely
the kind of case for which the ICC was created and that
it should bring hope to the families of victims. However,
it is regrettable that four ICC arrest warrants remain
outstanding. We urge the Sudan to surrender the four
remaining suspects pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005)
and the orders of the ICC. As the Prosecutor highlighted,
22-46912

23/08/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

his Office has had to deal with limited access on the
ground, which remains a matter of great concern. We
urge the Sudanese authorities to allow the Office of the
Prosecutor to have full, safe and secure access to all
parts of the Sudan, including archives and mass graves,
as required by the memorandum of understanding,
resolution 1593 (2005) and the Juba Peace Agreement,
which Prosecutor Khan also mentioned.
It is important that the Council keep the promise of
accountability it made through resolution 1593 (2005)
and send the right message on promoting justice and
ensuring accountability for the atrocities committed in
the Sudan. In that regard, it is important to seek ways
to enhance cooperation between the ICC Prosecutor
and the Government of the Sudan, as the ICC’s
mission cannot be achieved without the support of the
Sudanese authorities.
In conclusion, we believe that the Sudanese people’s
desire to build their future in freedom and dignity can
be achieved only through a return to civilian leadership
and through honest and inclusive dialogue. The role of
the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance
Mission in the Sudan and the Juba Peace Agreement
will be key in reaching those goals.
Mr. Samson (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Prosecutor Khan for his report and his briefing from
Khartoum in the context of his visit to the Sudan. I also
welcome the participation of the Sudan in this meeting.
The investigation by the International Criminal
Court (ICC) into the situation in Darfur, at the
Council’s request, remains essential, especially at a
time of such political instability in the Sudan. Building
lasting and inclusive peace in the region will not
be possible without justice. Combating impunity is
essential in order to put an end to the spirals of revenge
and restore confidence in institutions. It must respond
to the desire for justice that the people have shared
with the Prosecutor during his visit. The fight against
impunity will also help to restore democratic life and
reconciliation. In that regard, we call on the Sudan to
cooperate fully with the Office of the Prosecutor. We
urge the Sudanese authorities to fulfil their obligations
under resolution 1593 (2005), the Juba Peace Agreement
and the memorandum of understanding concluded with
the Office of the Prosecutor. All necessary assistance
must be provided to the investigators, who must be
given secure access to Sudanese territory, including to
the crime scenes in Darfur, the archives and evidence

S/PV.9113

and to the witnesses, including those in detention. In
line with the agreements reached with the Sudanese
Government, a local office of the ICC should also be
established in Khartoum as soon as possible.
France welcomed the opening on 5 April of the trial
of Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman. We want to point out that it
is essential that witnesses in the case be able to speak
in total security with no risk of reprisals or hindrance.
Beyond that, while complementarity remains a
cardinal principle, the execution of the outstanding
arrest warrants is crucial. The Sudan must promptly
surrender Ahmad Harun to the ICC, and we once again
urge Abdallah Banda to surrender immediately to the
Court so that he can be tried.
The current political stalemate in the Sudan calls
into question many of the gains made during the past
two years. We support the efforts of the United Nations,
the African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development to facilitate dialogue between the
Sudanese parties. Political instability is particularly
affecting the security situation in Darfur, which has
been reflected in an increase in violence, including
intercommunal violence. Those responsible for such
violence must be held accountable.
We also reiterate our call for the deployment of the
joint force for the protection of civilians provided for
in the Juba Peace Agreement. The Sudanese authorities
are responsible for the protection of civilians, including
humanitarian and medical personnel, and for ensuring
full, safe and unhindered humanitarian access.
Those issues must continue to be priorities.
Together with its partners, especially those in Europe,
France will remain actively committed to the political
transition in the Sudan.
Mr. Wickremasinghe (United Kingdom): I thank
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
for his thirty-fifth report on the situation in Darfur,
pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005), and for his briefing
to the Security Council. I also welcome the fact that the
briefing has been delivered during his second visit to
Sudan, as a sign of Court’s unwavering commitment to
helping deliver justice to the people of Darfur.
In that light, the United Kingdom welcomes the
progress made in the trial of Mr. Abd-Al-Rahman, in
which 28 witnesses have provided evidence since April.
It is a testament to the victims’ courage and patience
for them to tell their stories after two decades and

22-4691213/16

S/PV.9113

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

represents a vital step towards seeking accountability
for all survivors and affected communities in Darfur.
This historic moment demonstrates how enhanced
cooperation can translate into meaningful action in
the pursuit of justice. It is our sincere hope that this
initial step will begin to deliver justice to the people
of Darfur and help to break the cycle of impunity that
exists across the Sudan.
However, it is regrettable that sufficient cooperation
has been lacking from the Sudanese authorities since
the October 2021 military coup, putting at risk the
progress that the previous Government of Sudan had
been able to make with the Court. The United Kingdom
therefore urges the Sudanese authorities to immediately
enhance their cooperation with the Court.
First, we call for the Sudanese authorities to engage
in helping to facilitate the establishment of a field
office in Khartoum. A permanent presence is vital for
the Office of the Prosecutor to continuously deepen its
engagement with affected communities and facilitate
stronger cooperation with the Sudanese authorities.
Secondly, the United Kingdom urges the
Sudanese authorities to respond swiftly to the Court’s
outstanding requests for assistance, noting the Court
has only received a response to two of the 17 requests
it has made in the past six months. We also urge the
Sudanese authorities to provide unimpeded access
to the documentation and witnesses that have been
identified by the Court.
Finally, the United Kingdom would like to
commend the ICC for its tireless efforts in delivering
justice to the people of Darfur and reiterate its support
to the Court in that endeavour. In that regard, we call for
action to deliver on the four outstanding ICC warrants
in the Darfur situation. We also continue to call for the
surrender of Mr. Banda, who remains a fugitive from
the Court.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.
I would like to thank Prosecutor Khan for his
briefing. I also welcome the participation of the
representative of the Sudan in this meeting.
The overall security situation in the Darfur region
of the Sudan has witnessed repeated intercommunal
conflicts, in response to which the Government
of the Sudan has taken active measures and made
14/16

23/08/2022

significant efforts. The international community
should provide constructive support to the Sudanese
Government to address the difficulties encountered in
the implementation of the Juba Peace Agreement, such
as the shortage of resources, and to help the Sudanese
Government to strengthen capacity-building.
Security Council sanctions have severely limited
the security capabilities of the Sudanese Government,
and they should be adjusted and lifted in the light of
the evolving situation on the ground. China hopes
that the provision in resolution 2620 (2022) on
setting benchmarks to adjust sanctions on the Sudan
by 31 August will be implemented. The relevant
benchmarks should be clearly identified and realistic
and should not go beyond the Darfur issue, and neither
should they be used as a political tool to exert pressure
on the Sudan.
I would like to reiterate that China’s position
on the International Criminal Court (ICC) remains
unchanged. We take note the work of the ICC and
Prosecutor Khan on the situation in Sudan. We have
always believed that the Court should strictly follow
the principle of complementarity and earnestly respect
the judicial sovereignty of the Sudan. We hope that the
actions that the Court has taken in accordance with the
resolutions of the Security Council will help Sudan
achieve long-term stability and security. We note that
Prosecutor Khan is currently visiting the Sudan and
that the Sudanese Government has provided active
support and coordination in that regard.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
and your friendly country on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of August. I
also want to thank Mr. Karim Khan, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), for briefing the
Council today from Khartoum.
Since its glorious December 2018 revolution, Sudan
has witnessed significant positive developments that
have laid the groundwork for a new political reality that
will undoubtedly lead to the establishment of a system
where freedom, justice and the rule of law prevail.
We have already started to consolidate a sustainable
structure for democratic civilian rule where people’s
22-46912

23/08/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

sovereignty is ensured, and actions are governed by law
and underpinned by justice with no place for impunity.
The Government of the Sudan has demonstrated
serious cooperation with the ICC, especially with the
Office of the Prosecutor, where various delegations
were received and a memorandum of understanding was
signed in August 2021. As I speak before the Council
today, a high-level delegation led by Prosecutor Khan
is in Khartoum. The people of Darfur have previously
suffered killing, destruction and displacement. The
Government of the Sudan has therefore given special
attention to Darfur and its people and has made
achieving complete, just and sustainable peace its top
priority. That means ensuring the voluntary return
of internally displaced persons and refugees to their
villages and solving the problem of land and ownership.
In order to achieve peace, development, justice
and accountability, the transitional Government
eagerly signed the Juba Peace Agreement in 2021.
It set out a comprehensive road map to address the
conflict and post-conflict arrangements. Among the
most important pillars of the Peace Agreement are the
security arrangements for the protection of civilians
through the deployment of joint forces in all parts of
Darfur, pursuant to the national plan for the protection
of civilians, the national plan for the protection and
promotion of human rights and the 2019 Constitutional
Declaration. The transitional Government has amended
a number of laws in order to abolish immunities for
officials that could otherwise impede the achievement
of justice and enable impunity.
The Sudanese judiciary and the Public Prosecutor’s
Office have been investigating all the violations
registered in Darfur since 2001, in line with the
Sudan’s obligations under international law and the
four Geneva Conventions. However, as the Council
is aware, the transitional Government bears the
responsibility for preventing impunity through credible
national procedures. A failure to prevent impunity
would encourage the same individuals to commit
further violations and encourage others to believe that
they would not be punished and held accountable. The
transitional Government is also working to enshrine
the principles of transitional justice as one of the most
important mechanisms for achieving societal peace
and stability.
We welcome the reference in the Prosecutor’s report
acknowledging the steady improvement of the situation

S/PV.9113

in Darfur. We also welcome the report’s recognition of
the cooperation between the Government of the Sudan
and the Office of the Prosecutor during the reporting
period, in line with the principles of international
criminal law and the Rome Statute of the ICC. Former
Prosecutor Bensouda agreed to three options for
dealing with suspects and individuals wanted by the
Court. First, the trial of suspects and wanted persons
of the ICC would take place before a Sudanese court.
Secondly, the suspects and the wanted would appear
before the ICC. Thirdly, the Sudan would accept the
option of prosecuting those individuals before a hybrid
court that is supported internationally. In the light of the
current political transition in the Sudan, its immense
challenges and the fragility and sensitivity of the
situation, it is imperative that those options be examined
in order to determine which would be the best way to
achieve justice, establish social harmony and preserve
the Sudan’s unity and sovereignty. That requires that all
the members of the Security Council fully support the
measures taken by the Sudanese Government, in line
with their international commitments, which would
help lead to sustaining peace and stability and to the
delivery of justice and the prevention of impunity.
We must underscore that the Juba Peace Agreement
has created a new reality in the Sudan, particularly in
Darfur. The international community must support that
reality. The Government of the Sudan would like to recall
the principle of legal complementarity, as outlined in
the Rome Statute of the ICC, which allows for bilateral
cooperation between the Sudanese Government and the
Office of the Prosecutor. The transitional Government
stresses its commitment to productive cooperation with
the Office of the Prosecutor, consistent with its moral
and legal obligations. At the same time, we expect
such cooperation to be reciprocal in order to deliver
justice and provide redress to victims according to the
options under consideration and the dialogue launched
to achieve stability and ensure the Sudan’s sovereignty
and unity.
In conclusion, we emphasize that the issue of
addressing impunity is a noble goal in the achievement
of justice. It is not a contentious one. As I stated
earlier, it is one of the most important priorities of the
transitional Government and one of the most important
elements for achieving peace throughout our country.
We want to underscore that we are fully and strongly
committed to fighting impunity, in particular for
international crimes related to Darfur.

22-4691215/16

S/PV.9113

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to Prosecutor Khan to respond to the comments
and questions that have been raised.
Mr. Khan: I would like to thank the Permanent
Representative of the Sudan for his attendance
and comments. I can only reiterate that within the
parameters of the Rome Statute, which includes the
principle of complementarity but beyond that the
imperative of justice, we are willing to engage and look
at imaginative ways forward in order to advance the
situation in the Sudan.
With regard to the remarks by the representative
of the Russian Federation, I can clarify a few points.
First, contrary to the fallacious assertion that the report
that I presented was late, I should reiterate that we
delayed the submission of the report at the request of
the Sudan and with the full knowledge of the Security
Council Affairs Division and the Council itself. The
Sudan requested that I delay my planned mission here
last month out of respect for the Muslim festival of Eid
Al-Adha. I complied with that request in a spirit of
brotherly respect for the independence and sovereignty
of the Sudan. So there was no delay.
Secondly, I am the first to agree that when one
surveys the international legal landscape, it has been
peppered with double standards, contradictions and
imperfections — before colonialism, during colonialism
and today. However, as the judge from Russia who sat
in Tokyo and Nuremberg clearly identified, tu quoque,
you too, is not a defence in international crimes.
Thirdly, with the greatest humility and respect, but
with a degree of candour, I would urge the representative
of the Russian Federation not to see the whole world
through the lens of the activities and conflagration in

16/16

23/08/2022

Ukraine. The people of Darfur deserve a few minutes of
focus on their own suffering, which they have endured
for 17 years. I cannot guess what Mr. Andrey Denisov,
the representative of the Russian Federation, would
have thought today, but when resolution 1593 (2005)
was adopted, he said that
“[t]he members of the Security Council have
frequently reaffirmed that the struggle against
impunity is one of the most important elements of a
long-term political settlement in Darfur … All who
are guilty of gross violations of human rights in
Darfur must be duly punished, as is rightly pointed
out in the report of the International Commission of
Inquiry … We believe that the resolution adopted
today … will contribute to an effective solution in
the fight against impunity” (S/PV.5158, p. 10).
Contrary to the assertion made to Council members
just now that we are somehow a single-issue Office,
my presence here today and the Deputy Prosecutor’s
recent return from Libya provide an ample riposte
that that is patently untrue. I am very grateful for the
representative’s kind remarks about the wisdom of
my late father. Perhaps I can mention another pearl of
his wisdom, which was that when one has jaundice,
everything seems yellow. I can only pray that any of
us, either in the Security Council Chamber or here in
the Sudan, including myself, who have jaundice may be
cured of that affliction as soon as possible.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Prosecutor Khan for his further clarifications
and comments.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 11.35 a.m.

22-46912
