United Nations

A/RES/59/116

General Assembly

Distr.: General
25 January 2005

Fifty-ninth session
Agenda item 74

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 10 December 2004
[on the report of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) (A/59/469)]

59/116. International cooperation in the peaceful uses of
outer space
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 51/122 of 13 December 1996, 54/68 of 6 December
1999 and 58/89 of 9 December 2003,
Deeply convinced of the common interest of mankind in promoting and
expanding the exploration and use of outer space, as the province of all mankind,
for peaceful purposes and in continuing efforts to extend to all States the benefits
derived therefrom, and also of the importance of international cooperation in this
field, for which the United Nations should continue to provide a focal point,
Reaffirming the importance of international cooperation in developing the rule
of law, including the relevant norms of space law and their important role in
international cooperation for the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful
purposes, and of the widest possible adherence to international treaties that promote
the peaceful uses of outer space in order to meet emerging new challenges,
especially for developing countries,
Seriously concerned about the possibility of an arms race in outer space, and
bearing in mind the importance of article IV of the Treaty on Principles Governing
the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the
Moon and Other Celestial Bodies, 1
Recognizing that all States, in particular those with major space capabilities,
should contribute actively to the goal of preventing an arms race in outer space as
an essential condition for the promotion and strengthening of international
cooperation in the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes,
Considering that space debris is an issue of concern to all nations,
Noting the progress achieved in the further development of peaceful space
exploration and applications as well as in various national and cooperative space
projects, which contributes to international cooperation, and the importance of

_______________
1

04-48322

Resolution 2222 (XXI), annex.

A/RES/59/116

further developing the legal framework to strengthen international cooperation in
this field,
Convinced of the importance of the recommendations in the resolution entitled
“The Space Millennium: Vienna Declaration on Space and Human Development”,
adopted by the Third United Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful
Uses of Outer Space (UNISPACE III), held at Vienna from 19 to 30 July 1999, 2 and
the need to promote the use of space technology towards implementing the United
Nations Millennium Declaration, 3
Convinced also that the use of space science and technology and their
applications, in such areas as telemedicine, tele-education and disaster management,
and environmental protection as well as other Earth observation applications,
contribute to achieving the objectives of the global conferences of the United
Nations that address various aspects of economic, social and cultural development,
inter alia, poverty eradication,
Having considered the report of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space on the work of its forty-seventh session, 4
1.
Endorses the report of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space on the work of its forty-seventh session;4
2.
Urges States that have not yet become parties to the international treaties
governing the uses of outer space 5 to give consideration to ratifying or acceding to
those treaties as well as incorporating them in their national legislation;
3.
Notes that, at its forty-third session, the Legal Subcommittee of the
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space continued its work, as mandated by
the General Assembly in its resolution 58/89; 6
4.
Requests the Secretary-General to send to the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of States that have not yet become parties to the above-mentioned
international treaties, the letter 7 and document,7 as endorsed by the Legal
Subcommittee, encouraging their States to participate in those treaties, and to send a
similar letter to intergovernmental organizations that have not yet declared their
acceptance of the rights and obligations under those treaties; 8
5.
Endorses the recommendation of the Committee that the Legal
Subcommittee, at its forty-fourth session, taking into account the concerns of all
countries, in particular those of developing countries:
_______________
2

See Report of the Third United Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space, Vienna, 19–30 July 1999 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.00.I.3), chap. I, resolution 1.
3
See resolution 55/2.
4
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/59/20).
5
Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space,
including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies (resolution 2222 (XXI), annex); Agreement on the Rescue
of Astronauts, the Return of Astronauts and the Return of Objects Launched into Outer Space (resolution
2345 (XXII), annex); Convention on International Liability for Damage Caused by Space Objects
(resolution 2777 (XXVI), annex); Convention on Registration of Objects Launched into Outer Space
(resolution 3235 (XXIX), annex); and Agreement Governing the Activities of States on the Moon and
Other Celestial Bodies (resolution 34/68, annex).
6
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/59/20),
chap. II.D.
7
A/AC.105/826, annex I, appendix I.
8
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/59/20),
chap. II.D, para. 150.

2

A/RES/59/116

(a)

Consider the following as regular agenda items:

(i)

General exchange of views;

(ii)

Status and application of the five United Nations treaties on outer space;

(iii) Information on the activities of international organizations relating to
space law;
(iv) Matters relating to:
a.

The definition and delimitation of outer space;

b.
The character and utilization of the geostationary orbit, including
consideration of ways and means to ensure the rational and equitable use of
the geostationary orbit without prejudice to the role of the International
Telecommunication Union;
(b)

Consider the following single issues/items for discussion:

(i) Review and possible revision of the Principles Relevant to the Use of
Nuclear Power Sources in Outer Space; 9
(ii) Examination of the preliminary draft protocol on matters specific to
space assets to the Convention on International Interests in Mobile Equipment,
opened for signature at Cape Town, South Africa, on 16 November 2001:
a.
Considerations relating to the possibility of the United Nations
serving as supervisory authority under the future protocol;
b.
Considerations relating to the relationship between the terms of the
future protocol and the rights and obligations of States under the legal regime
applicable to outer space;
(c) Consider the practice of States and international organizations in
registering space objects in accordance with the work plan adopted by the
Committee; 10
6.
Notes that the Legal Subcommittee, at its forty-fourth session, will
submit its proposals to the Committee for new items to be considered by the
Subcommittee at its forty-fifth session in 2006;
Also notes that, in the context of paragraph 5 (a) (ii) above, the Legal
7.
Subcommittee at its forty-fourth session will reconvene its Working Group and
review the need to extend the mandate of the Working Group beyond that session of
the Subcommittee;
Further notes that, in the context of paragraph 5 (a) (iv) a. above, the
8.
Legal Subcommittee will reconvene its Working Group on the item only to consider
matters relating to the definition and delimitation of outer space;
Notes that the Legal Subcommittee will reconvene its Working Group to
9.
consider the questions reflected in paragraphs 5 (b) (ii) a. and b. above separately;
10. Endorses the recommendation of the Legal Subcommittee, in the context
of paragraph 5 (b) (ii) a. above, to establish an open-ended ad hoc working group to
_______________
9

See resolution 47/68.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/58/20),
para. 199.
10

3

A/RES/59/116

continue between the forty-third and forty-fourth sessions of the Subcommittee, the
consideration of the question of the appropriateness of the United Nations acting as
supervisory authority, and notes that the working group would prepare a report,
including the text of a draft resolution, to be submitted to the Subcommittee for
consideration at its forty-fourth session; 11
11. Agrees that, in the context of paragraph 5 (c) above, the Legal
Subcommittee should establish a working group in accordance with the work plan
adopted by the Committee;10
12. Notes that the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee, at its forty-first
session, continued its work as mandated by the General Assembly in its resolution
58/89; 12
13. Endorses the recommendation of the Committee that the Scientific and
Technical Subcommittee, at its forty-second session, taking into account the
concerns of all countries, in particular those of developing countries:
(a)

Consider the following items:

(i) General exchange of views and introduction to reports submitted on
national activities;
(ii)

United Nations Programme on Space Applications;

(iii) Implementation of the recommendations of the Third United Nations
Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
(UNISPACE III);
(iv) Matters relating to remote-sensing of the Earth by satellite, including
applications for developing countries and monitoring of the Earth’s
environment;
(b) Consider the following items in accordance with the work plans adopted
by the Committee: 13
(i)

Space debris;

(ii)

Use of nuclear power sources in outer space;

(iii) Space-system-based telemedicine;
(iv) Near-Earth objects;
(v)

Space-system-based disaster management support;

(c)

Consider the following single issues/items for discussion:

(i) Examination of the physical nature and technical attributes of the
geostationary orbit and its utilization and applications, including, inter alia, in
the field of space communications, as well as other questions relating to

_______________
11

Ibid., Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/59/20), para. 170.
Ibid., chap. II.C.
13
See A/AC.105/761, para. 130, and Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session,
Supplement No. 20 (A/59/20), paras. 141 and 144, for item (i); A/AC.105/804, annex III, for item (ii);
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/58/20), para. 138,
for item (iii); A/AC.105/823, annex II, para. 18, for item (iv); and A/AC.105/823, annex II, para. 15, for
item (v).
12

4

A/RES/59/116

developments in space communications, taking particular account of the needs
and interests of developing countries;
(ii) Support to proclaim the year 2007 the International Geophysical and
Heliophysical Year;
14. Notes that the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee at its forty-second
session will submit its proposal to the Committee for a draft provisional agenda for
the forty-third session of the Subcommittee, in 2006;
15. Endorses the recommendation of the Committee that the Committee on
Space Research and the International Astronautical Federation, in liaison with
member States, be invited to arrange a symposium to address high-resolution and
hyperspectral satellite data integration for precision farming, environmental
monitoring and possible new applications, with as wide a participation as possible,
to be held during the first week of the forty-second session of the Scientific and
Technical Subcommittee;
16. Agrees that, in the context of paragraphs 13 (a) (ii) and (iii) and 14
above, the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee at its forty-second session should
reconvene the Working Group of the Whole;
17. Also agrees that, in the context of paragraph 13 (b) (i) above, the
Scientific and Technical Subcommittee, at its forty-second session, should
reconvene the Working Group on Space Debris to consider, as necessary, the
proposals of the Inter-Agency Space Debris Coordination Committee on space
debris mitigation and any related comments that might be received; 14
18. Further agrees that, in the context of paragraph 13 (b) (ii) above, the
Scientific and Technical Subcommittee at its forty-second session, should reconvene
its Working Group on the Use of Nuclear Power Sources in Outer Space;
19. Endorses the United Nations Programme on Space Applications for 2005,
as proposed to the Committee by the Expert on Space Applications and endorsed by
the Committee; 15
20. Notes with satisfaction that, in accordance with paragraph 30 of General
Assembly resolution 50/27 of 6 December 1995, the African regional centres for
space science and technology education, in the French language and in the English
language, located in Morocco and Nigeria, respectively, as well as the Centre for
Space Science and Technology Education in Asia and the Pacific and the Regional
Centre for Space Science and Technology Education for Latin America and the
Caribbean, continued their education programmes in 2004, that all the above
regional centres have entered into an affiliation agreement with the Office for Outer
Space Affairs of the Secretariat, and that the Office is providing technical support to
the Government of Jordan for the establishment of the regional centre for space
science and technology education for Western Asia;
21. Welcomes the memorandum of understanding between the Office for
Outer Space Affairs of the Secretariat and the Pro Tempore Secretariat of the Fourth
Space Conference of the Americas, under which the parties demonstrated their

_______________
14
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/59/20),
paras. 141 and 144.
15
Ibid., para. 70; see also A/AC.105/815, sects. II-IV.

5

A/RES/59/116

intention to collaborate in promoting and implementing joint activities, and invites
the Pro Tempore Secretariat to inform the Committee of the work accomplished;
22. Notes with satisfaction that the Government of Ecuador is considering
positively hosting the Fifth Space Conference of the Americas, to be held in Quito
in the second half of 2005 or in 2006, and that the convening of the Conference will
be in accordance with the desire of Member States in the Latin American and
Caribbean region to institutionalize the Space Conference of the Americas;
23. Also notes with satisfaction that concerning the report on the review of
the implementation of the recommendations of UNISPACE III, the Committee, at its
forty-seventh session, approved the draft report of the Committee as finalized by the
Working Group which was reconvened at that session to prepare the report, and
submitted the report to the General Assembly for use in its review and appraisal of
the implementation of the recommendations of UNISPACE III at its fifty-ninth
session; 16
24. Recommends that more attention be paid and political support be
provided to all matters relating to the protection and the preservation of the outer
space environment, especially those potentially affecting the Earth’s environment;
25. Considers that it is essential that Member States pay more attention to
the problem of collisions of space objects, including those with nuclear power
sources, with space debris, and other aspects of space debris, calls for the
continuation of national research on this question, for the development of improved
technology for the monitoring of space debris and for the compilation and
dissemination of data on space debris, also considers that, to the extent possible,
information thereon should be provided to the Scientific and Technical
Subcommittee, and agrees that international cooperation is needed to expand
appropriate and affordable strategies to minimize the impact of space debris on
future space missions;
26. Urges all States, in particular those with major space capabilities, to
contribute actively to the goal of preventing an arms race in outer space as an
essential condition for the promotion of international cooperation in the exploration
and use of outer space for peaceful purposes;
27. Emphasizes the need to increase the benefits of space technology and its
applications and to contribute to an orderly growth of space activities favourable to
sustained economic growth and sustainable development in all countries, including
mitigation of the consequences of disasters, in particular in the developing
countries;
28. Notes that space science and technology and their applications could
make important contributions to economic, social and cultural development and
welfare as indicated in the resolution entitled “The Space Millennium: Vienna
Declaration on Space and Human Development”,2 notes with satisfaction the
convening of a conference entitled “International Conference on Space and Water:
Towards Sustainable Development and Human Security” in the context of the
International Air and Space Fair, held at Santiago de Chile from 29 March to 4 April
2004, and also notes that the next Fair will be held in 2006;

_______________
16

6

See A/59/174.

A/RES/59/116

29. Notes with satisfaction the convening of the International Seminar on
Satellite Technology Applications in Communications and Remote Sensing in
Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, in October 2004 in cooperation with the InterIslamic Network on Space Sciences and Technology Applications;
30. Agrees that the benefits of space technology and its applications should
be prominently brought to the attention of conferences organized within the United
Nations system to address global issues relating to social, economic and cultural
development and that the use of space technology should be promoted towards
achieving the objectives of those conferences and implementing the United Nations
Millennium Declaration;3
31. Notes with satisfaction the increased efforts of the Committee and its
Scientific and Technical Subcommittee as well as the Office for Outer Space Affairs
and the Inter-Agency Meeting on Outer Space Activities to promote the use of space
science and technology and their applications in carrying out actions recommended
in the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development
(“Johannesburg Plan of Implementation”) 17 and the joint initiative taken by the
Committee and the Inter-Agency Meeting to compile a list of space-related
initiatives and programmes that correspond to recommendations contained in the
Johannesburg Plan of Implementation; 18
32. Notes that space technology could play a central role in disaster
reduction and that both the Committee and its Scientific and Technical
Subcommittee could contribute to the follow-up to the World Conference on
Disaster Reduction to be held in Kobe, Japan, in January 2005;
33. Urges entities of the United Nations system, particularly those
participating in the Inter-Agency Meeting on Outer Space Activities, to examine, in
cooperation with the Committee, how space science and technology and their
applications could contribute to implementing the United Nations Millennium
Declaration, particularly in the areas relating to, inter alia, food security and
increasing opportunities for education;
34. Invites the Inter-Agency Meeting on Outer Space Activities to continue
to contribute to the work of the Committee and to report to the Committee and its
Scientific and Technical Subcommittee on the work conducted at its annual session;
35. Requests the Committee to continue to consider, as a matter of priority,
ways and means of maintaining outer space for peaceful purposes and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its sixtieth session, and agrees that during its
consideration of the matter, the Committee could consider ways to promote regional
and interregional cooperation based on experiences stemming from the Space
Conference of the Americas and the role space technology could play in the
implementation of recommendations of the World Summit on Sustainable
Development;
36. Agrees that the Committee should continue to consider a report on the
activities of the International Satellite System for Search and Rescue as a part of its
consideration of the United Nations Programme on Space Applications under the
_______________
17

Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–
4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I,
resolution 2, annex.
18
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/59/20),
para. 28; and A/AC.105/2004/CRP.8.

7

A/RES/59/116

agenda item entitled “Report of the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee”, and
invites Member States to report on their activities regarding the System;
37. Requests the Committee to continue to consider, at its forty-eighth
session, its agenda item entitled “Spin-off benefits of space technology: review of
current status”;
38. Also requests the Committee to continue to consider, at its forty-eighth
session, its agenda item entitled “Space and society” under the special theme for the
focus of discussions for the period 2004–2006 entitled “Space and education”, in
accordance with the work plan adopted by the Committee; 19
39. Agrees that the Committee should continue to consider, at its forty-eighth
session, its agenda item entitled “Space and water” and urges entities of the United
Nations system and invites other intergovernmental entities dealing with issues
relating to the use and management of water resources as well as space agencies to
contribute to the work of the Committee by, inter alia, sharing their experience in
the use of space-related technology for water resources management;
40. Also agrees that a symposium on space and archaeology should be held
during the forty-eighth session of the Committee;
41. Notes that in accordance with the agreement reached by the Committee at
its forty-sixth session on the measures relating to the future composition of the
bureaux of the Committee and its subsidiary bodies, 20 on the basis of the measures
relating to the working methods of the Committee and its subsidiary bodies, 21 the
Group of African States, the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States and the
Group of Western European and Other States nominated their candidates for the
offices of Second Vice-Chairman/Rapporteur of the Committee, Chairman of the
Legal Subcommittee and Chairman of the Committee, respectively, for the period
2006–2007, at the forty-seventh session of the Committee, for its consideration;
42. Urges the Group of Asian States and the Group of Eastern European
States to reach a consensus agreement on their candidates for the offices of
Chairman of the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee and the First ViceChairman of the Committee, respectively, before the forty-eighth session of the
Committee;
43. Agrees that the Committee should reach agreement on all the officers of
the bureaux of the Committee and its subsidiary bodies for the period 2006–2007
and that, for this purpose, the Committee should include in the agenda of its fortyeighth session an item on the composition of the bureaux of the Committee and its
subsidiary bodies for that period;
44. Decides that the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and Thailand shall become
members of the Committee;
45. Requests the Committee to consider ways to improve participation in its
work by member States and entities with observer status, with a view to agreeing on
specific recommendations in that regard at its forty-eighth session;

_______________
19

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/58/20), para. 239.
Ibid., annex II, paras. 4–9.
21
Ibid., Fifty-second Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/52/20), annex I; see also Official Records of the
General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/58/20), annex II, appendix III.
20

8

A/RES/59/116

46. Notes that each of the regional groups has responsibility to actively
promote the participation in the work of the Committee and its subsidiary bodies of
the member States of the Committee that are also members of the respective
regional group, and agrees that the regional groups should consider this Committeerelated matter among their members;
47. Invites the Inter-Agency Meeting on Outer Space Activities to consider at
its twenty-fifth session, in 2005, the question of the enhancement of the
participation of the entities of the United Nations system in the work of the
Committee and its Subcommittees, and requests the Office for Outer Space Affairs,
in its capacity as the secretariat of the Inter-Agency Meeting, to report to the
Scientific and Technical Subcommittee and the Legal Subcommittee, at their
sessions in 2005, on the outcome of the discussions of the Inter-Agency Meeting;
48. Agrees that the Legal Subcommittee should, at its forty-fourth session,
address the level of participation of the entities having permanent observer status
with the Committee and report to the Committee, at its forty-eighth session, on
means of enhancing their participation in the work of the Legal Subcommittee;
49. Urges the Committee to expand the scope of international cooperation
relating to the social, economic, ethical and human dimension in space science and
technology applications;
50. Requests entities of the United Nations system and other international
organizations to continue and, where appropriate, to enhance their cooperation with
the Committee and to provide it with reports on the issues dealt with in the work of
the Committee and its subsidiary bodies;
51. Requests the Committee to identify and consider new areas and
mechanisms of international cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space to
strengthen multilateralism, in accordance with the preamble to the present
resolution, and to submit a report to the General Assembly at its sixtieth session,
including its views on which subjects should be studied in the future.
71st plenary meeting
10 December 2004

9
