NATIONS

UNIES

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL RECORDS
SECOND YEAR

CONSEIL DE SECURITE
PROCES-VERBAUX OFFICIELS
DEUXIEME ANNEE

No. 15

107etne et 108eme seances
18 fevrier 1947

and l08th nleetings

February 1947

Lake Success

New York

TABLE DES MA'r1ERES

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Cent-septi-eme seance

Hundred and seventh meeting
Page

nal agenda

59. Ordre du jour' provisoire. . . . . . . . . . . . .. 29 3

. 293

m of the discussion of the
:,ingdom complaint against
........... , .. ,
, 293

307

62. Ordre du jour provisoi~e.... : ..... '.... 307

, 308

63. Adoption de l'ordre du jour. . . . . . . . .•.. 308

ional agenda

0-1.

61. Suite de la discussion de la plainte du
Royaume-Uni contre l'Albanie
. 293

Cent-huitieme seance

Hundred and eighth meeting

ion of the agenda

. 293

60. Adoption de rordre du jour

on of the agenda. . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 293

63. Suite de la discussion du Pr~mier Rapport
de la Commission de 1'6~ergie atomique 308

L:ontinuation of the discussion of the
Fint Report of the Atomic Energy Com-

mission

308

Documents

Documents
Annex

Annexes

Les documents suivants, se rapportant aux
cent-septieme et cent-huitieme seances,
figurent all:

The following documents relevant to the
hundred and seventh and hundred and
eighth meetings appear in:
Supplement No. 3) Second Year

Supplement No 3) Deuxieme Annee

Letter from the representative of the United
Kingdom on the Security Council addressed .to the Se.cretary-Cencral and enclosures (document 8/247)

B

Lettre en date du 10 janvier 194-7 adressce
au Secretaire general par le representant
du Royaume-Uni au Conseil de securite
et pieces jointes (document S/24-7) . . . . .

8

9

Communications du Gouvernement albanais
relatives aux incidents survenus dans le
detroit de Corfou (document.S/250) ...

9

Communications from the Albanian GovcrI1lm~nt concerning incidents in the
Corfu Challnel (document S/250). . . .
SUjJplement No. 5, Second Year

Supplement No 5) Deuxieme Annee

Letter from the Chairman of the Atomic
Energy Commission to the President of
tbe Security Council dated 31 December
I !Hli tl':tllsmiuing tlH.~ First Report of the
Atomic Energy Commission (document
8/239)
14·

Lettre en date du 31 decembre 1946 adressee par le President de la Commission de
l'energie atomique au President tiu
Cons~il de· securite pour accompagner le
PremIer Rapport de la dite Commission
(document 8/239)

14

NATIONS UNIES

UNITED NATIONS

SEC,URITY
COUNCIL

CONSEIL
DE SECURITE

OfFICIAL RECORDS

PROCES-VERBAUX OFFICIELS

SECOND YEAR

No. 15

OEUXIEME ANNEE

No 15

HUNDRED AND SEVENTH MEETING

CENT-SEPTIEME SEANCE

Held at Lake Success, New York,
on Tuesday, 18 February 1947, at 11 a.m.

Tenue aLake Success, New York,
le mardi 18 fcvrier 1947, a11 heures.

President: Mr. F. VAN LANGENHOVE
(Belgium) .

President.: M. F. VAN LANGENHOVE
(Belgique ) .

Present: The representatives of the following
countries: Australia, Belgium, Brazil, China,
Colombia, France, Poland, Syria, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom,
United States of America.

Presents: Les representants des pays suivants:
Australie, Belgique, Bresil, Chine, Colombie,
France, Pologne, Syrie, Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques, Royaume-Uni, Etats-Unis
d'Amerique.

59. Provisional agenda (document 5/280)

59. Ordre du jour provisoire
(docu ment SI280)

1. Adoption of the agenda.

1. Adoption de l'ordre du jour.

2. Letter from the representative of the United
Kingdom on the Security Council addressed
to the Secretary-General concerning incidents in the Corfu Channel (documents
S/247 and S/250).:1

2. Lettre au Secretaire general du representant
du Royaume-U ni llU Ccinseil de securite,
relative aux incidents survenus dans le detroit
de Corfou (documents S/247 et S/250)1.

60. Adoption of the agenda

60. Adoption de I'ordre du jour

The agenda was adopted.

L'ordre du jour est adopte.

61. Continuation of the discussion of the
United Kingdom complaint against
Albania

61. Suite de la discussion de la plainte
du Royaume-Uni contre J'Albanie

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The next item on the agenda is the discussion
of the letter from the representative of the
United Kingdom on the Security Council to the
Secretary-General, concerning incidents in the
Corfu. Channel.
In accordance with a decision taken previously by the Security Council, and if there is no
opposition, I shall invite the representative of
Albania to take his seat at the Council table.

Le PRESIDENT: L'ordre du jour appelle la.
discussion sur la lettre au Secretaire general du
representant du Royaume-Uni au Conseil de
securite, relative aux incidents survenus dans le
detroit de Corfou.

(At this point in the proceedings, the representative of Albania, Mr. Hysni Kapo, Minister
Plenipotentiary to Yugoslavia, took a seat at the
Council table.)

(A ce moment, le representant de l'Albanie,
M. Hysni KapoJ Ministre pUnipotentiaire en
Y ougoslavie, prend place a la table du Conseil.)

'See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, Supplement No. 3, Annexes 8 and 9.

• Voir Proces-verbizux officielr du ConJeil de recuritJ J
Deuxieme Ann6e, Supplement No 3, Annexes 8 et 9~

Conformement a la decision prise anterieure~
ment par le Conseil de securite, et s'il n'y a pas
d'opposition, j'invite le representant de l'Albanie
a prendre place a la table du Conseil.

294
The PRESIDENT (trap,slated from French):
I now call upon the representative of the United
Kingdom.

Le PRESIDENT: Je donne la parole au representant du Royaume-Uni.

Sir Alexander CADOGAN (United Kingdom):
From the correspondence enclosed in my letter
of 10 January1 to the Secretary-General requesting him to bring this dispute before the Security
Council, and from other documents subsequently
circulated to the members, the broad outline of
the case is sufficiently plain. I may have occasion
to circulate further documents, and I shall
deposit with the Secretary-General certain other
evidence which will be available for members to
consult at their convenience.

Sir Alexander CADOGAN (Royaume-Uni)
(traduit de [J anglais): Les communications
jointes a la 1ettre que j'ai adressee le 10 janvi~:1.
au Secretaire general pour lui demander de SaISIf
le. Conseil de securite de ce differend,ainsi que
les autres documents qui ont ete, par la suite~
distri):mes aux membres du Conseil, do:pnent un
apen:;u suffisamment clair de l'affaire. Peut·etre
aurai-je l'occasion de distribuer d'au~res ?O,CUments. Je remettrai de plus au Secretall'e general
quelques autres preuves que les membres du
Conseil pourront examiner a loisir.
Je voudrais maintenant compIe~er cet~e doeu:
mentation, en vous relatant de VIve VOlX, aussl.
brievement que possible, les evenements qU1
contraignent mon Gouvernement a porter son
accusation contre l'Albanie.

I will now orally, and as briefly as I can, supplement this documentary material in order to
complete the narrative of the events which are
the subject of the charge which my Government
is compelled to make against the Government·
of Albania.
On the early afternoon of 22 October 1946,
a squadron of British warships was on the move
through the Straits between the Greek island of
Corfu and the mainland of Albania. The Mediterranean fleet, to which these warships belong,
had recently, in accordance with an old peacetime tradition of that fleet, been visiting various
Greek ports. This particular squadron visited
Corfu. At the time in question, they had left the
port and were moving northwards through the
Straits in order to rendezvous with certain other
of His Majesty's ships in the open sea north-west
of Corfu Island. They were in normal passage
formation-here I would refer to the chart
(Exhibit I) which illustrates their movements. 2
The cruiser Mauritius was leading, followed
at an interval of a few hundred yards by the
destroyer Saumarez. Behind them, after a gap of
two miles but on the same course, was the cruiser
Leander followed at an interval of a few hundred yards by the destroyer Volage. The course
they were taking was through a channel which
had been swept of mines in 1944, and which I
will in future refer to as the "swept .channel".
On their left, or westwards, as the exhibit shows,
German mine fields were still in existence. I
should explain, however, that even apart from
these mine fields, their course, close as it is to
the Albanian shore, is a necessary and reasonable one for navigational reasons. The waters to
the west near the northern coast of Corfu are
dangerous and rocky; it has always been quite
normal for all shipping which passes through
this area to keep close to the Albanian shores,
where the waters are deep and safe and navigation is much easier.
At 2.45 p.m., two bursts of machine-gun fire
were heard by the leading warships on the
Albanian coast. They proceeded on their passage and did not alter formation. At 2.53 p.m.,
a .heavy explosion took place in His Majesty's
ShIp Saumarez. The destroyer Volage was im.
1

Document 5/247.

See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, Supplement No. 6, Annex 15, Exhibit I.
1

.

Le 22 octobre 1946, au debut de l'apres-midi,
une escadre de batiments de guerre britanniques
etait engagee dans le detroit qui separe l'ile
grecque de Corfou de la cote albanaise. Suivant
une ancienne tradition du temps de paix, la flotte
de la Mediterranee, a laquelle appartenaient ces
navires, avait touche differents ports grecs. L'escadre en question avait fait escale a Corfou. Au
moment dont je parle, les ba.timents venaient
d'appareiller et faisaient route au nord, dans le
detroit en direction du large, vers un point situe
au nord-ouest de Corfou, ou ils devaient rejoindre
d'autres batiments de Sa Majeste. Ils naviguaien t:
en ligne de file, et vous pouvez a ce propos vous
reporter a la carte Oll est indiquee la route suivie
par les batiments (piece No 1)2.
Le croiseur Mauritius naviguait en tete, suivi
du contre-torpilleur SaumarezJ a quelques centaines de yards. A deux milles derriere eux, mais
gouvernant au meme cap, venait le croiseur
LeanderJ suivi, a quelques centaines de yards, du
contre-torpilleur Volage. L'escadre suivait un
chenal qui avait ete drague en 1944, et que
j'appellerai desormais "le chenal drague". A
babord, c'est-a-dire en direction de l'ouest, ainsi
que la carte l'indique, se trouvaient encore des
champs de mines posees par les Allemands. Je
tiens toutefois a faire remarquer que, meme independamment de ces champs de mines, il est
necessaire et raisonnable, pour des raisons de
navigation, que les navires serrent la cote albanaise. En effet, en direction de l'ouest, pres de la
cote septentrionale de Corfou, les caux sont
pleines de recifs dangereux. 11 a toujours ete
normal que les bateaux traversant cette region
serrent d'aussi pres que possible la cote albanaise
ou les eaux sont profondes et sures, et la navigation plus facile.
A 14 h. 45, les navjres de tete entendirent deux
rafales de mitrailleuse venant de la cote albanaise.
lIs ~ontinuerent leur· route sans changer de formation. A 14 h. 53, une violente explosion se
produisit a bord du Saumarez. Le contre-torpilleur Volage re~ut immediatement l'ordre de
s Document 5/247.
1 V:oir Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de s8curite,
DeUlCleme Annee, Supplement No 6, Annexe 15, piece
No I.

295
mediately ordered forward to give her assistance
and to take her in tow. At 3.32 p.m., an
Albanian launch, flying a white flag, came out
from the port of Saranda (Port Edda) and
hailed the damaged destroyer enquiring what
the ships were doing there. The launch remained
in the area for twenty or thirty minutes, without, I regret to say, offering any assistance, and
then returned to port. My only comment on this
incident is that my Government does not understand the use of the white flag, whose international significance is that of a flag of truce
during hostilities.
Three-quarters of an hour later, at 4.16 p.m.,
there was a heavy explosion in His Majesty's
ship V olage and her bows were blown off. These
two incidents accounted for the death of fortyfour sailors and injury to forty-two others. Both
ships were now crippled and in a serious situation. A west wind of 15 to 20 miles an hour was
blowing them in towards the shore and there
was a danger of their being wrecked. I have
tabled some photographs taken at the time,
(Exhibit Il).1 All possible arrangements for help
were, of course, made by the British naval authorities and the Greek senior naval officer in
Corfu also organized immediate help.

At this point, I should like to express my
gratitude on behalf of His Majesty's Government to the valuable assistance which was offered by the Greek authorities. The crews struggled to keep their ships afloat and to make their
slow and dangerous passage back to Corfu. In
this they were successful. Mter nearly twelve
hours of hard endeavour, both ships made the
few miles of passage back to Corfu and arrived
there at 3 a.m. It has since become clear that
His Majesty's ship Saumarez has become a total
loss.
The nature of the explosions and the extent
of the damage were such as to indicate that they
were caused by contact mines. The matter was
therefore immediately reported to the Mediterranean Zone Board of the International Mine
Clearance Organization. I think it would be
convenient if I explained, at this point, what this
organization is and I am therefore tabling as
Exhibit Ill, the agreement which constituted the
International Organization for the Clearance of
Mines in European waters. 2 This organization
consists of a Central Board, which sits in London, and contains representatives of France, the
United Kingdom, the United States of America,
and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
Under the Central Board are a number of local
or zone boards. The Mediterranean Zone Board,
with which we are here concerned, contains
representatives of France, Great Britain, Greece,
the United States of America, the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics and Yugoslavia.
When the Corfu incident was reported to the
Mediterranean Zone Board, the Board on 28
1 See Official Records of the Security Council) Second
Year. Supplement No. 6. Annex 5) Exhibit 11.

• Ibid., Exhibit Ill.

se porter a son secours et de le prendre en re-morque. A 15 h. 32, une vedette albanaise battant pavillon blanc sortit du port de Saranda
(Port Edda) et arraisonna le contre-torpilleur
endommage, lui demandant ce que ces navires
faisaient en cet endroit. La vedette resta dans
les parages pendant vingt a trente minutes et, je
regrette de le dire, sans offrir aucune assistance,
puis eUe regagna le port. La seule remarque que
j'aie a faire Sur cet incident, est que mon Gouvernement ne comprend pas l'emploi du pavillon
blanc qui, dans tous les pays du monde, marque
une treve dans les hostiliU~s.
Trois quarts d'heure plus tard, a 16 h. 16,
une forte explosion se produisit a bord du batiment Volage dont l'etrave fut emportee. Ces
deux incidents provoquerent la mort de quarantequatre marins; quarante-deux autres furcnt
blesses. Les deux navires etaient alors desempares
et dans une situation tres critique. Un vent
d'ouest de 15 a 20 milles a l'heure les poussait
vers la cote el ils risquaient d'y faire naufrage.
J'ai fait distribuer que1ques photographies prises
au moment de l'incident (piece No Il) 1. Bicn
entendu, les autorites navales britanniques prirent toutes les dispositions possibles pour venir en
aide aux navires et le commandant de la marine
grecque a Corfou organisa immediatement des
secours.
Je voudrais, a. ce propas, exprimer toute la
gratitude du Gouvernement de Sa Majeste pour
l'aide si precieuse qu'ont apportee les autorites
grecques. Les equipages firent tous leurs efforts
pour maintenir leurs navires a flot et pour rallier
Corfou a. vitesse tres reduite et dans des conditions dangereuses. I1 fallut aux deux navires pres
de douze heures de durs efforts pour couvrir les
que1ques rnilles qui les separaient de Corfou, ou
ils arriverent a 3 heures du matin. Il est apparu
depuis que le Saumarez etait entierement perdu.
La nature des explosions, comme l'etendue
des degats, prouve qu'elles ont ete causees par
des mines de contact. En consequence, cet incident fut immediatement signale au Bureau mediterraneen de l'Organisation mondiale de deminage. 11 conviendrait peut-etre que j'explique
maintenant cc qu'est cette organisation. C'est
pourquoi je presente comme piece No Ill, le
texte de l'accord etablissant l'Organisation internationale de deminage des eaux europeennes 2 •
Cette organisation comprend un Bureau central
qui siege a Londres et groupe les representants
de la France, du Royaume-Uni, des Etats-Unis
d'Amerique et de l'Union des Republiques sodalistes sovietiques. De ce Bureau central dependent
un certain nombre de bureaux regionaux au
bureaux de secteur. Le Bureau mediterraneen,
qui nous occupe en ce m.oment, comprend des
representants de la France, de la Grande-Bretagne, de la .Grece, des Etats-Unis d'Amerique,
de l'Union des Republiques sodalistes sovietiques
et de la Yougoslavie.
'
Quand cet incident fut porte a sa connaissanee, le Bureau mediterraneen recommanda a
1

VoirProc6s.verballx 0 fficiels du ConSilii de sAcuritl,

Deuxieme Annee) Supplement No 6, Annexe 15, piece
No 11.
o Ibid., piece No Ill.

296
October unanimously recommended a check
sweep of Medri routes 18/32 and 18/34.
I should explain that a 'Medri route is a safe
route for shipping published' as Mediterranean
Routing Instructions, which are issued. by the
International Routing and Reporting Authority.
Routes 18/32 and 18/34 quoted above are the
routes through the Corfu Channel.
This recommendation of the Mediterranean
Zone Board was submitted to the Central Board
which, on 1 November unanimously decided
that the North Corfu Channel should be reswept at a favourable opportunity.
It was on the basis of this decision that the
Allied Naval Commander-in-Chief, Mediterranean, ordered mine-sweeping of the Corfu
swept channel..
The action taken in the diplomatic field was
as follows:
On 26' October, my Government had informed the Government of Albania that, in view
of the mining of the two warships, the swept
channel would shortly be re-swept. The Albanian Government replied in a communication
of 31 October in which they protested against
the alleged violation of Albanian waters by
British vessels on 22 October. This is a point
with which I will deal later. The Albanian reply
went on to say that they had no objection to
mine-sweeping of the channel, provided that this
was carried out outside their territorial waters;
the Albanian Government would take no responsibility if mine-sweeping were carried on in
Albanian territorial waters and would consider
this a flagrant violation of the integrity of their
country. My Government considered that this
part of the Albanian reply made no sense, as the
swept channel-an international highway between two parts of the open seas-lies in territorial waters.

Accordingly, a further note was sent to the
Albanian Government on 10 November, informing them that mine-sweeping would start
on 12 November. The Albanian Government replied with a protest against what they called the
unilateral decision of His Majesty's Government.
I have already explained how this decision,
though communicated by His Majesty's Government, gave effect to the decision of an international body. The Albanian reply went on to
propose the establishment of a mixed commission to decide what area of the sea should be
considered to constitute the channel of navigation. This proposal, my Government were wholly
at a loss to understand. The limits of the swept
channel were perfectly well known and had been
so known for years, to every Government in
Europe. I have aJready explained the reasons
arising from mine fields and from navigational
considerations for which this channel takes the
course it does. The Albanian Government had
been kept fully informed; since October, 1945,

l'unanimite, le 28 octobre, un dragage de securite des routes Medri 18/32 et 18/34.
Je me permettrai d'expliquer aux membres du
Conseil qu'une route M edri est une route qui,
d'apres les Instructions sur 1es routes en Mediterranee publiees par le Service international des
routes et de la signalisation, presente toutes
garanties de securite pour la navigation. Les
routes 18/32 et 18/34, dont je viens de pader,
passent par le detroit de Corfou.
Les recommandations du Bureau mediterraneen furent sournises au Bureau central qui
decida, a l'unanimite, le ler novembre, qu'il
serait procede a un nouveau dragage de la partie
nord du detroit de Corfou des que les circonstances le permettraient.
C'est a la suite de cette decision que le commandant en chef des marines alliees en Mediterranee donna l'ordre de proceder a un nouveau
deminage du chenal drague de Corfou.
Les mesures prises dans le domaine diplomatique furent les suiv~ntes:
Le 26 octobre, le Gouvernement du RoyaumeUni informa le Gouvernement albanais que, en.
raison du fait que les deux navires de guerre
avaient ete endommages par des mines, le chenal
serait prochainement drague de nouveau. Le
Gouvernement albanais repondit par une communication datee du 31 octobre, ou il elevait une
protestation contre ce qu'il appelait une yiolation
des eaux territoriales albanaises par des navires
britanniques le 22 octobre. Je reviendrai plus
tard sur ce point. Le Gouvernement albanais
declarait ensuite qu'il ne voyait aucun inconvenient a un dragage du chenal a condition qu'il
ait lieu en dehors des eaux territoriales albanaises; si des dragages etaient effectues dans les
eaux territoriales albanaises, le Gouvernemen t
albanais declinerait toute responsabilite, et
considererait l'operation comme une violation
flagrante de l'integrite territoriale de son pays.
De l'avis de mon Gouvernement, cette partie de
la reponse albanaise n'avait aucun sens, puisque
le chenal drague, qui constitue une route internationale reliant deux zones de la haute mer, se
trouve dans les eaux territoriales.
En consequence, une nouvelle note fut adressee au Gouvernement albanais, le 10 novembre
pour l'informer que le dragage commencerait l~
1? novembre. Le Go~vernement albanais repondlt par une protestatIOn contre ce qu'il appelait
la decision unilaterale du Gouvernement de Sa
Majeste. J'ai deja explique que cette decision
bien que communiquee par le Gouvernement d~
Sa Majeste, ne faisait que donner suite a la decision prise par un organisme international. Le
Gouvernement albanais proposait ensuite dans
sa reponse, la creation d'une commission' mixte
qui determinerait queUe partie de la mer on
devrait considerer comme constituant le chenal
de navigation. C'est la une proposition que mon
Gouvernement n'est pas arrive a comprendre.
Tous les Gouvernements de l'Euiope connaissent
parfaitement les limites du chenal drague et ceci
de,Puis des annees. Je vous ai deja expliq~e qu'en
ralSon des champs de mines et pour des motifs
de navig.ation, le chenal ne peut emprunter une
autre VOle. Le Gouvernement albanais avait ete

297
thirty copies of all Mediterranean routing instructions, thirteen serials in all, had been sent
by the International Routing and Reporting
Authority to the Ministry of Public Works at
Tirana.
I table as Exhibit IV.copies of the diplomatic
correspondence quoted above. 1
Mine-sweeping was carried out on 12 and 13
November as, notified. British mine-sweeping
forces only were used; as it happened only British
forces were available. A French naval officer,
however, attended as an observer. This officer,
Captain Mestre, was the French representative
on the Mediterranean Zone Board, and the
Security Council will be interested to see his report. I am depositing the original of this report
with the Secretary-General, but a copy, with an
English translation, is being circulated to all
members of the Council as Exhibit V. 2

Twenty-two mines were found; nine were
identified on the spot and two have been preserved. As many as possible were sunk on the
spot by rifle fire-:-this doubtless accounts for the
allegation' in the Albanian note of 21 December
concerning machine-gun fire-but some drifted
on shore before the westerly wind.
The mines found Were identified as being German V-type mines containing 600 pounds of
explosive. They are the largest moored mines in
existence and are capable of inflicting enormous
damage to the largest ship afloat. I will lay before the Council as Exhibit VI a number of
photographs to illustrate the recovery and identification of these mines. s
Examination of these mines showed conclusively that the mine field was newly laid-six
months or less before the incident. There was
no rust or marine growth. The horns unscrewed
casily. There was still grease on the mooring
wire. The paint shone brightly in the sun and
identification marks were still visible. I invite
the Security Council to examine carefully Captain Mestrc's report and the photographs I am
exhibiting. I could, if necessary, table more detailed reports by the British naval authorities on
the identification of these mines, but I expect
the Security Council will agree. that the documents mentioned make the case sufficiently clear.

parfaitement tenu au courant; depuis oetobre
1945, le Ministere des Travaux publics a Tirana
avait re~u du Service international des routes et
de ,la signalisation trente exemplaires, en tout
treize series, de toutes les instructions relatives aux
routes en Mediterranee.
J e presente comme piece No IV des copies de
la correspondance diplomatique en question l •
Le dragage fut effectue les 12 et 13 novembre,
conformement a l'avis donne. On n'utilisa a cet
effet que des dragueurs de la marine britannique,
car seules des forces britanniques se trouvaient.
disponibles a ce moment-la. Toutefois, un officier
de la marine fran~aise assistait aux operations,
en qualite d'observateur. Cet officier, le capitaine
de vaisseau Mestre, representait la .France au
Bureau mediterraneen, et son rapport interessera
surement le Conseil de securite. J e remets l'original de ce rapport au Secretaire g~neral, mais
j'en fais distribuer a tous les membres du Conseil
une copie, avec traduction anglaise, qui constitue
la piece No V 2 •
Vingt-deux mines furent decouvertes. Neuf
furent identifiees sur place et on en conserva
deux. On en fit couler le plus possible, sur place,
a coups de fusil,-ce qui explique sans doute
pourquoi'la note albanaise du 21 decembre fait
mention d'une rafale de mitrailleuse - mais
d'autres mines deriverent vel'S la cote, poussees
par le vent d'ouest.
Les mines decouvertes furent reconnues comme
etant des mines allemandes du type Y, contenant
600 livres d'explosif. Ce sont les plus grosses
mines a crapaud connues jusqu'a ce jour et elles
peuvent causeI' des avaries enormes aux plus
grosses unites navales. Je vais presenter au
Conseil, comme piece No VI, un certain nombre
de photographies, illustrant la fa~on dont les
mines ont cte relevees et identifiees3 •
De l'examen de ces mines, i1 ressort, de fa~on
concluante, qu'elles avaient ete posees recemment, six mois, ou meme moins, avant l'incident.
Elles ne portaient aucune trace de rouille ou
d'algues. Les antcnnes des detonateurs ont pu
ctre facilement devissees. Le cable de la mine
etait encore enduit de graisse. La peinture brillait au soleil et les marques d'identification etaient
encore visibles. Je prie les membres d u Conseil
de securite d'examiner avec attention le rapport
du capitaine de vaisseau Mestre, ainsi que les
photographies que je leur presente. Si le Conseil
le juge necessaire, je pourrai fournir sur l'identification de ces mines des rapports plus detailles
emanant des autorites navales britanniques. J'espere toutefois que le Conseil de securite reconnaitra que les documents en question apportent
suffisamment de clarte sur l'affaire.

This discovery gave the incident a serious and
sinister aspcct. It was now clear that His
Majesty's ships had not been damaged by loose
or drifting mines but that a minc field had becn
deliberately, recently and secretly laid. The laying of this mine field, which stretched for three

La decQuverte de ces mines donnait a l'incident une gravite sinistre. Il etait manifeste que
ce n'ctaient pas des mines mal amarrees ou denvantes qui avaient cause des degats aux navires
de Sa Majeste, mais qu'un champ de mines avait
etc delibcrement, recemrnent et secretement

1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, Supplement No. 6, Annex: 15, Exhibit IV.

1 Voir Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securitJ,
Dcuxieme Annce, Supplement No 6, Annexe 15, piece
No IV.
, Ibid., piece No -V.
B Ibid., piece No VI.

• Ibid., Exhibit V.
a Ibid., Exhibit VI.

298
, miles along the Channel, in waters open to and
frequently used by the shipping of all nations,
is immediately apparent as a serious international crime.
I have laid before the Security Council as
Exhibit VII a chart to illustrate this mine field,
showing the exact position of the mines discovered. 1 The chart shows that these mines appear
to have been laid in rough lines across the approaches to Saranda. One such line is easily
identifiable and may have been based on a
bearing running approximately north from the
land mark of San Giorgio monastery.
For these reasons, ~y Government felt compelled to send a communication to the Albanian
Government, recapitulating the whole affair,
drawing attention to the responsibility which so
clearly lay upon them and requesting an apology
and compensation for the loss of life and property involved. My Government considered that
the Albanian reply to this communication was
entirely unsatisfactory and they therefore have
no option but to submit this case to the Security
Council. I have already laid before the Council
copies 6f the two documents. 2
Those are the facts of this unhappy incident.
The Security Council will, I am sure, have no
hesitation in accepting the facts I have stated as
to the presence of this mine field and the damage
it has caused.
I should now like briefly to explain the provisions of international law as applied to the
laying of mines. The law is perfectly clear and
is covered by the Hague Convention No. 8 of
1907, articles 2 to 5, inclusive. The text of these
articles is as follows:
"ARTICLE 2: The laying of automatic contact mines off the coast and ports of the enemy
with the sole object of intercepting commercial shipping is forbidden.
"ARTICLE 3: When anchOred automatic
contact mines are employed, every possible
precaution must be taken for the security of
peaceful shipping.

"The belligerents undertake to do their utmost to render these mines harmless after a
limited time has elapsed and, should the mines
cease to be under observation, to notify the
danger zones as soon as military exigencies
permit, by a notice to mariners, which must
also be communicated to the Governments
through the diplomatic channel.
'See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, Supplement No. 6, Annex 15, Exhibit VII.
2 Note of 21 December 1946 from the Albanian Government to His Majesty's Government in the United
Kingdom and note of 9 January 1947 transmitted to
His Majesty's Ambassador at Belgrade for presentation
to the Albanian Government. See Official Records of the
Security Council, Second Year, Suppltlment No. 3, Annex
8, pages 41 and 45.

moullie. La pose de ce champ de mines sur une
distance de trois mllies, le long du chenal, dans
des eaux ouvertes a la navigation et frequemment empruntees par des navires de tous pays,
constitue manifestement un crime international
tres grave.
La carte constituant la piece No VII, que
j'ai present~e au Conseil de sec~~te, montre ce
champ de mines ainsi que la pOSItion exacte des
mines qui ont ete decouvertes1 • D'apres cette
carte, il semble que ces mines aient ete mouillees
a peu pres suivant des lignes paralIeles, dans les
eaux proches de Saranda. ~n peu~ facilen:ent
suivre le trace d'une de ces hgnes qUI a peut-etre
ete etabli sur un relevement partant de l'amer
constitue par le monastere de San Giorgio, a peu
pres en direction du nord.
C'est pourquoi, mon Gouvernement s'<;st ~ru
dans l'obligation d'adresser une commumcatIOn
au Gouvernement 'albanais. Cette communication
contenait un resume de l'affaire, attirait son attention sur le fait qu'il en etait responsable de
toute evidence, et demandait des excuses et une
reparation pour les pertes en vies humaines et
les degats materiels subis. Mon Gouvernement .a
estime que la reponse du Gouvernement albana~s
ne lui donnait nullement satisfaction et qu'il
n'avait comme alternative que de saisir le Conseil
de securite de cette affaire. J'ai deja remis aux
membres du Conseil de securite des copies de ces
deux communications'.
C'est donc ainsi que s'est passe ce regrettable
incident. Je suis certain que le Conseil de securite
n'hesitera pas a admettre les faits que je viens de
relater, en ce qui concerne l'existence de ce
champ de mines, et les degats qu'il a causes.
Je voudrais maintenant expliquer brievement
queUes sont les dispositions du droit international
en matiere de mouillage de mines. Les reglements sont parfaitement clairs. a cet egard; iIs
font l'objet des articles 2 a 5 inclus de la Convention de La Haye No 8 de 1907. Void le texte de
ces articles:
"ARTICLE 2: Il est interdit de placer des
mines automatiques de contact devant les cotes
et les ports de l'adversaire, dansle seul but
d'intercepter la navigation de commerce.
"ARTICLE 3: Lorsque les mines automatiques de contact amarrees sont employees,
toutes les precautions possibles doivent etre
prises pour la securite de la navigation pacifique. .
"Les belligerants s'engagent a pourvoir"
dans la mesure du possible, a ce que ces mines
~ev.ie,nnent inoffensives, apres un laps de temps
hmlte, et, dans le cas ou elles cesseraient d'etre
surveillees, a signaler les regions dangereuses
aussitot que les exigences militaires le permet~
tront, par un avis a la navigation qui devra
etre. aussi communique aux Gouvernements
par la voie diplomatique.
'V?ir Proc~s.verbaux officiels du Conseil de securiM,
Deuxleme Annee, Supplement No 6· Annexe 15 piece
No VII.
'
.
,
2 Note en date du 21 decembre 1946 adressee par le
Gouvernement alban3;is au Gouvernement de Sa Majeste
pour l~ Roya~me-Um, et note en date du 9 janvier 194-7
tran.s~lse a 1Ambassadeur de Sa Majeste a Belgrade et
destl,nee au Gouvernement albanais. Voir Proces-verbaux
Of!i;ClelS du Conseil de securite, Deuxieme Annee, Supplement No 3, Annexe 8, pages 41 et 45.
.

299
"ARTICLE 4: Neutral Powers which lay
automatic contact mines off their coasts must
observe the same rules and take the same
precautions as are imposed on belligerents.
"The neutral Power must give notice to
mariners in advance of the places where automatic contact mines have been laid. This
notice must be communicated at once to the
Governments through the diplomatic channel.
"ARTICLE 5: At the close of the ,var, the
contracting Powers undertake to do their utmost to remove the mines which they have
laid, each Pow~r removing its own mines.
"As regards anchored automatic contact
mines laid by one of the belligerents off the
coast of the other, their position must be
notified to the other party by the Power which
laid them, and each Power must proceed
with the least possible delay to remove the
mines in its own waters."
The language of these articles is perhaps
somewhat repetitive, but they may be summed
up as laying down the following general rules:
(a) Nations are not to lay mines, even in time
of war, except with every possible precaution for
the security of peaceful shipping.
(b) Nations are to give notice of the areas
or danger zones where mines are laid.

( c) Nations are to remove mines as soon as
possible.
The above provisions apply both to belligerent
and to neutral States.
This Convention, which is declaratory of the
general law, only covers the laying of mines in
time of war. The rules of conduct which it sets
out and which the interests of humanity require
apply a fortiori in time of peace.
The laying of this clandestine mine field in
the Corfu Channel is a blatant violation of the
rules of conduct set out in the Hague Convention.
Quite apart from the Hague Convention,
however, the laying of this mine field without
notification is a crime against humanity. I would
emphasize that this case in no way hinges on
the mining of warships. These mines would
equally have destroyed merchant ships of any
nationality using this international route. It is
pure chance that warships were the victims.

The eastern coast of the Adriatic is peculiarly
suitable for coastal traffic by shipping. This is
so from the geography of the hinterland, which
is fertile but mountainous and with undeveloped
communications. In ordinary times" therefore,
the local seaborne traffic is very considerable.
Caiques ply all along the coast, as well as other
" types of shipping. With regard to the Corfu
Straits, my Government is informed that the
average amount of shipping which passed
through the Straits in the three months previous

"ARTICLE 4: Toute Puissance neutre qui
place des mines automatiques de contact devant ses cotes doit observer les memes regles
et prendre les memes precautions que celles
qui sont imposees aux belligerants.
"La Puissance neutre doit faire connaitre
a la navigation, par un avis prealable, les
regions ou seront mouillees des mines automatiques de contact. Cet avis devra etre communique d'urgence aux Gouvernements par
voie diplomatique.
"ARTICLE 5: A la fin de la guerre, les Puissances contractantes s'engagent a faire tout ce
qui depend d'elles pour enlever, chacune de
son cote, les mines qu'elles ont placees.
"Quant aux mines automatiques de contact
amarrees que l'un des belligerants aurait posees
le long des cotes de l'autre, l'emplacement en
sera notifie a l'autre partie par la Puissance
qui les a posces, et chaque Puissance devra
proceder dans le plus bref delai a l'enlevement
des mines qui se trouvent dans ses eaux."
Ces differents articles comportent peut-etre
quelques repetitions, mais on peut resumer
comme suit les rcgles generales qu'ils posent:
a) Meme en. temps de guerre, les nations ne
peuvent mouiller de mines qu'en prenant toutes
les precautions possibles pour assurer la securite
de la navigation pacifique.
b) Les nations doivent faire connaitre les
regions ou zones dangereuses ou des mines ont
ete mouillees.
c) Les nations doivent enlever les mines aussi.tot que possible.
Les dispositions qui precedent s'appliquent a
la fois aux Etats belligerants et aux Etats neutres.
Cette Convention, qui etablit une loi generale,
ne vise que le mouillage de mines en temps de
guerre. Les regles de conduite qu'elle enonce et
qui sont necessaires dans l'inter~t de l'humanite
sont a fortiori applicables en temps de paix.
La pose clandestine de ce champ de mines
dans le dctroit de COl'fou est une violation flagrante des rcglements formules par la Convention
de La Haye.
Indcpendamment meme de la Convention de
La Haye, c'est un crime contre l'humanite d'avoir
pose cc champ de mines sans avertissement. Je
tiens a. signaler que le fond de la question n'est
pas le fait que des navires de guerre aient ete
touches par des mines. Ces mines auraient pu
tout aussi bien causeI' la destruction de navires
marchands de n'importe quelle nationalite empI'untant cctte route internationale. C'est un pur
hasard que ce soit des navires de guerre qui aient
ete touches.
La cote est de l'Adriatique se prete tout particulicremcnt au cabotage, en raison de la geographie physique de l'arricre-pays, qui est fertile,
mais montagneux, et dispose de moyens de communication insuffisants. En pcriode ordinaire, le
trafic maritime local est donc tres important. Des
calques, ainsi que d'autres types de bateaux,
circulent tout le long de la cote dans un va-etvient continue!. Mon Gouvernement a ete informe que, pendant les trois mois qui ont precede
le mois de mai 1946, la moyenne du trafic men-

300
to May 194.6 was 6 motor launches and 15
caiques a month, in addition to individual larger
ships which included those of Italian, -British,
Greek and French nationality. This traffic
would, indeed, have been much larger were it
not for the unfortunate political situation on the
frontier of Albania and Greece, which we hope
will pass. Since Albania's coastal guns fired on
His Majesty's ships on 15 May, the traffic has
sunk further to an average of 2 caiques per
week. I submit, however, that Albania has no
right to take advantage of the present situation
with a view to debarring shipping from these
coastal routes, and that to do so by means of an
unnotified mine field is an international crime.

sue! dans le detroit de Corfou a ete de 6 vedettes

a moteur et de 15 caiques, sans compter d'autres

batiments d'un tonnage superieur, de nationalites
italienne, britannique, grecque et franc;;aise. Ce
trafic aurait d'ailleurs ete plus intense sans la
regrettable situation politique qui regne dans les
regions frontalieres de l'Albanie et de la Grece et
qui, je l'espere, ne durera pas. Depuis le 15 mai,
date a laqueIle les batteries cotieres albanaises ont
ouvert le feu sur les bateaux de Sa Majeste, le
trafic a ete reduit a une moyenne de 2 caiques
par semaine. J e me permettrai, toutefois, de formuler l'avis que I'Albanie n'a pas le droit de
profiter de la situation actueIle pour empecher la
navigation le long de ces routes cotieres, et que
poser, dans ce dessein, un champ de mines sans
en signaler l'existence, est un crime international.
I confidently believe that the Council must
Je suis convaincu que le Conseil ne peut manfind that these mines were recently laid, and that
quer d'arriver a la conclusion que les mines en
they were laid in violation of international law.
question ont ete mouillees depuis peu de temps,
et qu'elles I'ont ete en violation du droit international.
The question then arises who laid them.
Des lors, la question se pose de savoir qui les a
mouillees.
I cannot produce actual eye-witnesses of -the
J e ne suis pas en mesure de dter id des temoins
laying. But a consideration of certain circumoculaires de I'operation. Toutefois, certaines cirstances points inescapably to Albanian responconstances font apparaitre d'une maniere. desibility.
cisive la responsabilite de l'Albanie.
First I invite attention to the elaborate and
En premier lieu, j'attire l'attention du Conseil ,
vigilant defences which the Albanian Governsur le reseau de de£enses compliquees et gardees
ment maintains along its coast. The defences
avec, soin que l'Albanie a etabli tout le long de
of Saranda are shown on the chart which I
son littoral. Le Conseil pourra voir sur la carte
table as Exhibit VUP These were observed by
que je lui soumets, et qui constitue la piece No
the crews of the sinking destroyers when they
VIII, les de£enses de Sarandal, EIles ont ete
drifted near the shore on 22 October; I have no _ observees par les equipages des contre-torpilleurs
doubt there are many others which are not pinen perdition qui, le 22 octobre, furent deporres
pointed on this chart. This chart, of course, does
pres du rivage. Je suis certain qu'il y a encore
not attempt to show defences elsewhere along
beaucoup d'autres defenses qui ne sont pas porthe coast, but only those near Saranda.
tees sur cette carte, laqueIle, bien entendu, a
seulement pour objet d'indiquer les defenses
situees dans le voisinage de Saranda, et non celles
qui se trouvent en d'autres points de la cote.
If there is any doubt about the vigilance of
Au cas 011 il existerait un doute quelconque sur
the Albanians, I will quote a few examples
la vigilance des Albanais, je vais dter quelques
of the use they have made of these defences. On
exemples de l'usage qu'ils ont fait des defenses
15 May, when two of our cruisers were making ~
en question. Le 15 mai, tandis que deux de nos
peaceful passage southwards through the swept
croiseurs faisaient pacifiquement route vers le
channel, batteries of 3.7 inch guns fired at them
Sud en empruntant le chenal drague, des bata dozen rounds at the close range of 5,000 yards
teries cotieres de canons de 3 pouces, 7 ont ouvert
-fortunately without registering a hit. On 6
le feu sur eux a la faible distance de 5.000 yards,
June, at 8.30 a.m., rifle fire was opened on a
tirant une douzaine de coups qui, heureusement,
small schooner south bound through the chanmanquerent leur but. Le 6 juin, a 8 h. 30 du
nel. This episode was reported to my Governmatin, on ouvrit le feu, a coups de fusils, sur une
ment by the Greek Ministry of Marine and was
goelette de petit tonnage qui naviguait dans le
also published in the local press. I have already
chenal en direction du sud. Cet incident fut
described how our ships heard machine-gun fire
signale au Gouvernement britannique par le
from the shore before they were mined on 22
Ministere de la Marine grec et, egalement, relate
October. A week later, at 9.30 p.m. on the night
par la presse locale, J'ai deja dit qu'avant que
of 29 October, the tug Tanac towing three
nos batiments ne fussent atteints par des mines,
UNRRA barges was fired at by what was stated
le 22 octobre, leurs equipages avaient entendu le
to be machine-gun fire of .303 inches calibre
crepitement de mitrai1l~uses instaIlces sur la cote.
from a position marked in Exhibit VIII. The tug
Vne semaine plus ,tard, dans la soiree du 29 ocwas burning full navigation lights and was protobre, a 21 h. 30, le remorqueur Tanac, halant
ceeding through the channel in ignorance of the
trois pcniches de l'UNRRA, essuya le feu de
mining fatality of the previous week. This shootmitrailleuses qu'on a estimees etre du calibre de
ing was observed by a Greek naval craft at
o pouce, 303, instalIees en une positionindiquee •
1 See Official Records of the Securitjl Council, Second
Year, Supplement No. 6, Annex 15, Exhibit VIII.

1 Voir Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de slcurite,
Deuxieme Annee, Supplement No 6, Annexe 15, piece
No VIII.

301
Loukoura in Corfu, and I lay before the Council
an affidavit from the Italian skipper Bargellini,1
as Exhibit IX,

From these examples, the Security Council
may well credit that the Albanian authorities are
very wide awake both by day and by night and
take care to observe-and do more than observe
-anything that happens in their waters.
Now the mine field chart (Exhibit VII) shows
that the mine field comes actually as close as 300
yards off the Albanian coast. Will anyone believe that this mine field, if it was not laid by
the Albanian authorities, could possibly have
been laid without their knowledge and connivance?
.
The Albanian Government has asserted that
it could not have laid mines because it was
incapable of sweeping them. This is nonsense.
The laying of mines is' the easiest operation in
the world. Almost any small craft can be em. ployed and the procedure is most simple: the
mines are simply tumbled over the edge and
sink to the pre-arrangcd level. I have deposited
with the Secretary-General a photograph of a
small British craft prepared for mine-laying
(Exhibit X) .2 Sweeping is a very different proposition.
There is a considerable amount of evidence
that Albania possesses and uses mines.
For example, in November, 1946, a navigational warning or hydrolant as it was called,
was broadcast internationally by the United
States naval authorities, declaring the entrance
to Durazzo and Valona unsafe. This was, I
understand, in consequence of a United States
;;hip having observed floating mines in the swept
channel to Durazzo. But I will leave this aspect
for comment by my United States colleague, if
he is so disposed.
J

There is yet another consideration which I
would mention to the Security Council. On
10 September 1946, a maritime agreement was
signed between Yugoslavia and Albania which
provided, among other things, for a regular
service of shipping between the seaports of
Yugoslavia and Albania, from Zadar in the
north to Saranda in the south. Having instituted
this agreement, one would have expected it to
be carried out, but my Government has received information that the last call which was
made at Saranda was on 24 September.
I would also draw attention to Albanian
propaganda on the subject of allied shipping in
Albanian waters. Just to take one example:
Colonel-General Enver Hoxha's New Year mes-

----

1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, Supplement No. 6, Annex 15, Exhibit IX.
1

Ibid., Exhibit X.

sur la piece No VIII. Ce remorqueur, taus feux
de route allumes, naviguait dans le chenal sans
que personne aboI'd eut connaissance des degats
causes par les mines la semaine preccdente. Un
batiment de guerre grec qui se trouvait a Loukoura, dans l'ile de Corfou, fut temoin de ce tir
de mitrailleuses, et je depose devant le Conseil,
comme piece No IX, une declaration ecrite de
M. Bargellini, citoyen italien, patron du bateaul,
Le Conseil de securite peut voir, par ces exempIes, que les autorites albanaises font bonne
garde, nuit et jour, et qu'elles surveillent avec
attention-et font meme plus que surveillertout ce qui se passe dans les caux albanaises.
La carte qui constitue la piece No VII inclique que le champ de mines s'etendait en fait
jusqu'a 300 yards du littoral de l'Albanie. Qui
pourrait croire que ce champ de mines, s'il n'a
pas ete pose .par les autorites albanaises, ait pu
l'etre a leur insu et sans leur connivence?
Le Gouvernement albanais a soutenu que
l'Albanie, ne pouvait mouiller des mines, n' etant
pas en mesure de les draguer. C'est la une assertion illsoutenable. Rien n'est plus facile que de
mouillcr des mines. Presque n'importe queUe
petite embarcation peut etre employee et l'operation est des plus simples: les mines sont simplement larguees par-dessus bord et s'enfoncent a
une profondeur calculee a I'avance. rai remis
au Secretaire general la photographie d'une embarcation britannique de petit tonnage, amenagee en vue du mouillage de mines (piece No
X) 2. Le dragage est une tout autre affaire.
Il existe de nombreuses preuves que l'Albanie
possede des miries, et qu'elle s'en sert:
Au mois de novembre 1946, par exemple, un
avis aux navigateurs, ou hydrolantJ fut radiodiffuse dans le monde entier par les autorites
navales des Etats-Unis, pour declarer dangereuse l'entree des ports de Durazzo et de Valona.
D'apres les renseignements que j'ai recueillis, cet
avis fut diffuse apres qu'un navire americain eut
repere des mines flottantes dans le chenal drague
qui donne acces a Durazzo; mais je laisse au
representant des Etats-Unis le soin de faire une
declaration a ce sujet, s'ille juge apropos.
J'ai encore un autre point a presenter au
Conseil de securitc: le 10 septembre 1946, la
Yougoslavie et l'Albanie ont conclu un accord
maritime prevoyant, entre autres chases, l'institution d'un service de navigation regulier entre
les ports de mer yougoslaves ct albanais, allant
de Zadar, au nord, a Saranda, au sud. Cct accord
ayant cte conclu, on pouvait s'attendre a ce qu'il
£Ut mis a execution; pourtant, d'aprcs les informations re~ues par man Gouvernement, la dernicre escale qu'un navire ait faite a Saranda
remonte au 24 septembrc.
Je voudrais aussi attirer l'attention du Conseil
sur la propagande a laquelle se livre l'Albanie
contre la navigation alliee dans les caux albanaises. Je n'en citerai qu'un exemple: dans le
1 Voir Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de s!cllriU,
Denxieme Annee, Supplement No 6, Annexe 15, piece
No IX.
• Ibid., piece No X.

302
sage of goodwill to the Albanian people. contains the following statement:
"British ships have brutally violated three
times in succession the sovereignty of our
country. They have purposely created incidents so as to charge our people with things
for which they have not the least responsibility. "
I will deal with these so-called brutal violations later. My present point is that the tone of
the Albanian Government certainly gives the
impression, not that it had no part in doing the
things with which we now charge it, but that
whatever it did it was justified in doing. I should
have thought that if the Albanian Government
were in good conscience', innocent and ignorant
of this mine-laying, it would have denied the
charge, supporting its denial with such evidence
as it could muster, rather than raise counteraccusations and imply justification. Moreover,
it might have made a better show of innocence
if it had co-operated in the re-sweeping of the
channel.

message de vceux que le colonel-general Euyer
Hoxha a adresse au peuple albanais a 1'0ccas10U
du Nouvel An, figure le passage suivant:
"Trois fois de suite, les navires britanniques
ont brutalement viole la souverainete de notre
pays. 11s ont cree des incidents a dessein, afin
de pouvoir ensuite accuser les Albanais de
faits dont ils ne sont nullement responsabl cs •"

Je parIerai plus tard de ces pretendues viola:
tions brutales. Le point auque1 je m'attache...r a!pour l'instant, c'est qu'on est vraiment parte a
croire, d'apres le ton employe par le Gouvernement albanais, non pas qu'il n'a eu aucune pax: t
aux actes dont nous l'accusons aujourd'hui, ;rnalS
que, quoi qu'il ait fait, il avait de bonnes ralsons
pour le faire. J'aurais pense que, si le Gouvernement albanais ignorait, en toute sincerite, le
mouillage de mines, et etait innocent en. cette
affaire, il aurait oppose un dementi a l'accusation dont il etait l'objet en l'appuyant de tou.tes
les preuves qu'il aurait pu rassembler, au heu
de formuler des contre-accusations et de donner
a entendre que ses actes etaient justifies. ]'ajoute
qu'il aurait rnieux fait ressortir son innocence s'il
nous avait aides a redraguer le chenal.
Je pense surtout, en disant cela, a la taC1:ique
I particularly refer to the Albanian Government's obstructive attitude in the face of the' d'obstruetion employee par le Gouvernernent
albanais lorsque le Bureau central de dexninage
recommendations of the Central Mine Cleara recommande de proceder a un nouveau draance Board that the channel should be re-swept.
gage du chenal. Comme je l'ai deja dit, la comAs I have said before, the mixed commission
mission mixte clont le Gouvernement albanais a
they suggested was quite unnecessary and the
propose la creation etait parfaitement inutile, et
terms of refex:ence they proposed made no sense.
le mandat qu'i! a suggere n'avait aucun sens_
It would almost seem as if they were trying to
On aurait presque pu penser qu'i! essayait ainsi
gain time for the removal of evidence against
de gagner du temps, afin de faire disparaitre les
them.
prtmves defavorables asa these.
On retrouve la meme tactique dans la note
Another example of the same tactics is the
albanaise qui insinue, sans aucune preuve, que
innuendo in the Albanian note, unsupported by
les mines ont ete mouillees par la Grece. Le Gouany evidence, that those mines were laid by
vernement albanaischerchait ainsi, evideUl.lnent
Greece. This was obviously intended to deflect
a detourner de lui les soupc;ons.
'
suspicion from themselves.
Le
dementi
donne
par
la
Grece
a
deja.
ete
A Greek denial has already been published.
publie. Je ne dirai donc rien de plus a ce sujet
I will therefore say no more about it, except to
sauf qu'il aurait mieux valu que le Gonverne~
say that this malicious insinuation might well
ment albanais s'absunt de formuler cette inhave been omitted from the Albanian note to
sinuation malveillante dans la note adressee a.
my Government. 1
mon Gouvernementl,
There is one final point that I would ask the
. 11 est, enfin, un dernier point important q ne
Security Council to consider very seriously. The
Je demande au Conseil de securite d'exa:rniner
Council will note from the diplomatic correavec beaucoup d'attention. 'Le Conseil cons taspondence that the Albanian Government claims
tera, en prenant connaissance de la correspon_
peculiar and special proprietary rights over its
dance diplomatique echangee, que le Gouverne_
territorial waters, even where these are part of
men~ albanais revendique des droits de propriete
an international channel between two parts
specIaux sur les eaux territoriales albanaises
of the open sea. They deny the rights of shipping
meme lorsque ces eaux font partie d'une vo"
of other countries to pass through these waters,
internationa~e .reliant .deux: .zones de la hau~~
contrary to international law and long-estabme~. Au mepns des dISPOSltlO?S du droit interlished practice, and they frequently shoot at
natl.onal et dune coutume anclenne, il denie a ux
those who do pass. I suggest that if the Albanian
naVlres marchands des autres pays le droit cl
Government claims and exercises such extreme
traverse~ ces eaux et fait frequemment tirer su~
control over its territorial waters it cannot receux qm veulent les traverser. J'estime que si 1
pudiate the corresponding responsibility for what
Gouv:meme~t alb:u:ais pretend exercer u~
goes on in its waters. We know that a new mine
controle aUSSI outranCler sur les eaux territorial
..
cs
.
il
alb an~lse,s,
field had been put there, within 300 yards of its
ne peN
u t reJeter la responsabilite de
shore. Does the Albanian Government seriously
ce qUI s y passe. ous savons qu'un nouvea
"

See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, No. 18, 111 th meeting.
1

u

Voir Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseii de, se cU1'ittf.
Deuxieme Annee, No 18, 111eme seance.
1

303
expect the Security Council to believe that it
was ignorant and innocent of its laying?

Before I conclude my case, I must for a few
minutes refer to certain counter-charges which
the Albanian Government has made and may
make again before the Security Council.
The first such counter-charge is that the passage of our warships through the swept channel
was not innocent. This may take two forms. One
is that our ships were passing unnecessarily close
to the Albanian shore. The answer is easy. They,
like all other shipping, must use the swept channel, and the chart shows that the channel hugs
the shore. The swept channel has always taken
this course since it was first instituted during the
war. The Germans originally swept this channel; it was re-swept and kept open by the Allies.
It followed its present course because it was
known that mine fields existed to the west and,
for obvious reasons, it is easier and more economical to re-sweep a channel formerly swept
than to clear a new course through a known
mine field. Moreover, navigational reasons have
always caused shipping to follow a course close
to the Albanian shore. The north-east coast of
Corfu is roeky and dangerous and all shipping
prefers to hug the well-known landmarks and to
proceed in the decp water close to the mainland.

Alternatively, the Albanian Government may
suggest that our ships' passage was not innocent
because their conduct was provocative. That it
certainly was not. To start with, there is no
secrecy about the movements of our naval
squadrons nowadays. Anyone who is interested
can know where they are going and why. When
they passed through on the first occasion on 15
May, the two cruisers proceeded without stopping, in normal passage formation, that is, in line
ahead. When they were fired on by Albanian
batteries they refrained from returning the fire.
After. this epi~ode, express orders were given to
those ships not to return through the North
Channel, even if this were the most convenient
route, so as avoid any possibility of a fresh incident while tempers were still hot.
On 22 October our ships were also in normal
passage formation proceeding at a speed of ten
knots and again they did not stop. As has already been published in the press, their crews
were at action stations. In view of the previous
shooting, this was an elementary precaution
which needs no justification. Action stations are
merely a form of defensive alert. Express orders
were given that the guns should be trained fore
and aft, not pointing towards the shore and not
loaded. I might add, as a testimony to the

champ de mines avait ete etabli dans ces eaux,

a moins de 300 yards dulittoral albanais. Le
Gouvernement albanais s'attend-il serieusement
a ce que le ConseiI de securite croie qu'il n'a
rien su de cette operation, et qu'il en est innocent?
Avant de terminer mon expose, il me faut
revenir quelques instants sur certaines contreaccusations que le Gouvernement albanais a
formulees, et qu'il peut formuler encore devant
le Conseil de securite.
La premiere de ees contre-accusations est que
le passage de nos navires de guerre dans le chenal
drague n'etait pas un passage innocent. Cette
accusation peut s'interpreter de deux manieres:
d'une part, on peut dire que nos b~himents naviguaient plus prcs de la cote albanaise qu'il n'etait
necessaire. A cela, il est facile de repondre. Ces
batiments, eomme tous les autres navires, devaient emprunter le chenal drague, et la carte
montre que ce chenal serre le littoral de pres.
Depuis le moment OU on l'a etabli, pendant la
guerre, le trace de cc chenal est reste le meme.
A l'origine, il a ete drague par les Allemands.
Les Allies l'ont ensuite drague de nouveau et
1'ont maintenu ouvert a la navigation. La route
q u'il suit actuellement a ete choisie parce que
l'on savait que des champs de mines se trouvaient a I'ouest et que, pour des raisons evidentes, il est plus facile et plus economique de
draguer une seconde fois un chenal qui l'a ete
auparavant que cl'en ouvrir un nouveau a travers
un champ de mines connu. En outre, des raisons
de navigation ont toujours oblige les navires marchands a longer de pres le littoral albanais. La
cote nord-est de Corfou est rocheuse et dangereuse, et tous les navires preferent ne pas. s'eloigner des amers qu'ils connaissent bien, et faire
route en eau profonde en serrant la terre.
D' autre part, le Gouvernement albanais pretendra peut-etre que le passage de nos navires
n'etait pas innocent, car ils se sont eomportes
d'une maniere provocante. Ccla ne saurait se
soutenir. Tout cl'abord, les mouvements de nos
escadres ne sont plus secrets aujourd'hui. Quiconque le desire peut connaitre leur destination
et le but de leurs deplacements. 10rs de leur premier passage, le 15 mai, les deux croiseurs passerent sans s'arreter, dans la formation normale en
pareil cas, c'est-a-dire en ligne de file. Lorsque
les batteries albanaises ouvrirent le feu sur eux,
ils s'abstinrent de riposter. A la suite de cet incident, ils ret;;urent ordre expres de ne pas rentrer
en empruntant la partie nord du detroit, meme si
c'etait la route la plus commode, afin de parer
a toute possibilite de nouve! incident tant que les
esprits ne se seraient pas calmes.
1e 22 octobre, nos navires, toujours en formation normale, faisaient route a une vitesse de
dix nceuds et, cette fois encore, ne stoppcrent pas.
Comme on l'a deja appris par la pl'esse, les equipages ctaient aux postes de combat. Etant donne
que Ies batteries albanaises avaient precedemment tire, c'etait la une precaution Clementaire
qu'il n'est nul besoin de justifier. L'appel UlL"C
postes de combat est simplement la manifestation
d'un ctat d'alerte defensive. Les batiments
avaient l'ordre expres cl'avoir leurs canons pointes

304
innocence of our intentions, that anti-mine devices were not in use during this passage.

de 1'avant a l'arricrc, ct non pas vcrs la cote, et
de ne pas lcs charger. Je pourrais ajoutcr, pour
tcmoigner de la puretc de nos intentions, que les
dispositifs de protection contre les mines n'ont
pas ctc cmployes au COUl':'; de ce passage.

Finally, when the mine-sweeping took place
on 12 and 13 November, the independcnt observer, Captain Mestre, has testified to the scrupulous correctness of the conduct of our flotilla.

Enfin, lorsque les 12 et 13 novembre, on proceda au dragage des mines, le capitaine Mestl'c,
obscrvateur independunt, put attester la parfaite
correction de la concluite de notre Ilottille.

Before I pass on I would like to give my Government's assurance to the Council that the
object of the passage of our ships both on 15
~ay and 22 October was to pass by the quickest
and ,most convenient route from one place to
another. The'sea is a highway for all, and it is
for that purpose we use it. The Albanian shooting of 15 May was a complete surprise. I do not
suppose that anyone in these ships had a single
thought about Albania until the Albanians themselves opened fire.

Avant d'aller plus loin, je tiens donncr au
Conseil, au nom de man Gouvcrncmcnt, l'assurance que le passage de nos navircs dans le
chenal, aussi bien le 15 mai que le 22 octobre,
avait pour but de !cs amener d'un cndrait a un
autre par la route la plus rapide et la plus commode. La mer est une grand'route a l'usage de
tous, et c'est a cc titre-la que nous l'utilisons. Le
tir des batteries albanaises, le 15 mai, fut pour
nous une complete surprise. Je ne crais pas que
personnc, a bord de ces navires, ait songc tl
l'Albanie avant que les Albanais eux-mcmes
ouvrent le feu.

The Albanian Government has also chosen to
accuse us of flying aircraft over their territory
in a menacing fashion. We have carefully looked
into this charge; it is quite without foundation.
We have- no tri-motor aircraft, as they alleged.
None of our aircraft carry the marking PK-4.
Examination of all the journeys carried out by
our aircraft on 22 and 23 October shows that
none flew within a dozen miles of Albanian territory. The map to show the routes flown by our
aircraft on these days is tabled as Exhibit XI. 1

a

Le Gouvernement albanais a cgalemcnt jugc a
propos de nous accuser d'envoyer des avions survoler le territoire albanais d'une maniere mena~ante. Nous avons etudi6 attentivement cette
accusation et I'avons trouvee denuee de tout
fondement. Contrairement aux allegations du
Gouvernement albanais, nous n'avons pas
d'avions trimoteurs et aucun de nos appareils ne
porte la marque PK-4. De l'enquete a laquelle
nous nous sommes !ivres sur les vols executes par
nos appareils les 22 et 23 octobre, il ressort I
qu'aucun d'eux n'est passe a mains de 12 milles
du territoire albanais. Les routes suivies par nos
avions pendant les deux jams en question sont
indiquees sur la carte qui constitue la piece No

XP.
It may be, however, that the Albanian Government will now allege that there is no such
thing as the right of innocent passage; in other
words, that the very presence of our ships was
contrary to international law unless there had
been prior notification and even permission obtained through diplomatic channels. This in
effect would be a fonn of counter-charge, and
the Security Council must consider very carefully the legal relevance of this unsubstantiatcd
charge. A person charged with an offence cannot excuse himself from the charge by alleging
that the victim of his crime has himself committed some other legal wrong. To take a simple
example: If a policeman in the streets of this
or any other city were to shoot the driver of a
passing motor, otherwise innocent of crime, it
would be no defence for him to allege that the
motorist was driving his car in the wrong direction up a one-way street; it would be even more
outrageous if the motorist was in fact not driving
in 'the wrong direction. In short, the Albanian
counter-charge of trespass, even if it were valid,
as it is not, does not modify or affect in any way

Quoi qu'il cn soit, il se peut que le Gouvernement albanais prctende maintenant que le droit
de passage innoccnt n'cxistc pas; en d'autres
termes, que la simple presence de nos navires
dans les eaux tcrritorialcs albanaises, fante d'une
notification prealable par la voie diplomatique,
et meme d'une autori.<;atioll rCl;lIe par la meme
voie, etait contraire aux dispositions du droit
international. Il s'agirait la, en fait, d'une sorte
de contre-accusation, et le Conseil de SeCUl1te
doit examiner de tre8 pres si cette accusation
sans preuve est juridiqucment valable. Dne per~
sonne accusee d'un delit ne peut se justifier en
allegllant que sa victime a, elle-mcme, enfreint
la loi d'une autre manit:re. Par exemple, un agent
de polict': qui, dans une vill<: que1conqlie, tirerait
sur le condllcteur d'une automobile qui n'a commis d'autre dclit que ele circultr a contresens
dans tine rue asens unique, ne pourrait alh~gucr,
pour sa defense, que ce chauffeur violait les
rcglemcnts; et son actc rcvctirait une gravite
plus gninde encore s'il l"avcrait qu'en fait, le
chauffeur n'ctait pas clans son tort. Bre!, la
contre-accusation tin GO\1vernement albanais

1 See Official R~cords of the Security Council, Second
Year, Supplement No, 6, Annex 15, Exhibit XI.

I Voir Proce~-v(Jrbnux offir.iels du Conseil d~ securitJ,
DClIXiclllc Annre, Supplt:ll\cnt No 6, AnrH'xe 15, piece
No XI.

305
the charge which we make against them, and
which the Security Council is now judging.

selon laquelle nous aurions illegalement penetre
dans les eaux territoriales de l'Albanie, meme si
elle etait valable, ce qui n'est pas le cas, ne saurait modifier ou affecter en aucune maniere
l'accusation que nous portons contre lui, et dont
le Conseil de securite est saisi maintenant.
The mine-laying was in any case illegal. The
.ne toute manihe, il etait illegal de poser des
proof is that, if these ships had been merchant
mrnes. La preuve en est que, si ces navires avaient
ships, as they very well might have been, the
ete des navires marchands, supposition tres plausame accident would have occurred. The Alsible, le meme accident serait arrive. Il est a
banian Government, which is a party to the
croire que le Gouvernement albanais, qui a adStatute on Freedom of Transit of the Barcelona
here au Statut sur la liberte de transit de la
Convention of 1921, presumably does not quesConvention de Barcelone de 1921, ne met pas
tion the right of innocent passage by merchant
en doute le droit de passage innocent pour les
ships, though it is true they have been guilty of
navires marchands, bien qu'a la verite, il soit
shooting at them occasionally.
coupable d'avoir parfois fait tirer sur eux.
I believe, therefore, that the Security Council
Je crois donc que le Conseil de securite reconwill readily recognize that the international law
nai:tra sans difficuIte que les dispositions du droit
concerning innocent passage has no relevancy to " international concernant le droit de passage innocent n'ont aucun rapport avec la decision a
the decision to be reached in the present charge
of illegal mining.
prendre en ce qui concerne la presente accusation de pose illegale de mines.
That being so, it is hardly necessary for me to
Ceci etant, je ne vois guere la necessite de
argue at any length on the state of international
discuter, meme succinctement, les dispositions du
droit international relatives a la question qui nous
law on thi" subject. That does not mean that my
occupe. Cela ne veut pas dire que mon GouGovernment is not fully prepared to vindicate
vernement ne soit pas tout dispose a de£endre
its views on the subject.
ses vues sur cette question.
.
The great majorIty of authoritative writings
La plupart des ouvrages faisant autoriteen
on international law favour the thesis that warmatiere de droit international viennent appuyer
ships have the right of innocent passage through
la these selon laquelle les navires de guerre jouisterritorial waters. There is an even stronger consent du droit de passage innocent dans les eaux
sensus of opinion in .respect of international
territoriales. L'opinion generale des specialistes
straits connecting two parts of the open seas.
est encore plus categorique en ce qui concerne
les detroits internationaux reliant deux zones de
haute mer.
Among the resolutions of international conParmi les. resolutions adoptees par des confeferences, I would mention, in passing, resolutions
rences internationales, je citerai en passant les
in favour of this right passed by the Institute
resolutions votees en faveur de ce droit par l'Insof International Law, Paris, in 1894; by the
titut de droit international, a Paris, en 1894, par
International Law Association, Vienna, in 1926;
l'Association internationale du droit, a Vienne,
en 1926, et par l'lnstitut de droit international,
and by the Institute of International Law,
Stockholm, in 1928; and the so-called "Bases of
a Stockholm, en 1928, ainsi que les documents
intitules "Bases de discussions Nos 20 et 21",
Discussion Nos. 20 and 21" drawn up by the
elabores en 1930 par la Commission preparatoire
Preparatory Commission of the Hague Conferde la Conference de La Haye, en vue de la codi.
ence for the codification of international law
fication du droit international.
in 1930.
La derniere occasion que l'on ait eue de reThe opinions of Governments on this question
cueillir l'opinion officielle de Gouvernements sur
were last formally obtained in 1928 and 1929
cette question remonte aux annees 1928 et 1929,
in preparation for the Hague Conference of
lors de la preparation de la Conference de La
1930. Fifteen nations stated their opinion that
Haye de 1930. Quinze nations declarerent alors
warships have the right of innocent passage
qu'a leur avis, les navires de guerre d'un Etat
through the territorial waters of another State.
jouissent du droit de passage innocent dans les
Only two, Bulgaria and Latvia, formally denied
eaux territoriales d'un autre Etat. Seules, la
this.
Bulgarie et la Lettonie refuserent officiellement
d'adopter cette maniere de voir.
As to international practice, anybody may
Quant a la coutume internationale, il est facile
de savoir a quoi s'en tenir la-dessus. I1 suffit de
know the facts. It is sufficient to quote the
famous straits of the world. No French warship
citeI' les detroits les plus conIms du monde. Je
would, I suppose, think of asking Italian persuppose qu'il ne viendrait pas a l'esprit des
mission before passing through the "Straits of
Fran~ais de demander aux Italiens la permission,
pour l'un de leurs navires de guerre, de passeI'
Bonifa.cio. No Russian warships depend on the
sanction of Denmark or Sweden to enter or leave
par le detroit de Bonifacio. Aucun navire de
the" Baltic. In our own case, just before the late
guerre russe n'a besoin de la permission du
Danemark ou de la Suede pour entrer dans la
war, we decided we should not deny to Japanese warships passage through the territorial
Baltique ou en sortir. En ce qui nous concerne,
nous avions decide, juste avant la derniere guerre,
waters of Hong Kong, on the ground of respect

306
for law, and though this was contrary to our
interests and inclinations.

So much for international law. But, as I have
said before, this issue in no way affects the
charge which the Council is now to decide.
His Majesty's Government has brought this
dispute to the attention of the Council under
Article 35 of the Charter because an attempt at
settlement through diplomatic correspondence
has unfortunately failed. I ask the Council to
take into consideration this attempt at settlement and to recommend under Article 36 of the
Charter settlement of the dispute by direct negotiation, after making the finding of fact without
which such direct negotiation cannot succeed.

I invite the Council to consider also the wider
implications of this case, for it must be clear to
all that international peace and security cannot
be maintained for long where criminal incidents
such as those I have described threaten death to
innocent men and destruction to property of
friendly nations. By Article 2, paragraph 6 of
the Charter, the Organization of the United
Nations is required to ensure that States which
are not Members of the United Nations act in
accordance with the principles of the Charter
so far as may be necessary for the maintenance
of international peace and security; I suggest
that the Council should retain watchful interest
in the negotiations for settlement of this dispute,
and furthermore should remind all States that
it is incumbent on them to see that their territorial waters are free from mines.
On the basis of the evidence which I have
presented, I submit that the Council should
adopt the following conclusions:
( 1) That an unnotified mine field was
laid in the Corfu Straits by the Albanian
Government or with its connivance, resulting
in serious injury to His Majesty's ships and
loss of life and injury to their crews.

de ne pas refuser aux Japonais le droit de passage,pour leurs navires de guerre, dans les eaux
territoriales . de Hong-Kong. Nous avions pris
cette decision par respect pour le droit, bien
qu'elle allat a l'encontre de nos interets et de
nos sentiments.
Telle est la situation au point de vue du droit
international. Toutefois, comme je l'ai deja dit,
cette question n'affecte en rien l'accusation sur
laquelle le Conseil doit maintenant se prononcer.
Le Gouvernement de Sa Majeste a porte le
differend qui nous occupe a l'attention du
Conseil, conformement a l'Article 35 de la
Charte, parce qu'une tentative faite pour le
regler par un echange de correspondance diplomatique a malheureusement echoue. Je demande
au Conseil de prendre en consideration la tentative que nous avons faite, et de recommander,
conformement a l'Article 36 de la Charte, que
ce differend soit regIe par voie de negociations
directes, apres avoir formule sur les faits euxmemes les conclusions necessaires pour que ces
negociations directes puissent reussir.
. J'invite le Conseil a considerer aussi les repercussions profondes de cette affaire, car il n'y a
aucun doute que la paix et la securlte internationales ne pOl,lrraient etre maintenues longtemps
si des incidents criminels comme ceux que j'ai
mis en lumiere mettent en danger la vie d'etres
humains innocents et les biens de nations amies.
Aux termes du paragraphe 6 de l'Artiele 2 de
la Charte, l'Organisation des Nations Unies doit
faire en sorte que les Etats qui ne sont pas Membres des Nations Unies agissent conformemen t
aux principes de la Charte dans la mesure necessaire au maintien de la paix et de la securite
internationales. Je suggere que le Conseil suive
attentivement la marche des negociations tendan t
au reglement du present difIerend, et qu'il rappelle en outre a tous les Etats q u'illeur incombc
de veiller a ce qu'il n'y ait aucune mine dans
leurs eaux territoriales.
Etant donne les preuves que J"ai soumises J'c
'
propose au Conseil d 'adopter les conclusions suivantes:
1) Un champ de mines a ete etabli sans
avertissement dans le detroit de Corfou par lc
Gouvernement albanais, ou de connivencc
avec lu~; de ce fait, des navires britanniques
ont SUbl de graves avaries, et des membres de
1eurs equipages ont ete tues ou blesses.

(2) That the United Kingdom and Albanian Governments should settle the dispute
between them on the basis of the Council's
finding in (1) above, and that, in the event
of a failure to settle, either party may apply
to the Council for further consideration of the
matter.

2) Les Gouvernements du Royaume-Uni et
de l'Albanie reg1eront leur differend entre eux
sur la base des conel.usions du Conseil figuranf
au paragraphe 1 cl-dessus. Au cas OU eUes
n'arriveraient pas a regler ce differend chacune des parties pourra demander au Conseil
d'examiner de nouveau l'affaire.

(3) That the Security Council will retain
this. dispute .on its agenda until both parties
certrfy that It has been settled to their satisfaction.

3) Le Conseil de securite maintiendra ce
differend ~ l'o~dre du jour jusqu'a ce que les
deux partIes alent attestc qu'il a ete regIe a
leur satisfaction.

(4) That, since the laying of mines in
peacetime without notification is unjustified
and an offence against humanity and since it
is the duty of Governments to remove
promptly mines laid in time of war, the

4) Etant do;me que le mouillage de mines
en temps de palX sans avertissement est injustifie et constitue un deIit contre l'humanite et
qu'il est du devoir des Gouvernementsdtenlever rapidement les mines mouillees en

307

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Does anyone wish to speak?
If no one else wishes to take part in the
debate today, we can continue it tomorrow
afternoon at 3 o'clock.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.

temps de guerre, l~ Conseil de securite rappelle a tous les Etats, qu'ils soient ou non
Membres des Nations Unies, qu'illeur incombe
de faire draguer, ou de laisser draguer, toutes
les zones situees dans leurs eaux territoriales
ou l'on a des raisons de supposer la presence
de mines.
J e termine la l'expose des faits et des arguments presentes par mon Gouvernement. I1 lui
a ete tres penible d'etre oblige de saisir le Conseil
de cette affaire, mais il est oblige de veiller a ce
que la vie d'innocents marins de toutes nationalites soit protegee contre des activites criminelles
clandestines.. J'aime it croire que le Conseil ne
verra pas dans cette affaire une tentative d'intimidation de la part d'un grand pays it l'egard
d'un petit. Les petites nations n'ont pas plus que
les autres le monopole de l'infaillibilite, et elles
doivent se conformer aux principes de civilisation qui sont it la base de la Charte des Nations
Unies.
J'ai vu dans un journal yougoslave un dessin
humoristique representant deux paysans albanais
qui, debout au bordde la mer, regardent passer
deux navires de guerre, avec la Iegende: "Pourquoi ces navires ne sont-ils done pas venus au
moment ou nous nous battions contre les fascistes?" A ceIa, je reponds: "Ces navires sont
venus". La marine britannique, en efIet, a pris
part, en 1943 et 1944, a d'innombrables operations dans l'Adriatique, et je pourrais fournir de
longs rapports sur l'appui qu'elle a donne aux
forces de la liberation. Ce sont les forces britanniques qui, de concert avec les partisans, ont
libere Corfou, et Saranda meme, au mois d'octobre 1944. Ce fut le jour de Noel de la meme
annee-il y a de cela un peu plus de deux ansque la marine royale britannique a invite 750
enfants albanais a une fete organisee pour eux.
Je puis assurer au Conseil qu'elle serait heureuse
d'avoir l'occasion de renouveler ce geste, si seulement elle avait l'assurance de ne pas etre payee
de retour avec des balles, des obus et des mines.
Le PRESIDENT: Personne ne demande la
parole?
Si personne ne desire plus intervenir aujourd'hui dans le debat, nous pourrions le poursuivre
demain a 15 heures.
La seance est levee cl 13 heures.

HUNDRED AND EIGHTH MEETING

CENT-HUI1'IEME SEANCE

Held at Lake Success, New York,
on Tuesday, 18 February 1947, at 3 p.m.

Tenue Lake Success, N ew-Yark,
le mardi 18 jevrier 1947, 15 heures.

President: Mr. F. VAN LANGENHOVE
(Belgium) .

President: M. F. VAN LANGENHOVE
(Belgique) .

Present; The representatives of the following
countries: Australia, Belgium, Brazil, China,
Colombia, France, Poland, Syria, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom,
United States of America. A representative of
Canada also attended the meeting.

Presents: Les representants des pays suivants:
Australie, Belgique, Bresil, Chine, Colombie,
France, Pologne, Syrie, Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques, Royaume-U ni, Etats-U nis
d'Amerique. Le representant du Canada assistait
egalement a la seance.

62. Provisional agenda (document 5/278)

62. Ordre du jour provisoire
(document 5/278)

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Letter from the Chairman of the Atomic

1. Adoption de l'ordre du jour.
2. Lettre en date du 31 decembre 1946 adressee

Security Council reminds all States, whether
Members of the United Nations or not, that
it is incumbent on them to sweep or permit to
be swept all parts of their territorial waters
where there is reason to suspect the presence
of mines.
This concludes my Government's case. It has
been very painful for my Government to have
to .bring it. But it is necessary for my Government to see that the lives of innocent mariners
of every nationality are protected against clandestine criminality. I trust the Council will not
look at this case as an example of a large country
trying to bully a small one. Even small countries
are not infallible and must obey the rules of
civilization, which lie at the basis of the Charter
of the United Nations.

I have seen a cartoon in a Yugoslav paper,
depicting two Albanian peasants standing on
the sea coast, and watching two warships passing by; the caption is "Why did not those ships
come when we were fighting the fascists here?"
The answer is: "They did". The British Navy
took part in countless operations in the Adriatic
in 1943 and 1944, and I could produce lengthy
accounts of the support it gave to the forces of
liberation. It was our forces which, in co-operation with the partisans, liberated Corfu, and
Saranda itself in October 1944. It was on Christmas Day of the same year-a little more than
two years ago-that the Royal Navy gave a
Christmas party to 750 Albanian children. Let
me assure the Council that the Navy would
gladly accept an opportunity to repeat this hospitality, provided they can be assured it will not
be returned with bullets, shells and mines.

a

a
