A /70/PV.97

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventieth session

97th plenary meeting

Wednesday, 8 June 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lykketoft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Denmark)

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 11 (continued)
Implementation of the Declaration of Commitment on
HIV/AIDS and the political declarations on HIV/AIDS
High-level meeting of the General Assembly
on HIV/AIDS
Draft resolution (A/70/L.52)
The President: I declare open the high-level
meeting of the General Assembly on HIV/AIDS. This
meeting is being held in accordance with resolutions
70/228 of 23 December 2015 and decision 68/555 of
30 June 2014.
I warmly welcome everyone to this high-level
meeting, which will undertake a comprehensive review
of the focus achieved in realizing the Declaration of
Commitment on HIV/AIDs and the political declarations
on HIV/AIDS of 2006 and 2011, including successes,
best practices, lessons learned, obstacles and gaps,
challenges and opportunities, including with regard
to partnership and cooperation, the recommendations
to guide and monitor the HIV/AIDS response beyond
2015; and concrete strategies for action to end the
AIDS epidemic by 2030 and to promote the continued
commitment and engagement of leaders to accelerate
a comprehensive, universal and integrated response
to HIV/AIDS.
The General Assembly has before it a draft political
declaration in document A/70/L.52. Before proceeding
further, I would like to inform members that action on

16-16375 (E)

the draft political declaration on HIV and AIDS will be
taken following the opening statements.
At the outset, allow me to extend a special welcome
to Ms. Loyce Maturu, representative of people living
with HIV, and Mr. Ndaba Mandela, AIDS activist
and grandson of the late Nelson Mandela. I also wish
to sincerely thank the United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS for its enormous support in the preparations
for this meeting.
Nelson Mandela once described HIV/AIDS as the
greatest danger we have faced for very many centuries
and as being worse than a war. How right he was. It is
hard to believe and hard to accept that some 34 million
people have died from AIDS-related diseases and that
14 million children have been orphaned as a result. It is
even harder to believe, and we should not accept, that
in this world of incredible possibility, approximately
6,000 new HIV infections occur daily and that some
36.9 million people are living with HIV.
Today is the moment, therefore, that we collectively
signal our intentions to strike out for victory, to fasttrack efforts over the next five years, and to end the AIDS
epidemic by 2030. It is an epidemic that undermines
development, significantly impacts economic growth
and can be a major concern in conflict and postconflict situations. But most of all, it is an epidemic
that haunts ordinary people, particularly in developing
countries — those who are living with, at risk of and
affected by HIV, as well as their families. It affects
women and girls more than any other group, such as in
sub-Saharan Africa, where women and girls are more

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1616375*

A/70/PV.97

than twice as likely to become HIV-positive than boys
of the same age.
It can have tragic impacts for young people who
account for more than one-third of all new HIV
infections among adults, and who often have limited
access to information, services and programmes that
they need to protect themselves from HIV. And it greatly
impacts certain key populations that are globally at
higher risk of HIV, such as people who inject drugs,
sex-workers, men who have sex with men, transgender
people and prisoners. Over the coming days, let us be
both mindful of and listen to those people.
In recent years, thanks to the political commitment
of world leaders and the incredible solidarity,
innovation and bravery of others, we have been making
strong progress towards the goals and targets set out
in 2011. But if we want to reach our 2030 goals and
targets, and deliver on the political declaration that
members will consider shortly, all stakeholders must
now step up to the plate. We have to deliver greater
global solidarity, bring more resources to bear and
spend them more efficiently. We have to promote
even greater collaboration and partnership, building
on the many excellent initiatives created these past
two decades aimed at prevention, treatment, care and
support. We have to pay much greater attention to the
principles of equality and inclusion, uphold all human
rights and speak out against discrimination and stigma.
We have to empower women and girls, ensure that
they gain access to sexual and reproductive health
and reproductive rights, and that they can live their
lives free from violence. We have to ensure that key
populations are fully included in AIDS responses and
that services are made available to them. Ultimately,
we have to be accountable for the commitments we
make on big stages like this one to leave no one behind
and to deliver on the Sustainable Development Goals,
including by securing healthy lives and well-being
for all.
Ending the AIDS epidemic would be one of the
greatest achievements of our lifetimes. It can be done
and it must be done.
I now give the floor to His Excellency SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General: It is a great pleasure to be
here with everyone today to open this important highlevel meeting on HIV/AIDS.
2/28

08/06/2016

Ten years ago, when I took over as Secretary-General,
AIDS was still devastating families, communities and
nations. In many low-income countries, treatment was
scarce. In 2007, only 3 million people — one-third of
those in need — had access to life-saving antiretroviral
drugs. We have made enormous progress. Since 2000,
the global total of people receiving antiretroviral
treatment doubled every three to four years, thanks to
cheaper drugs, increased competition and new funding.
Today, more than 17 million people are being treated,
saving millions of lives and billions of dollars.
The world achieved Millennium Development Goal
6. We have halted and begun to reverse the spread of
HIV/AIDS. New HIV infections have declined by
35 per cent since 2000. AIDS-related deaths have gone
down by 43 per cent since 2003. I am particularly happy
that new HIV infections among children are down by
56 per cent in the past 15 years. Four countries — Cuba,
Thailand, Armenia and Belarus — have eliminated
them completely. I hope that we will reach zero new
infections among children soon.
None of this could have happened without the
leadership of people living with HIV and civil society
partners on the ground around the world. They believed
that more equitable treatment and access was possible,
and they made sure that we responded. They broke the
silence and shone a light on discrimination, intolerance
and stigma. They brought passion to their fight, and
that passion will make the end of AIDS a reality.
Progress and investment in the AIDS response have
changed the face of global health. They have strengthened
health systems, social protection and community
resilience. Those approaches and mechanisms are a
model for meeting the many challenges that result in
repeated disease outbreaks and new epidemics. But
AIDS is far from over. Over the next five years, we
will have a window of opportunity to radically change
the trajectory of the epidemic and put an end to AIDS
forever. Despite remarkable progress, if we do not act
there is a danger that the epidemic will rebound in lowand middle-income countries.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(resolution 70/1) affirms the global commitment to
ending the epidemic within 15 years. Action now could
avert an estimated 17.6 million new infections and
11 million premature deaths between 2016 and 2030.
But we must make a radical change within the next
five years if we are to achieve that goal. That requires
16-16375

08/06/2016

commitment at every level — from the global health
infrastructure to all Member States, civil society
organizations and non-governmental organizations,
and to the Security Council, which has dealt with AIDS
as a humanitarian issue and a threat to human and
national security.
I call on the international community to reinforce
and expand the unique, multisector, multi-actor
approach of the United Nations Programme on HIV/
AIDS, as an integral element of the 2030 Sustainable
Development Agenda. That means making sure that
we meet the annual target of $26 billion in funding,
including $13 billion for the next three years, through
the fifth replenishment of the Global Fund to Fight
AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria. It means continued
advocacy to the most vulnerable groups, and approaches
that promote gender equality and empower women. It
means leaving no one behind and removing punitive
laws, policies and practices that violate people’s dignity
and human rights. It means that everyone affected must
have access to comprehensive HIV services, without
discrimination — young people, migrants, women and
girls, sex-workers, men who have sex with men, people
who inject drugs, transgender people and prisoners.
And it means that this meeting must issue a strong
political declaration to galvanize the commitment that
will be needed to meet that challenge. The future of
people with HIV/AIDS, many of whom are children and
among the most vulnerable, must be central to every
decision. I thank the representatives who have been
working to reach consensus on the draft declaration.
This may be my last address to the General
Assembly on the subject of HIV/AIDS. This cause
has moved and inspired me. Together, the most
marginalized, the people left behind, the extraordinary
health and social workers on the ground, UNAIDS and
the Member States have shown great commitment and
resolve to ending the epidemic once and for all and to
leaving an AIDS-free world for future generations.
The AIDS response is a source of innovation and
inspiration, demonstrating what is possible when
science, community activism, political leadership,
passion and compassion come together. I commend
everyone involved in this remarkable effort, and I wish
the Assembly success in its deliberations and in ending
the worldwide scourge of HIV/AIDS.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.

A/70/PV.97

It is my great pleasure, in accordance with
resolution 70/228 of 23 December 2015, to now give the
floor to Mr. Michel Sidibé, Executive Director of the
Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS.
Mr. Sidibé (Joint United Nations Programme
on HIV/AIDS): At the outset, allow me to express
my thanks to the President of the General Assembly,
the co-facilitators, the Secretary-General and the
representatives of Member States here today for
helping us to draft one of the most important political
declarations on HIV/AIDS (A/70/L.52, annex). I know
it was not easy. I know it was complex, but the political
declaration will certainly help us to close a door and to
open a new one for ending AIDS.
I just want to begin by noting that the Charter of
the United Nations begins with three powerful words:
“We the peoples”. I stand before the Assembly today to
say that we the peoples have broken the trajectory of
the HIV/AIDS epidemic. Together, we have been able
to deliver on Millennium Development Goal 6. We have
significantly lowered the rates of new infections and
reduced AIDS-related deaths. We have delivered on
the 2011 Political Declaration. I know it was not easy,
because I remember that in this Hall in 2001 someone
took the floor and told us that we could not give
treatment to poor people, that they would not be able to
fulfil the protocol, and that it would be too expensive
to pay for them. Of course, treatment was then $15,000
per person per year.
But we have been able to prove them wrong. We
managed to break the price; we reduced the price.
Today, we are talking about a cost of less than $100 per
person per year, and we have been able to put people
on treatment, as the Secretary-General mentioned. We
have been able to reach more than 15 million people,
just as the Political Declaration requested, and we did
so eight months before the designated end date. We
even exceeded that goal and managed to have more than
17 million people on treatment. That achievement would
never have been possible without the commitment and
hard work of the Member States.
On behalf of those people whose lives were saved
and whom we will never have a chance to meet, I wish
to thank the Assembly for its support. I want to share
the great news today. This is indeed the first time in the
history of HIV/AIDS that we can say that Africa has
been able to reach the tipping point. It is indeed the first
time that we have more people in treatment in Africa

16-163753/28

A/70/PV.97

08/06/2016

than are newly infected, which is just amazing. No one
could have believed that would happen.

to silence their voices as we come together to chart a
course towards ending the AIDS epidemic.

We must also pay attention to West Africa and
Central Africa. West Africa and Central Africa,
unfortunately, have been left behind. We need to
ensure that political leaders will mobilize energy in
West Africa and Central Africa to triple the treatment
initiation rate within three years. It is important that we
do not have a two-speed approach on the continent. It is
also my duty today to thank to the Assembly, because
it is so beautiful that our once-distant dream to end
mother-to-child transmission and to have an AIDS-free
generation is becoming a reality.

Let us not forget, and I repeat, that we are the
peoples. The rights to health and dignity must be
universal, as enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations. The AIDS response has always been
about partnership, solidarity, innovation and social
transformation. AIDS has demonstrated the power of
integration with tuberculosis, hepatitis, with maternal
health and child health, with sexual reproductive
health, with cervical cancer and rights, and we have
produced an unprecedented result with the support of
the Global Fund to fight HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis and
Malaria; the United States President’s Emergency Plan
for AIDS Relief; and every one here. Some 8.8 million
deaths have been averted.

At the beginning of the year, Cuba announced that
it had eliminated transmission from mother to child.
Yesterday, the World Health Organization certified
that the countries of Thailand, Belarus and Armenia
had also eliminated transmission from mother to
child. Who could have believed that we could have
generations born free of HIV? Today, it is a success
story, because I can affirm that many other countries
will follow. Just four years ago, South Africa had more
than 58,000 babies born every year with HIV; today, it
has fewer than 6,000 babies born with HIV. More than
80 countries today have been able to demonstrate that
they will soon achieve this goal because they have fewer
than 50 babies born every year with HIV. While over a
decade ago, fewer than 10 per cent of pregnant women
living with HIV were on antiretroviral treatment.
Today, with the Assembly’s collective effort, more than
77 per cent of those mothers are on the treatment.
I just want to reiterate that we the peoples made
this commitment together, and we delivered this result
together. It was not a few of us; it was not some of us.
The United Nations must always represent all of us.
Certainly, this effort was not just about giving treatment
to millions of people; it was not just about giving pills.
It was about restoring dignity to people. It was about
fighting against social injustice. It was about ensuring
that equity would be in every single place. One by one,
we are breaking the bonds of stigma, discrimination,
prejudice and exclusion. We should work to ensure that
no one — I said no one — is left behind because of
who they are or who they love. This includes prisoners,
migrant populations, people with disabilities, men who
have sex with men, people who use drugs, sex workers
and transgender people. The doors of the United
Nations should be open to all. Indeed, we cannot afford
4/28

But those results and gains are fragile. Women are
being raped, exploited and infected at the same rate
as 20 years ago. Adolescent girls especially remain
shockingly vulnerable. Stigma and discrimination
continue to push people into the shadows and prevent
them from accessing lifesaving services. We need a
prevention revolution with the young people at the centre.
At a time when 62 people ­— I said 62 people — own
as much as the poor half of the world’s population, it is
unacceptable that we will leave 20 million people dying
because they will not have access to treatment.
AIDS is not over, but it can be. The next five years
will be critical. We have to get countries on the fast track.
We have to achieve 90-90-90. We should normalize
testing and reach every one of the 19 million people
who do not know their status. We have to frontload our
investment. If we do not act now to break the backbone
of the epidemic once and for all, the world will never
forgive us for the consequences of our complacency.
We can do it, we must do it, we the people.
The President: I thank the Executive Director of
the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS for
his statement.
Pursuant to paragraph 2 (b) of resolution 70/228, I
now give the floor to Ms. Loyce Maturu from Zimbabwe.
Ms. Maturu: I thank you, Sir, for your kind
invitation for me to speak here today. Let me just
start by saying, as I stand here today, that I am truly
humbled to address this important gathering on behalf
of my peers.
16-16375

08/06/2016

Let me start by briefly sharing my background and
my story growing up with HIV. In 2002, when I was
10 years old, I lost my mother and my younger brother
in the same way, due to HIV and tuberculosis. That
was the most painful moment for me, as those were the
people who were close to my heart. In 2004, when I
was 12 years old, I got really sick, and I stopped going
to school for some months. One of my aunts whom I
was staying with went with me to the clinic, and I was
informed that I had HIV and tuberculosis. Learning
that was the most depressing moment for me. I cried,
and I thought I was going to die, but here I am today.
I had a long journey after losing my mother and my
younger brother. In 2010, I faced a lot of emotional and
verbal abuse from one of my family members, and I
tried killing myself by taking all of the medication that
I had, because I could not contain the situation. I was
admitted to the hospital, and when I was discharged
I got massive counselling from an organization called
Africaid Zvandiri back in Zimbabwe. I said to myself,
“If I am going to live in this world again, I want to share
my story growing up with HIV, and I want to make sure
that adolescents and young people gain their confidence,
are able to take their HIV medication and are able to
realize their dreams and hopes for the future”.
Now, every day that I live I am thankful that I am
one of the 17 million people who mark the success of
HIV treatment over the past years, and it shows that
together, we have the greatest strength in saving more
lives, like my life was saved. It shows that we are able
to avert AIDS-related deaths because now I am tired
of seeing adolescents dying because they are not able
to take or to adhere to their HIV treatment, of seeing
adolescents fail second-line and third-line treatment
because there are no peer-led interventions to motivate
them to take their HIV treatment daily. This makes
me ask: Where is our investment going towards, as
countries? Who is our priority if we are not going to
leave anyone behind?
Sharing my story, I hope that it reflects the fact
that adolescent girls and young women are vulnerable,
at risk, and the most affected population among any
other age group. There is a need for us to prioritize
key populations — men who have sex with men, sex
workers, people who inject drugs, prisoners and
migrants — and today I call upon Governments not to
exclude them.

A/70/PV.97

Let me start by sharing some of the challenges that
we face as adolescents and young people. Access to
and availability of treatment, care and support services
are not always available when we need them, and most
of us are not financially stable enough to pay for the
services. Yes, HIV treatment is for free, but in most
clinics administrative fees have to be paid, and we
cannot afford them. Ministers of Health, what does
this say about us, in our HIV and AIDS progress at the
country level?
Stigma is one of the biggest barriers, as it affects
us mentally and hinders our progress as adolescents
and young people. Let me just say that in the past two
weeks, I was talking with one of my peers who is an
adolescent, and she was crying and very depressed
because she was denied certification in what she was
doing because of her HIV status, and we are here today
talking about empowering adolescent girls and young
women and ending AIDS.
What does my friend’s scenario mean to us in the
context of our progress in the fight against HIV and
AIDS? We believe that if we are to accelerate ending
AIDS among adolescents and young people, there is
a need to invest in evidence-based adherence support
interventions so that adolescents and young people are
supported in adhering to treatment even in the case
of pre-exposure prophylaxis. There is a need to have
clear a investment strategy to support advocacy for
and by adolescents and young people. More resources
need to be mobilized for scaling up friendly facilities
by training health-care workers on how to provide
friendly treatment case services for adolescents and
young people so that we can say that we will be able to
end AIDS by 2030. But if this is not addressed in my
generation, we will continue to see the same problem
even in the next generation.
Ending AIDS for good is not just about adopting
the draft political declaration (A/70/L.52, annex); it will
require teamwork and being united with one agenda.
Let me say that the political declaration would not be
a stand-alone approach for us to end AIDS by 2030,
and we will need to take advantage of the upcoming
AIDS conference to start drawing up the road map
to end AIDS. We know that the Global Fund to Fight
AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria is already mobilizing
financial resources for AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria
for the most burdened countries, such as my country,
Zimbabwe. This is the time to make sure that we have a
fully funded Global Fund to end it for good.

16-163755/28

A/70/PV.97

My last words are a plea to representatives to trust
and believe in adolescents and young people in their
countries so as to help shape the way society thinks
about and creates programmes for HIV and AIDS. We
have already begun the journey towards ending AIDS,
and now is the time to accelerate our efforts.
The President: I thank Ms. Maturu for her statement.
Pursuant to sub-paragraph (b) of paragraph
2 of resolution 70/228, I now give the floor to
Mr. Ndaba Mandela, Chairman and founder of the
Africa Rising Foundation.
Mr. Mandela (Africa Rising Foundation): When
I was 19, my mother died of HIV/AIDS. When I was
21, my father died of HIV/AIDS. I will never forget the
day our family gathered at a press conference to tell the
world why my father had died. As we gathered, a family
member suggested that we say that it was tuberculosis
or pneumonia, and my grandfather said: “No, we shall
not do that. We shall tell the world my son died of
HIV/AIDS.”
My grandfather was not afraid of the truth. Nelson
Mandela instead spoke out loudly and with dignity.
His only surviving son, Makgatho Lewanika Mandela,
had died of AIDS. Madiba was determined that his
only son would not die in silence or in vain. This
was the beginning of a national dialogue on AIDS in
South Africa and of global action around the world.
I am here today to ask the General Assembly to continue
the legacy of Nelson Mandela — a legacy of unity and
a legacy of leadership. I am here to ask members to
ensure that all 37 million people living with HIV today
can access immediate antiretroviral treatment and
live full, healthy lives while they wait for a cure. The
90-90-90 by 2020 target should be the milestone for
every country to reach as the world moves to end AIDS
once and for all. But we will never end this epidemic by
treatment alone. Today, we have the tools to stop every
new HIV infection, and it is a crime that they are not
being used fully and immediately.
I am here to ask all gathered here to ensure that the
hundreds of millions of people at daily risk — LGBTI
people, people who use drugs, sex workers, migrants,
serodiscordant couples and people living with
HIV — who live in silence and fear can wake up every
day to good health, well-being and dignity, and that
they can go to work, school or their local clinic unafraid
of arrest, physical danger or discrimination simply
because of who they are or who they love. I am here
6/28

08/06/2016

to ask leaders of the 35 countries that still do not allow
foreigners living with HIV to enter or reside within their
countries to end travel restrictions now, because the
truth is that building walls or denying visas is not how
we protect ourselves from HIV or end a global epidemic.
Bigotry and fear do nothing but spread the virus. I am
here to echo the bold call of my mentor, Michel Sidibé,
to make fast-track the only track for ending AIDS in all
cities, fragile communities and countries, and to make
the end of AIDS the first Sustainable Development
Goal that our generation achieves.
I am also here to ask each of us to take a
three-pronged personal pledge to end AIDS: first, get
tested for HIV and know your status; secondly, always
carry at least two condoms — one for you to use
without fail and another to give to someone who is not
carrying one. It could save your life and it could save
theirs. Finally, when you learn that a friend, relative,
co-worker or neighbour is living with HIV, give them
a hand up, not a cold shoulder. None of these actions
costs much, but if we all do them the impact will be
priceless, and that will be the best down payment on
the end of AIDS.
It has been 11 years since my father passed away,
and although I am older now, I still want him to be proud.
I would have loved to see the look in his eyes today as
I address the opening of this historical meeting in this
historical place. Today, the eyes of millions living with
HIV are on us. They are counting on us today as we
launch this high-level meeting. They are counting on
us to make an unprecedented commitment to the end of
AIDS, and they are counting on us to keep our promise.
Let us make history. Let us make them proud. As the
great Nelson Mandela said, it is in our hands.
The President: I thank Mr. Mandela for his statement.
We have now heard the last speaker for the opening
segment of the high-level meeting.
The Assembly will now turn to draft resolution
A/70/L.52, entitled “Political Declaration on HIV
and AIDS: On the Fast-Track to Accelerate the Fight
against HIV and to End the AIDS Epidemic by 2030”.
In this connection, since the draft resolution has only
been circulated this morning, it will be necessary to
waive the relevant provision of rule 78 of the rules of
procedure, which reads in part as follows:
“As a general rule, no proposal shall be discussed
or put to the vote at any meeting of the General
16-16375

08/06/2016

Assembly unless copies of it have been circulated
to all delegations not later than the day preceeding
the meeting.”
Unless I hear any objection, I shall take it that the
Assembly agrees with this proposal.
It was so decided.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/70/L.52.
I give the floor to the representative of the Secretariat.
Ms. Pollard (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): The present statement
is made in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly. By paragraph 79 of
draft resolution A/70/L.52, the General Assembly would
“Decide to convene a High-Level Meeting
on HIV and AIDS to review progress on the
commitments made in the present Declaration
towards ending the AIDS epidemic by 2030, and
how the response, in its social, economic and
political dimensions, continues to contribute
optimally to progress on the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and the global health
goal, and decide to reach an agreement on the date
for convening the next High-Level Meeting on
HIV and AIDS no later than the 75th session of the
General Assembly”.
Pursuant to the request contained in the draft
resolution, in the absence of modalities for the high-level
meeting on HIV and AIDS it is not possible at present
to determine the conference-servicing implications
of the requirements for meetings and documentation.
As the decisions on the format, scope and modalities
are determined, the Secretary-General would submit
the relevant costs of such requirements to the General
Assembly, in accordance with rule 153 of its rules of
procedure.The date of the meeting would have to be
determined in consultation with the Department for
General Assembly and Conference Management.
Accordingly, the adoption of draft resolution
A/70/L.52 would not give rise to any financial
implications under the programme budget for the
biennium 2016-2017.
The President: I now give the floor to speakers
in explanation of position before the adoption of
draft resolution A/70/L.52. I remind delegations that

A/70/PV.97

explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Foradori (Argentina): I deliver this explanation
of position on behalf of the following Member States:
Albania, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, the Czech Republic,
Denmark, the Dominican Republic, Estonia, Finland,
France, Germany, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, the Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Papua New Guinea, Panama, Peru,
the Philippines, Portugal, Romania, Serbia, Slovenia,
Spain, Switzerland, Thailand, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States
of America, Uruguay and my own country, Argentina.
We welcome the important gains achieved in
addressing HIV and the AIDS epidemic. At the same
time, we acknowledge the remaining critical gaps and
challenges, with particular concern for all of those at
risk of being left behind. We reaffirm our commitment
to the full implementation of the Beijing Declaration
and Platform for Action, the International Conference
on Population and Development and its Programme
of Action, and the outcome documents of the review
conferences and of the previous political declarations
on HIV and AIDS.
At this critical moment in the global response,
we strongly reaffirm our commitment to ending new
HIV infections and AIDS as a public health threat
by 2030, including in conflict, post-conflict and
other humanitarian crises. Therefore, guided by full
respect for human rights and a gender-responsive
approach, and through evidence-based policies and
adequate investments in accordance with the political
declarations, we reaffirm all human rights and
fundamental freedoms for all, without distinction of
any kind, and with emphasis on addressing structural
inequalities and the needs and rights of people living
with, at risk of and affected by HIV, including key
populations and their families.
In line with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (resolution 70/1), we call for the
strengthening of health systems and capacities, broad
public-health measures and the promotion of wellbeing, committed to advancing universal health
coverage; access to essential and integrated health
services, diagnostic tests, monitoring and medicines for

16-163757/28

A/70/PV.97

the prevention and treatment of HIV, including those to
address co-infections, co-morbidities, and sexual and
reproductive health services and other related services;
and ensuring social protection for people living with
HIV and their caretakers, especially women and girls,
who bear a disproportionate burden, and for children
and young people.
We condemn all forms of discrimination, stigma
and violence, including hate crimes, without distinction
of any kind, perpetrated against people living with,
presumed to be living with, at risk of or affected by
HIV, including by strengthening legal protections and
their enforcement, ensuring equality before the law and
non-discrimination for all people, and by removing
punitive laws, policies and practices that marginalize
individuals, undermine prevention efforts, and block
access to HIV- and AIDS-related services, as needed.
We reaffirm the centrality of empowering all
women and girls, achieving gender equality and ending
all forms of gender-based and sexual violence and
harmful practices, including intimate partner violence,
marital rape, sexual exploitation and trafficking, child,
early and forced marriage and female genital mutilation,
cognizant that without the full enjoyment of all the
human rights of women and girls across a spectrum of
social, cultural, economic, political and civil rights, we
will be unable to put an end to AIDS.
In that context, we reiterate the importance of the
role of men and boys in achieving gender equality,
commit to respecting, protecting and promoting the
full enjoyment of the sexual and reproductive health
and rights of all, with particular attention to women,
adolescent girls and key populations at higher risk of
HIV infection, including the right to make decisions
regarding sexuality and reproductive matters free of
discrimination, coercion or violence, and the right
to access comprehensive, quality, integrated and
affordable sexual and reproductive health care and
HIV and AIDS information, education and services,
combination prevention and treatment and rights related
to privacy, confidentiality and informed consent. We
commit to preventing and punishing violations of those
rights and all forms of coercive practices, including
forced sterilization and forced abortion among women
and girls living with HIV, and to providing victims with
access to justice and redress.
We express grave concern that AIDS is the secondleading cause of death among adolescents globally,
8/28

08/06/2016

that HIV infection is rising among adolescent girls,
and that adolescents lack adequate knowledge about
how to prevent HIV and AIDS; and commit to taking
concrete steps to ensure that all girls and boys complete
primary and secondary education, and to scaling up the
implementation of quality, comprehensive sexuality
education in a manner consistent with their evolving
capacities and youth-friendly sexual and reproductive
health, HIV- and AIDS-related information, services
and commodities, regardless of age, marital, HIV or
any other status.
We commit to ensuring transparent, inclusive
and strengthened accountability frameworks with the
meaningful participation of civil society and other
relevant stakeholders at all levels of implementation,
monitoring, follow-up and review of the AIDS
response, including of people living with, at risk of, and
affected by HIV, key populations at higher risks of HIV,
community-based, women’s and youth organizations,
feminist groups, human rights defenders and national
human rights institutions.
We call for ensuring that reporting on progress on
the AIDS response and our fulfilment of commitments
made at the 2016 high-level meeting on HIV/AIDS
feed into the follow-up and review of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, including in the Highlevel Political Forum on Sustainable Development, the
Economic and Social Council and subsidiary bodies.
Mr. Morales Ojeda (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba joins the consensus in favour of the adoption
of the draft political declaration on HIV and AIDS
(A/70/L.52, annex), which aims to put us on the road
to accelerating the fight against HIV and to ending the
AIDS epidemic by 2030. My delegation recognizes
the efforts and achievements made by many countries
facing the HIV epidemic. However, we acknowledge
with concern persistent problems and challenges that
should be reflected more clearly and forcefully in the
draft political declaration.
In that regard, the right to health must take
precedence over any material, technological or
intellectual property consideration. No legislation,
agreement or national or international policy or practice
should restrict universal access to the best available
treatment for people with HIV/AIDS. It is unacceptable
that price or other selfish motives should limit universal
access to people who require the use of such treatment.
16-16375

08/06/2016

Cuba supports the contention that the issue of
health and sexual and reproductive rights deserves our
attention and supports promoting comprehensive sex
education as part of the response to HIV/AIDS. Such
an approach is essential in working with youth and
adolescents and should include a gender perspective.
International cooperation is more important
today than ever. The commitment of additional
resources is required, as is the unconditional transfer
of best technologies under the guidance of the World
Health Organization and the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS. The realization of the right
to development should have guided the draft text. The
enjoyment of this right will allow all human beings and
all peoples the full exercise of their fundamental rights
and freedoms, both individually and collectively. The
realization of the right to development will allow for
humankind’s victory over HIV/AIDS and its eradication
by 2030, without exclusion or discrimination.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/70/L.52, entitled “Political Declaration
on HIV and AIDS: On the Fast-Track to Accelerate the
Fight against HIV and to End the AIDS Epidemic by
2030”.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt
draft resolution A/70/L.52?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
70/266).
The President: Before giving the floor to the
speakers in explanation of position on the resolution just
adopted, may I remind delegations that explanations of
position are limited to 10 minutes and should be made
by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Gunnarsson (Iceland): Iceland is pleased to
have joined consensus on the Political Declaration
contained in resolution 70/266 and would like to
align itself to the general statement delivered by the
representative of Argentina on the importance of the
Political Declaration addressing sexual and reproductive
health and rights, comprehensive sexuality education
and other key issues for us to be effective in our fight
against HIV and AIDS.
We also reiterate our commitment in the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1)

A/70/PV.97

to ending the AIDS epidemic as an imperative. We
cannot accept losing our young women and men to the
disease, which often occurs simply because they are
unaware of how to protect themselves or do not know
their status. However, we consider it necessary to put
our view on record as with regard to the term “sex
worker”, which we believe is an incomplete reference to
a key population group. In addition, it does not take into
account that sex work is recognized only in a handful of
countries, while a majority of countries adopt different
measures to regulate the sale of sex.
Violence against women takes many forms. Recent
surveys have revealed that 35 per cent of women
worldwide have experienced intimate or sexual violence
in their lifetime. Therefore, violence against women
represents a massive and serious public health problem
against which bold concrete actions should be taken,
not only through the health-care system’s response but
also through a holistic and multisectoral approach.
One serious and yet too common form of violence
against women is prostitution. Iceland qualifies all
forms of prostitution — not only forced prostitution — as
sexual violence. We believe that the very act of buying
sex is incompatible with the dignity and worth of the
human person.
Sweden was the first country, in 1999, to introduce
a law criminalizing the purchase of sex by itself,
with a view to protecting male and female victims of
prostitution and reducing the demand. Iceland adopted
the same approach in 2009. This approach also supports
access for those who sell sex to commodities and health
services, without accepting the demand as an inevitable.
The term “sex work” implies that selling sex has
been legalized and is a normal profession just like any
other work. This is not the case in a large majority
of countries. The reference to work carries with it
questions regarding legal rights and entitlements, such
as labour rights and entitlements to unemployment
benefits. In that context, it is important to recall that
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women and the Beijing Platform
for Action refer to prostitution rather than sex work.
According to the Guidance Note on HIV and Sex
Work of the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/
AIDS (UNAIDS),
“[m]any people who exchange sex for money
or goods do not self-identify as sex workers and

16-163759/28

A/70/PV.97

do not seek nor have access to HIV prevention,
treatment, care and support advice or services for
sex workers, including in humanitarian and postconflict settings”.
When referring to sex workers there is therefore a
risk that those who do not sell sex as their occupation but
for other reasons, such as in emergency settings or as a
survival method, are not covered by that terminology.
This also undeniably excludes those forcibly sold into
the sex industry. Additionally, the term “sex worker”
applies only to those selling sex who are 18 years of
age or older, as those younger cannot be considered to
engage willingly in sex work. In fact, UNAIDS defines
the sale of sex by children under the age of 18 years as
sexual exploitation.
Data collected on sex work also refers to all those
engaged in selling sex without differentiating by age.
Studies of sex workers mostly do not disaggregate
programme outcomes by age, and no accurate global
estimates exist of the number of young people engaged
in selling sex, although some indications are that many
start selling sex well before they are 18. The term “sex
workers” therefore excludes those younger than 18.
Other terminology proposed by my delegation
as a compromise, such as “people who sell sex”, is
therefore a more complete reference to all those who
are more vulnerable to HIV as a result of selling sex.
This is also the terminology that UNAIDS uses when
referring to both those over 18 and those under 18. It is
worth noting that this terminology allows for variations
between countries that use different terminology, such
as “prostitution” or “sex work”, and have different legal
frameworks, such as my own country, which adopted
the so-called Swedish approach, which criminalizes
only the buyer, as it simply describes those who are
engaged in the activity.
Finally, we would like to put on record that we
believe that nothing in the current text gives UNAIDS
a mandate to continue to advocate for the legalization
of sex work. As stated in the Political Declaration, our
common aim is to focus on successful, effective and
equitable delivery of HIV prevention, treatment, care
and support to those living with or affected by by HIV.
We have seen a dramatic decrease in HIV infections
among persons who sell sex in many countries that
have different legal frameworks regarding the sale of
sex. Advocating for one legal framework over another
10/28

08/06/2016

despite this can harm our efforts in that regard, rather
than advance them.
Ms. Ali (Singapore): My delegation takes the floor in
explanation of position on the 2016 Political Declaration
on HIV and AIDS (resolution 70/266, annex). Singapore
reaffirms its commitment to the global fight against
HIV and the AIDS epidemic, as HIV/AIDS remains a
serious global health concern today. We were therefore
pleased to join consensus on the Political Declaration.
However, Singapore would like to explain its position
in respect of harm reduction, particularly in relation to
paragraph 43 of the Political Declaration, which calls
on Member States to consider ensuring access to such
interventions as harm-reduction programmes.
Singapore believes that a wide range of approaches
should be available to States, given the unique context
and circumstances of drug issues in each State. We do
not believe that it is appropriate or useful to attempt to
privilege or prioritize specific strategies at the global
level, as this paragraph does. In the Singapore context,
for instance, such harm-reduction strategies as needle
exchange or opiate substitution are not relevant, since
we have very few cases of HIV transmission through
injecting drug use.
We are also of the view that the paragraph is
inaccurate in its presumption that the criminalization
of drug abuse necessarily results in restricted access
to anti-HIV-related services. Singapore takes a
comprehensive and balanced approach in its drug
policies, with targeted preventive education, effective
enforcement, holistic rehabilitation and effective
community partnerships to faclitate reintegration.
This approach works for us and is the foundation in
our efforts as part of the global community to end the
AIDS epidemic.
Mr. Boehm (Canada): Canada is pleased to join
others in our support for the 2016 Political Declaration
on HIV and AIDS (resolution 70/266, annex). We
commend the efforts of the co-facilitators and the
collaborative spirit of all delegations, which helped us to
arrive at consensus. We also want to thank civil society
for its leadership in strongly encouraging Member
States to fight hard for an agreement that was inclusive
and left no one behind. We believe that, at this critical
juncture in the fight against AIDS, this is an important
declaration that demonstrates the global community’s
commitment to accelerated action to end AIDS.
16-16375

08/06/2016

The Political Declaration places human rights at
its core and commits countries to clear targets with
critical frontloading of support and funds from all
sources. It reflects an understanding that we must
empower all women and girls. For Canada that means
addressing not only their sexual and reproductive
health, but also their reproductive and sexual rights. It
also clearly recognizes that there is insufficient access
to services for key populations. Therefore, we welcome
the inclusion of people who inject drugs, men who have
sex with men, sex workers, transgender people and
prisoners, all of whom are at significantly elevated risk
of HIV infection globally.
It is essential that our response be grounded in
respect for human rights and tailored to the unique needs
of the key affected populations, including indigenous
people. We would have wanted more. The Declaration
does not include a call to end the stigma, discrimination
and violence faced by other key populations, such as
lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people globally,
which we know increases their vulnerability to
infection.
Canada also strongly supports evidence-based
harm-reduction measures as part of an overall approach
to HIV prevention and calls upon Member States to
consider their implementation.
We want to recognize the value of this process
and the important moment it brings us today. Since the
beginning of the epidemic, community organizations
have been at the forefront of the response. Canada
will continue to work in close partnership with civil
society and, in particular, with those who are living
with and at risk of infection, so as to ensure that our
collective response is informed by the realities of those
most affected.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
my delegation would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this meeting. Allow me to take this
opportunity to thank the co-facilitators — the Permanent
Representatives of Zambia and Switzerland — for their
efforts and wise leadership during the negotiations
aimed at ensuring a convergence of the views of
Member States on the Political Declaration adopted
today (resolution 70/266, annex).
My delegation reaffirms its commitment to all
United Nations resolutions and recommendations
on combating HIV/AIDS in order to achieve the
internationally agreed development goals. We also

A/70/PV.97

stress that we are committed to providing prevention
and care to all those affected, without discrimination,
and to making every possible effort to halt the spread
of the disease.
As members are aware, there are several matters
on which delegations did not find common ground. My
delegation joined the consensus overall, nevertheless,
despite the fact that some of our points of view and
concerns were not taken into consideration with respect
to a number of issues. Therefore, my delegation would
like to register its reservation to the following points.
First, there is the reference to the outcomes of the
reviews of the International Conference on Population
and Development, which contain the reviews of
non-governmental
and
regional
organizations,
and the discussion of which did not take place at
the level of intergovernmental negotiations in the
General Assembly.
Secondly, the Political Declaration includes several
contentious terms, such as the term “sexuality” in
paragraph 61 (c). This term runs counter to both the
domestic legislation of many Member States and to
international law.
Thirdly, paragraph 62 (c) includes the term
“comprehensive education”, which effectively means
comprehensive sexual education, even though there is
no consensus on that term. That is the reason we did
not support including it in the Declaration. It is also not
part of the agreed upon and internationally recognized
human rights. That term runs counter to the Charter of
the United Nations, the Convention on the Rights of the
Child and the legal systems of several countries.
Fourthly, we have reservations with regard to the
term “key populations” in paragraph 42 and paragraph
62 (e), as it focuses on only five groups affected by the
disease, even though the definition of the term differs
from one place to another, especially in Africa and in
particular sub-Saharan Africa. We see that populations
who are at highest risk of infection, or “key populations”,
are women and adolescent girls. However, focusing on
one group and turning a blind eye to another might
jeopardize the efforts we are making to eradicate this
disease. Such efforts must be in line with the new 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1).
Fifthly, paragraph 61 (l) includes a principle that
runs counter to several religions and the traditions of
several societies, regardless of age or marital status.

16-1637511/28

A/70/PV.97

Paragraph 61 (j) makes reference to the term “safe”.
We believe it is important to take into consideration
all traditions and religions. My delegation would like
to reiterate its position with regard to the principle of
sovereignty, which is a right of every Member State in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and
international law.
Mr. Alyemany (Yemen), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
In conclusion, my delegation would like the record
of this meeting to reflect our positions with regard to
the issues I just referred to. We renew our commitment
to working to achieve the objective of ending the spread
of HIV/AIDS to ensure the prosperity of all our peoples
and to eradicate the epidemic by 2030 in order to fulfil
the commitments we undertook in the Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
Ms. Mendelson (United States of America): The
United States would like to express its appreciation
to the Governments of Switzerland and Zambia,and
their respective Permanent Representatives to the
United Nations, Mr. Jürg Lauber and Dr. Patricia
Mwaba Kasese-Bota, for their exemplary efforts
as co-facilitators of this United Nations High-level
Meeting on ending AIDS.
The United States is pleased to align itself with the
general statement made by the representative of Argentina.
The United States’ commitment to ending the
epidemic of AIDS cannot be overstated. In articulating
that commitment, we must acknowledge the role that
civil society and the non-governmental organizations
community have played in this decades-long effort.
We believe that this Political Declaration (resolution
70/266, annex) is a necessary step in the continuing
efforts to combat HIV and AIDS, and appreciate that
the international community is able today to reiterate
its political will to end the epidemic. The Political
Declaration, however, is far from a perfect document.
We would like to point out some of our issues
with the Declaration.
We continue to be committed to working with
others to implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (resolution 70/1). Together, we have made
tremendous progress in the global HIV/AIDS response;
however, the work is far from done, particularly for
those at risk of being left behind. The language in the
Political Declaration could have been stronger and
12/28

08/06/2016

more explicit on this point. The protection of human
rights provides the foundation for ending the AIDS
epidemic as a public health threat by 2030 — the target
supported by 193 States Members of the United Nations
in adopting the 2030 Agenda in September 2015.
However, the language in the Political Declaration
should have been stronger and more explicit on this
point — the world’s population deserves no less.
Despite the significant medical advances in
HIV/AIDS over the past 35 years, we have not made
nearly as much progress in safeguarding human
rights and creating the legal and policy environments
needed to prevent stigma and discrimination. That
has resulted in part due to a lack of acceptance of the
human rights of all persons, without distinction, and
in part because we have not systemically measured
stigma and discrimination, thereby limiting efforts to
chart progress.
The United States remains firmly committed to
ending stigma, discrimination and violence against
persons living with HIV/AIDS and key populations
and to help create legal and policy environments that
increase their access to HIV prevention and treatment
services. When any person is stigmatized, discriminated
against, disrespected in the health-care setting or is
subjected to violence in accessing HIV/AIDS services,
the health and human dignity of everyone in that
community are threatened. We need to ensure that
HIV services are comprehensive and reach the most
vulnerable populations. In that regard, the needs and
rights of individuals living with, at risk of or affected by
HIV, especially members of key populations, including
men who have sex with men, transgender persons, sex
workers, persons who inject drugs, and prisoners must
be addressed.
To control the epidemic and, ultimately, achieve an
AIDS-free generation, it is imperative that we identify,
measure and change the complex dynamics driving
stigma and discrimination, and encourage innovative,
tailored, community-led approaches to address them
for each risk group. We need to measure and change the
outcomes of key population clinical cascades, specific
by risk, population and location, where stigma and
discrimination are key drivers limiting the ability to
make progress. Without exception, all efforts to address
these issues must include the populations directly
affected from the outset and at every stage.
16-16375

08/06/2016

A/70/PV.97

The United States also remains firmly committed
to protecting the sexual and reproductive health and
rights of all women. Every woman has the right to
have control over and decide freely and responsibly on
matters related to her sexuality, including sexual and
reproductive health, free of coercion, discrimination or
violence. A lack of protection of this right contributes
to the alarming facts that 390,000 adolescent girls and
young women are infected with HIV annually, and
that girls account for three-quarters of all new HIV
infections among adolescents in sub-Saharan Africa.
The AIDS epidemic will not be ended by 2030 unless
sexual and reproductive health and rights are protected.

The United States understands that this Declaration
does not imply that States must join human rights
instruments to which they are not a party, or that they
must implement those instruments or any obligations
under them. This Declaration does not change the
current state of conventional or customary international
law, nor do we understand it to recognize any rights
not previously recognized or expand the scope of, or
modify in any way, previously recognized rights. We
furthermore understand this Declaration to be consistent
with long-standing United States views regarding the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,
including article 17, and interpret it accordingly.

The United States is committed to measures
to promote access to safe, affordable, quality and
efficacious medicines, diagnostics and related health
technologies for HIV and other diseases, while at the
same time providing important incentives for innovation
through a robust intellectual property regime. In doing
so, the United States continues to strive to provide the
most effective tools for all populations and to reach
our shared goal of ending the AIDS epidemic. We
have concerns that the work of the Secretary-General’s
High-Level Panel on Access to Medicines, which is
currently under way and is noted in the Declaration,
will not achieve meaningful results.

The United States understands that any reaffirmation
of prior documents in the Declaration applies only to
those States that affirmed them initially. In supporting
the Declaration, we affirm our long-standing
commitment to both international development and the
promotion of human rights. However, we must reiterate
the concerns of the United States regarding the topic
of the right to development, which are long-standing
and well-known. It does not have an agreed-upon
international meaning. Any related discussion needs
to focus on aspects of development related to human
rights, which are universal rights, held and enjoyed by
all individuals and which every individual may demand
from his or her own Government.

As we have made clear through our submission
of views earlier this year, among our concerns is the
Panel’s narrowly defined mandate, the non-transparent
manner in which it was constituted and the presumption
of policy incoherence. We believe the Panel has
the potential to divide rather than to bring together
countries, patients and stakeholders. The United States
hopes that any recommendations from the Panel or the
Secretary-General will not divide us, but further the
goals of both access and innovation and find common
ground for future work on this critical issue.
We reiterate our understanding that this
non-binding document does not create rights or
obligations under international law. Additionally,
we note that the term “equitable” is used in multiple
contexts in the Declaration. While the United States
fully endorses the importance of universal access to
health-care services, we must collectively avoid any
unintended interpretation of the term “equitable” that
implies a subjective assessment of fairness that, among
other things, may lead to discriminatory practices.

The United States remains committed to not only
turning the tide on HIV/AIDS, but also on the unrelenting
stigma and discrimination within the health system and
community. The United States, through the President’s
Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief, has dramatically
increased funding to support key populations and
women, with comprehensive approaches to the
measurement and change of stigma and discrimination
and to ensure that anyone anywhere, independent of
race, gender, sexual orientation, gender identity or
other status, can access information and services to
change the course of the HIV/AIDS pandemic.
I thank the President for this opportunity to make
those important points of clarification. We ask that this
statement be added to the official record of this highlevel meeting. With those clarifications, we were very
pleased to join the consensus on the adoption of the
Political declaration to accelerate the fight against HIV
and to end the AIDS epidemic by 2030.
Ms. Appleyard (Australia): The Political Declaration
on HIV and AIDS (resolution 70/266, annex) is a critical

16-1637513/28

A/70/PV.97

milestone in our collective fight against HIV/AIDS.
We commend the co-faciliators — the Ambassadors
of Switzerland and Zambia — for their efforts to
bring this outcome document to consensus. Australia
is pleased to adopt a declaration that updates our
shared commitment to ending the AIDS epidemic by
2030 and that, importantly, sets out the actions needed
States need to take to ensure an effective and equitable
HIV response.
The Declaration places a human rights approach
to ending HIV at its core. It recognizes the need to
empower all women and girls, including as regards their
sexual and reproductive health and reproductive rights,
and to ensure access to services for all key populations
as central to ending HIV. We are pleased to see a wider
listing of key populations to include men who have
sex with men, people who inject drugs, sex workers,
transgender people and prisoners. Australia urges
Member States to see the Declaration as a minimum
starting point for efforts to end AIDS by 2030.
Australia would have liked the outcome document to
have gone further in referencing key populations and
the particular issues they face in accessing testing,
treatment and information. Australia’s HIV/AIDS
response is informed by epidemiological evidence
and evidence of what works. There is clear evidence
that engaging with, and addressing the needs of, key
populations is effective in delivering high impact at a
lower cost.
Like Canada, we are disappointed that the
Declaration does not include a call to end the stigma,
discrimination and violence faced by other key
populations, such as lesbians, gays, bisexuals and
transgender people globally, which we know increases
their vulnerability to infection. Australia condemns
any efforts to interpret HIV/AIDS transmission as a
criminal issue. Criminalization perpetuates isolation
and marginalization for women and girls and key
populations, prevents access to treatment and support
and undermines a human rights-based approach to
health. We were also disappointed that sexual rights
were not included. Australia supports the right of
everyone to access the highest attainable standard of
physical and mental health. For people living with HIV
and those at risk, that encompasses universal access
to HIV prevention, testing and treatment services free
from stigma and discrimination.
Finally, Australia strongly appreciates the
engagement of civil society in the development of
14/28

08/06/2016

the Declaration. Australia is pleased to adopt the
Declaration and notes the important contribution it will
make to the continuing evolution of our own national
response to HIV.
Ms. Hassan (Djibouti) (spoke in French): My
statement concerns our position with regard to the
Political Declaration on HIV and AIDS: On the Fast
Track to Accelerate the Fight against HIV and to
End the AIDS Epidemic by 2030, which the General
Assembly has just adopted (resolution 70/266, annex).
The Republic of Djibouti would like to reaffirm its
full and complete commitment and its unstinting
determination to pursue the implementation of efficient
and non-discriminatory national policies to eliminate
HIV/AIDS by 2030 and to do so in conformity with
human rights universally recognized by the relevant
international instruments.
The Republic of Djibouti also would like to
take the opportunity afforded by the adoption of the
Political Declaration on HIV and AIDS to emphasize
the importance of leadership and national ownership
in the fight against HIV/AIDS. Djibouti is committed
to the implementation of the relevant provisions of the
Political Declaration that are, on the one hand, in line
both with the national laws and cultural, social and
religious values of our country, and, on the other, with
the approach and strategies already being deployed on
a national level.
From that perspective, Djibouti welcomes the
reaffirmation in paragraph 4 of the Political Declaration
of the sovereign right of each country, described and
recognized in the Charter of the United Nations, as well
as the need of every country to be able to implement
the commitments of the Declaration in line with its
laws and priorities for national development in strict
compliance with the different cultural, ethical and
religious values that underpin each society. Therefore,
Djibouti reserves its position and would like to formally
state its understanding of paragraph 42 and paragraph
62 (e) of the Declaration, which claim to identify key
populations in combating HIV/AIDS but which do not
reflect key populations in terms of the epidemiological
and social realities of many countries, including ours. It
is vital for each State to be able to identify at a national
level those key populations that are the most exposed
to the AIDS epidemic. In fact, for the specific case of
Djibouti, the key populations are women and young
people, including young women.
16-16375

08/06/2016

References to sexual and reproductive health in
the Political Declaration should not be interpreted as
an appeal or an encouragement to women living with
HIV/AIDS to interrupt their pregnancy or to stop them
from conceiving children. For Djibouti, national efforts
with respect to that question consist in eliminating the
risks of transmission of HIV/AIDS from the mother to
the infant. We call on international partners to continue
to support our country in this approach, which is the
correct one.
With respect to sexual and reproductive health,
Djibouti, through the whole host of its relevant
policies, guarantees and ensures access to sexual and
reproductive health-care services for all women, in
line with the commitments undertaken through the
adoption of the outcome document of International
Conference on Population and Development (ICPD).
Moreover, for Djibouti, paragraph 14 and paragraphs
61 (b), (i) and (d) of the Declaration do not in any way
mean a reinterpretation of the ICPD, and therefore
cannot be interpreted as a guarantee for unconditional,
uncontrolled access by young women to the means
provided for women’s sexual and reproductive health.
My country reiterates its commitment to continuing
to spare no effort as it strives to reach the goal of
eliminating HIV/AIDS before the year 2030.
Finally, my delegation requests that this explanation
of position be entered into the official record of
this meeting.
Mr. Deyalsingh (Trinidad and Tobago): Trinidad
and Tobago wishes to congratulate the President for his
leadership on this issue and thanks the co-facilitators
of the negotiation for their able stewardship, which led
us to the bold Declaration that we have all joined in
consensus to adopt this morning (resolution 70/266,
annex). As to the Political Declaration, Trinidad and
Tobago believes that it generally reflects the global
ambition we are striving to achieve, namely, to end
the AIDS epidemic by 2030. While recognizing the
importance of paragraph 4 of the Declaration, we wish
to make the following explanation of position on some
of the issues set forth in the document.
Consistent with national legislation, health-care
services, including in relation to HIV prevention,
treatment and care, are provided to all citizens
of Trinidad and Tobago, including children and
adolescents, with the consent of their parents or legal
guardians. Additionally, while Trinidad and Tobago

A/70/PV.97

commends the development of new biomedical tools for
the prevention of HIV, the provision of pre-exposure
prophylaxis to individuals goes against our national
post-exposure prophylaxis policy, which expressly
states that pre-exposure prophylaxis is not offered
for casual encounters. Trinidad and Tobago is of the
view that this approach may give individuals a false
sense of security and encourage engagement in risky
behaviours, which may challenge national response
efforts and the achievement of global objectives to
prevent new infections and ultimately end the AIDS
epidemic by our 2030 target date.
Trinidad and Tobago reiterates that it is pleased to
have joined all other Member States in the adoption of
the Declaration by consensus and pledges to implement
the commitments made therein in accordance with
national legislation, circumstances, policies and
priorities, taking into account the obligations to which
we are committed in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (resolution 70/1), adopted by all of us
last September.
Mr. Bawazir (Indonesia): I would like to start
by congratulating all delegations on their hard work,
goodwill and cooperative spirit, which led us to today’s
adoption of the Political Declaration on HIV and AIDS
(resolution 70/266, annex). The Declaration offers us a
vision and guidance for our collective efforts over the
next five years to end the HIV/AIDS epidemic. I would
be remiss if I did not thank that the co-facilitators,
Ambassador Kasese-Bota and Ambassador Lauber, for
the excellent leadership with which they successfully
bridged the gap between differing interests and
priorities and managed to achieve consensus on this
crucial document in a timely manner.
We gather here today to advance our common
fight against HIV/AIDS. To date, HIV has killed more
than 30 million people worldwide. In Indonesia, it is
estimated that 100,000 people become infected with
HIV every year. Therefore, we know exactly how
serious this situation is for our country. However, the
last five years have provided clear evidence that we can
prevent infection, save lives and improve the quality
of life for millions of people threatened infected and
affected by HIV.
We fully understand that, despite the difference
in approaches in the prevention and treatment of
HIV/AIDS, we need to maintain our commitment to
completely eliminating the perils in order to eradicate

16-1637515/28

A/70/PV.97

the scourge of HIV/AIDS. We are convinced that
the most effective way to end HIV/AIDS is reflected
in paragraph 57 of the 2016 Political Declaration
through differentiated responses to HIV/AIDS
based on national ownership, priorities, drivers,
vulnerabilities and aggravating factors and by focusing
on affected populations. Furthermore, paragraph 42
also emphasizes that each country should define the
specific populations that are key to its epidemic and
response based on the local epidemiological context. In
the spirit of paragraph 42, we would like to take this
opportunity to make important clarifying points on
our understanding of the term “key populations” as it
appears in the Political Declaration.
Indonesia recognizes that key populations, as the
term is used in paragraph 42 and paragraph 62 (e) of the
Political Declaration, are populations at a higher risk of
contracting HIV. Nevertheless Indonesia believes that
this definition does not limit Indonesia’s authority to
define key populations or populations at greater risk of
HIV infection according to its national circumstances,
in line with paragraphs 42 and 57. Accordingly,
Indonesia has the right to design prevention, testing
and treatment programmes in due response. Given
Indonesia’s size and the complexity of its HIV/AIDS
response, programmes designed to contain HIV/AIDS
using only one approach or reaching only one segment
of the population does not represent the factual situation
on the ground in Indonesia.
We would now like to make some additional
points with regard to paragraph 39. To a certain extent,
Indonesia supports the promotion of risk-reducing
behaviour as a means to prevent the spread of HIV,
but we need to remain cognizant of the fact that risk
reduction does not imply that risks may be eliminated
entirely. We need to take a step beyond risk reduction. In
our view, to truly stop the HIV/AIDS virus in its tracks,
measures that encourage risk-avoidance behaviour
are required, as they are a far more effective way to
guarantee non-transmission of the HIV/AIDS virus.
Let us not forget that evidence shows that sexual
contact is the most common route of HIV transmission.
Ending HIV will be possible only if we can avoid
exposing ourselves to the modes of transmission.
Indonesia continues to hold the view that risk-avoidance
measures, including abstinence and fidelity, are the
most effective measures for preventing the spread and
bringing about the end of HIV, as enshrined in the 2011
Political Declaration. It is not only safe and effective,
16/28

08/06/2016

it is also in line with our cultural, religious and moral
values. Important inroads have been made through this
approach to reverse the spread of the epidemic globally,
and it is important to continue the efforts on the ground.
Unfortunately, the same language has not been retained
in the 2016 Political Declaration.
Any reference made to adolescence in the Political
Declaration shall be interpreted as a reference to
children, and any rights and responsibilities granted or
imposed will take into account the role of the parents.
Last but not least, Indonesia is concerned about
the term “people who use drugs”, since the term has a
different meaning from the agreed term “people who
inject drugs”. The use of the former term may shift our
focus from prevention, treatment and care programmes
in a way that runs counter to the evidence and testimony
that shows that people who inject drugs are among the
so-called key populations.
We are of the position that the the language I
mentioned and terms in the 2016 Political Declaration
should not serve as precedent for future decisions
and actions in other forms. The Assembly may rest
assured that we will continue to be actively engaged
in health issues as we pursue the attainment of the
highest standard of health and well-being for all. We
are committed to accelerating the fight against HIV
in order to bring about the end of the AIDS epidemic.
We therefore call for international cooperation in
that regard.
Mr. Salman (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Egypt would
like to thank the co-facilitators of the international
consultations, the representatives of Switzerland
and Zambia, who expended much effort in reaching
consensus on the Political Declaration just adopted
(resolution 70/266, annex).
My country joined the consensus on the 2016
Political Declaration to Declaration to respond to
and end the HIV/AIDS epidemic by 2030, although it
contains some controversial points that do not enjoy
consensus among all States on account of social,
cultural and religious diversity and different values
across countries.
My country is determined to move forward in
implementing those commitments as part of the
international and regional strategy to speed up efforts
to combat HIV/AIDS, prevent the outbreak of new HIV
cases and ensure that all members of society receive
16-16375

08/06/2016

treatment on a non-discriminatory basis. On the latter,
my country would like to express our reservations.
Egypt disassociates itself from the following
paragraphs of the Political Declaration: paragraph
42 and paragraph 62 (e) , because they refer to “key
populations”; paragraphs 62 (g) and (h) , which have
to do with vulnerable populations, because there is
no clear definition of such populations; paragraph 61
(l) , which has to do with all types of contraception
for girls, which is contrary to the cultural, social and
ethical values of Egyptian society; and paragraph 61
(j) , which refers to “safe abortion”, which in Egypt is
carried only in accordance with national legislation and
in line with our religious values.
We would like to express our concern with respect
to the several terms, including “populations at highrisk”, “vulnerable populations”, “key populations” and
“populations that epidemiological evidence shows are
at higher risk of infection”. We believe that the use of
those terms is not in line with the values and culture of
our country.
We request the Secretariat to note in the record of
this meeting the reservations I have set out here.
Mr. Hassan (Islamic Republic of Iran): While it
remains committed to providing as broad as possible
access to care, treatment and support for people living
with HIV/AIDS, the Islamic Republic of Iran is of the
view that HIV/AIDS is a public health issue and that
Governments are responsible for ensuring the highest
attainable standards of health and well-being for all their
citizens regardless of any consideration. The Political
Declaration on HIV and AIDS (resolution 70/266,
annex) was expected to avoid a discriminatory approach
that might put public health at risk for being overly
focused on exclusive populations that epidemiological
evidence shows to be at higher risk of infection. It is also
unacceptable that the Political Declaration altogether
avoids giving a positive assessment of important riskavoidance measures such as fidelity and abstinence.
Taking that into account, the Government of the
Islamic Republic of Iran wishes to place on record its
reservation to those parts of the Political Declaration that
may, in one way or another, run counter to its national
legal framework and the religious and cultural values of
our society. Iran specifically expresses its reservations
for the definition given for “key populations” in
paragraph 42 and in the associated paragraph 62 (e)
, as those references disregard the specific national

A/70/PV.97

circumstances and needs of each country. Additionally,
any reference made in the Political Declaration to
children and adolescents in connection with actions
required shall fully take into account the roles and
responsibilities of parents.
Finally, Iran expresses its serious concern that
such misplaced terms as “people who use drugs” in
paragraph 43 and “voluntary technology transfer on
mutually agreed terms” in paragraph 64 (g) are being
used in the Political Declaration in the context of HIV/
AIDS.
Mr. Alamr (Saudi Arabia): I have the honour to
make the following statement on behalf of the countries
of the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC).
I would first like to thank the co-facilitators, the
Permanent Representatives of Zambia and Switzerland,
for their tireless efforts to facilitate the consultations,
which resulted in consensus on the 2016 Political
Declaration on HIV and AIDS (resolution 70/266,
annex), intended to fast-track a solution and end the
HIV epidemic, which we have adopted today. We
reiterate the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations that guarantee the sovereign right of all States
to implement national programmes that are in line with
national legislation and in conformity with our national
religious, political and cultural values.
The Group would like to express its reservations
on the following paragraphs of the 2016 Political
Declaration: paragraph 42 and paragraph 62 (e),
which refer to “key populations”; paragraph 60 (h)
and paragraph 62 (g) , which refer to “vulnerable
populations”, as they do not include a clear definition of
such a category of the population; as well as paragraph
61 (l).
The GCC countries would also like to point to the
use of the term“early marriage” in the Declaration. We
believe that forced and early marriage is a crime under
various international conventions and instruments,
including the Convention on the Rights of the Child. Our
countries also express their reservations with regard to
the use of the term “sexual rights”. We need to take
into account of the national and regional specificities
and the cultural, historic and religious traditions of
each country.
We request that this statement be included in the
record of this meeting.

16-1637517/28

A/70/PV.97

Mr. El Haycen (Mauritania) (spoke in Arabic): I,
too, would like to thank the two co-facilitators.
It is clear that AIDS represents a serious danger
and a huge challenge that we have to face. That is why
we achieved unanimity on the Political Declaration on
HIV and AIDS (resolution 70/266, annex). However,
it includes certain principles on which we cannot
agree. That is why the Islamic Republic of Mauritania
expresses its reservations about all concepts that run
counter to our national legislation.
We would like our reservations to be included in
the record of this meeting.
Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I should like to convey my gratitude and
appreciation to the facilitators, the representatives of
Zambia and Switzerland, for their efforts to reach the
Political Declaration on HIV and AIDS (resolution
70/266, annex), which we have just adopted. My
delegation joined in the consensus on the Declaration
despite contentious formulations therein that run
counter to our national legislation and Mulsim
traditions. We joined the consensus mindful of the
need to deal with a disease that imperils the lives
of millions and thwarts development efforts. Libya
attaches great importance to this subject through our
non-discriminatory social programme based on human
rights, including the right to health as one of its main
pillars. Therefore, once Libya attains stability, it will
support Africa in eradicating this disease so that the
continent can achieve sustainable development by 2030.
In conclusion, we express our reservations on all
contentious formulations that embody the difficulties
identified by the representatives of the Sudan, Djibouti,
Egypt, Iran and Malaysia, as these formulations run
counter to Islamic culture and our national legislation.
We therefore ask that these reservations be placed on
record alongside those that have been expressed by
previous speakers.
Mrs. Ravilova-Borovik (Russian Federation)
(spoke in Russian): My delegation would like to register
our position with respect to the Political Declaration
(resolution 70/266, annex) we have adopted today. There
is no doubt of the need to step up our efforts to combat
and further prevent the spread of HIV. However, it is
our view that the main responsibility for protecting the
population from the spread of infection lies with States.
In that regard, we welcome the inclusion of a provision
in the Declaration indicating that its implementation
18/28

08/06/2016

will take into account and respect the sovereign rights
of Member States based on the traditions and norms
existing in those countries.
We are disappointed by the fact that, unlike the 2011
Declaration, the focus of this document has shifted away
from real measures that could assist countries and the
international community to put an end to the epidemic
by 2030, including prophylactic measures to prevent
risk-taking behaviours, and towards other questions
that do not enjoy the broad consensus of international
support. Similarly, the text relies on concepts that are
not reflected consistently or anchored in other agreed
intergovernmental documents.
In this vein, my delegation would like to express
its reservations to be placed on record: on the concept
of harm reduction, as set forth in paragraph 43 of the
Declaration; paragraphs 42 and 62 (d); the obligations
to reform national legislation with respect to the
infected populations, as specified in paragraphs 63 (b),
63 (e) and 63 (g); the concept of key populations, which
does not enjoy international support, as contained in
paragraph 62 (e); the equating of narcotics users with
consumers who inject drugs, as laid out in paragraph
43; the wording on general sexual education, as used in
paragraphs 61 (c) and 62 (c).
My delegation believes that these provisions will be
implemented only if they are in line with our national
policy, traditions and customs.
Mr. Al-Kumaim (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I too would like to thank the co-facilitators.
I to underscore the need to combat HIV/AIDS, which
is apparent in the unanimous adoption of the Political
Declaration on HIV and AIDS (resolution 70/266,
annex). However, the Declaration includes formulations
that give rise to the reservations expressed by the
representatives of Libya, the Sudan, Egypt and Saudi
Arabia, given that they run counter to our national
legislation. As a result, we we ask that these reservations
be placed on record.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic) I give
the floor to the Observer of the observer State of the
Holy See.
Monsignor Grech (Holy See): My delegation is
wholeheartedly in support of efforts to intensify our
collective commitment to ending the AIDS epidemic
by 2030, and to accelerate and scale up the fight against
HIV internationally, which is the primary aim of the
16-16375

08/06/2016

Political Declaration on HIV and AIDS (resolution
70/266, annex). We recognize that this goal will not
be achieved unless we meet the needs of those most
vulnerable to infection, and especially those who
continue to lack access to prevention, treatment
and health-care services due to discrimination,
stigmatization and poverty.
However, while discrimination and stigmatization
must be combated, it is of vital importance to
distinguish between policies that discriminate and
stigmatize unjustly and those put in place to discourage
risk-taking behaviours and to encourage responsible
and healthy relationships, especially among youth. In
this regard, the Holy See continues to call attention to
the undeniable fact that the only safe and completely
reliable method of preventing sexual transmission
of HIV is abstinence before marriage and respect
of mutual fidelity within marriage. The Holy See, in
conformity with its nature and particular mission,
especially keeping in mind the work of the Catholic
Church with regard to the HIV/AIDS epidemic, wishes
to express the following reservations on some of the
concepts used in the Political Declaration.
Regarding the terms “sexual and reproductive
health”, “sexual and reproductive health-care services”
and “reproductive rights”, the Holy See considers these
terms as applying to a holistic concept of health. The
Holy See does not consider abortion, access to abortion
or access to abortifacients as a dimension of those terms.
With reference to the terms “contraception”,
“commodities”, “condom use” and any other terms
regarding family-planning services and regulation
of fertility concepts in the document, the Holy See
reaffirms its well-known position concerning those
family-planning methods that the Catholic Church
considers morally acceptable and, on the other hand,
family-planning services that do not respect the
freedom of spouses, human dignity and the human
rights of those concerned.
In relation to the first and second paragraphs of
this statement of position, the Holy See reiterates its
statement and reservations as set out clearly and more
fully in the reports of the 1994 International Conference
on Population and Development (A/CONF.171/13),
the 1995 Fourth World Conference on Women
(A/CONF.177/20/Rev.1) and their respective follow-up
conferences. In particular, my delegation understands,
in accordance with paragraph 15 of chapter 1 of the

A/70/PV.97

annex of the 1994 report of the International Conference
on Population and Development, that no new rights or
human rights were created; that, in accordance with
paragraph 24 of chapter VII, recourse to abortion may
never to be had for purposes of family planning; and
that, in accordance with paragraph 25 of chapter VIII,
abortion is a matter to be determined in accordance
with national legislation.
With reference to “gender”, the Holy See
understands the term to be grounded in the biological
sexual identity and difference that is male or female.
Regarding the concept of “gender norms” and “gender
stereotypes”, the Holy See does not recognize the idea
that gender is socially constructed; rather, gender
recognizes the objective identity of the human person
as born male or female.
With respect to “comprehensive education” or
“information” on sexual and reproductive health, the
Holy See reiterates the primary responsibility and the
prior rights of parents when it comes to the education
and upbringing of their children, as enshrined, inter
alia, in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and
the Convention on the Rights of the Child. In that sense,
the Holy See wishes to underline the centrality of the
family, as well as the role, rights and duties of parents
to educate their children.
The Holy See would kindly request that these
reservations be placed on record, particularly in relation
to paragraphs 14, 15, 33, 39, 41, 47, 60 (e), 60 (f), 61 (c),
61 (d), 61 (j), 61 (l), 62 (a) and 62 (c).
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): We have
heard the last speaker in explanation of vote after
the vote.
I would like to express my sincere thanks to His
Excellency Mr. Jürg Lauber, Permanent Representative
of Switzerland and Her Excellency Ms. Mwaba Patricia
Kasese-Bota, Permanent Representative of Zambia,
who so ably and patiently conducted the discussions
and complex negotiations in order to bring the informal
consultations to a successful conclusion. I am sure that
the members of the Assembly join me in extending to
them our sincere appreciation.
Before we begin the list of speakers, I would like
to turn to some organizational matters pertaining to the
conduct of the plenary meetings.
In order to enable maximum participation within
the limited time available, I appeal to all speakers to

16-1637519/28

A/70/PV.97

limit their statements to five minutes when speaking
in their national capacity and eight minutes when
speaking on behalf of a group. In the light of that
time frame, I also appeal to speakers to deliver their
statements at a reasonable pace so that interpretation
into the six official United Nations languages may be
provided properly. To assist speakers in managing their
time, a light system has been installed at the rostrum.
Finally, in order to avoid disruption for the next
speaker, I seek the cooperation of representatives
in remaining in their seats after a statement has
been delivered. In that connection, I invite speakers,
after delivering their statements, to exit the General
Assembly Hall through Room GA-200, located behind
the podium, before returning to their seats.
The Assembly will now hear an address by His
Excellency Mr. Roch Marc Christian Kaboré, President
of Burkina Faso.
President Kaboré (spoke in French): Burkina
Faso is honoured to participate in this high-level
meeting on HIV/AIDS, which gives us the privilege of
evaluating, alongside the United Nations community,
the progress made in the implementation of the Political
Declarations and commitments on HIV/AIDS of 2001,
2006 and 2011.
From this rostrum, I recall that we have regularly
produced and conveyed to the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) our activity
reports on our response to AIDS in Burkina Faso, which
identify the progress made in achieving the different
indicators defined by the United Nations. In terms of
coordination and leadership, our National AIDS and
Sexually Transmitted Infections Council, which I chair,
has held regular sessions since its establishment in
2001. We have happily shared this governance exercise
in our national response to HIV with the countries of
the subregion.
In 2015, the Government decided to put together a
fourth document of guidelines for the national response
to HIV, known as the National Strategic Framework
to Combat HIV, AIDS and Sexually Transmitted
Infections. Drafted to cover the period 2016-2020, the
document should allow us to speed up our achievement
of results in regard to prevention and management.
This new tool is part of the vision of third-generation
national strategic plans, as defined by UNAIDS, which
focus on the priorities for interventions with clear and
evident impact. The National Strategic Framework was
20/28

08/06/2016

developed with a view to implementing the UNAIDS
international strategies to fast-track the effort to end
the AIDS epidemic by 2030, pursuant to Sustainable
Development Goal 3 of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (resolution 70/1) on the horizon, which is
the new global reference point for development.
The fight against HIV, AIDS and sexually
transmitted infections is a key priority of Burkina
Faso’s national development strategy. Concrete results
include, inter alia, the maintenance of the downward
trend and stabilization of HIV prevalence, the
improvement of access to treatment for those living
with HIV, strong leadership at the highest level of the
State, and the search for innovative mechanisms to
mobilize resources, especially at the national level. The
significant social mobilization of stakeholders and the
involvement of all development partners in the response
have made a major contribution to these results. As a
result, according to the 2015 report of the Joint United
Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS, the prevalence rate
declined from 1.2 per cent in 2011 to 0.9 per cent at the
end of 2014.
In terms of prevention, efforts have been made to
meet the needs of all specific groups that are vulnerable
and at high risk of HIV infection. In addition to the
gains made in the area of screening, priority has been
given to preventing mother-to-child transmission of
HIV, with a coverage rate of 98.22 per cent of healthcare centres and an improvement in women’s enrolment
rates in such programmes, to 86.06 per cent in 2015.
We have noted a regular increase in the number of
people receiving antiretroviral treatments and in the
number of health-care centres providing such care to
approximately 100, which have been free of charge since
2010. At the end of 2015, a total of 52,248 people living
with HIV were being given antiretroviral treatment,
including 49,955 adults and 2,293 children.
Legal protection efforts to combat the stigmatization
of and discrimination against people living with HIV
and affected persons have been maintained through
enhancing their access to legal services; awarenessraising programmes on combating stigmatization and
on human rights in the context of HIV; the publication
and dissemination of legal and regulatory texts on HIV;
and the holding of public-awareness media campaigns
on the stigmatization of and discrimination against
persons living with HIV.
16-16375

08/06/2016

In terms of financing the fight against HIV, AIDS
and STDs, it is important to recall that the efforts
made to call for the mobilization of domestic resources
have been translated into an increase in State budget
allocations since 2012 through the creation of a line
item on financing the combat against HIV and by
substantially increasing its contribution with respect to
the commitments made. Indeed, funding in the State
budget rose from $8 million in 2013 to $17 million
in 2014.
Clear and relevant results have been obtained given
the national response to HIV and the many political and
strategic opportunities available; however, in spite of
these gains, challenges remain that we need to take up
so as to overcome this epidemic. Therefore, it is both
necessary and urgent to reformulate strategies to adapt
them to real needs, both for the general population and
for specific vulnerable and high-risk groups, so as to
ensure control of the epidemic and ensure that there is
no rebound. We must also better target interventions
and strengthen gender mainstreaming and the human
rights component in efforts aimed at prevention, care
and support.
Against that backdrop, Burkina Faso, through
me, wishes to reaffirm its commitment to stepping
up efforts to prevent and treat HIV in order to put
an end to the AIDS epidemic by 2030. In order to do
so, significant progress will need to be made in the
following key areas: a reduction in the number of
new infections among populations, including among
women, youth and specific groups identified as centres
of the HIV epidemic; the elimination of mother-tochild transmission of HIV; and the achievement of the
90-90-90 objective by 2020.
The long-term alternative for financing the
national response to HIV will involve the development
of innovative strategies to leverage internal resources,
given that external financing continues to decline. I
therefore reaffirm the commitment of my Government
to maintaining and increasing, in the coming years,
State budget allocations for financing the strategic
national framework to fight HIV, AIDS and STDs.
I pay tribute to the great commitments made by
those living with HIV, civil-society actors, researchers
and all persons who day and night have dedicated
themselves to combating HIV/AIDS and to protecting
and supporting those persons who are infected or
affected.

A/70/PV.97

In closing, I reiterate my appreciation to all of the
technical and financial partners that are helping us in
our steadfast fight. I would like to call upon them to
maintain and strengthen their support, which is vital,
especially to African countries, to make it possible to
put an end once and for all to the AIDS epidemic and
help prevent the marginalization of our continent.
I would remind the Assembly that sub-Saharan
Africa receives less than 1 per cent of the total
investment in health care and that less than 2 per cent
of antiretroviral medications are produced in Africa.
We must therefore wage a global fight against AIDS
in a context of strong international solidarity. Such
efforts, combined with synergetic actions underpinned
by sustained and visible political will, will ensure the
success of our struggle against this scourge by 2030.
May we be fully successful.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): The
Assembly will now hear an address by Her Excellency
Ms. Roxana Guevara, Vice-President of the Republic of
Honduras.
Ms. Guevara (Honduras) (spoke in Spanish):
Our presence at this high-level meeting on HIV/
AIDS demonstrates the significance of this issue for
humankind. For my country, Honduras, it is great
importance because it involves a set of circumstances
that influence the development of our people.
Given the importance of a response to the HIV/AIDS
epidemic, our Government established a delegation
with representatives of key populations affected by the
epidemic, who are working hard to defend the human
rights of people with HIV as well as sexual diversity.
The current situation of the HIV epidemic means
that we have to act urgently and make effective efforts
and well-thought-out investments in the framework
of comprehensive development perspectives that will
allow us to reduce drastically and in the short term
new infections and deaths resulting from the epidemic,
a goal set out in the Fast-Track strategy of the Joint
United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS).
We must recognize the strategic importance
of prevention in order to guarantee access to key
segments of the populations that are lagging behind,
with an emphasis on adolescents and young people and
employing a comprehensive approach that eschews
discrimination, stigmatization, homophobia, gender
violence and physical abuse and violence.

16-1637521/28

A/70/PV.97

Today, before the Assembly, we wish to deeply
deplore and vigorously condemn the heinous
assassination of Mr. Rene Martínez, a well-known
leader of the LGBTI community of Honduras, a crime
of a homophobic nature that occurred last Friday.
Our determination at the inter-institutional level is
to make real, concrete efforts to ensure the protection
of sexual diversity, thus guaranteeing full respect of
human rights. The Government of Honduras ordered
a complete and thorough investigation to find those
responsible and apply the full weight of the law. We
express our most sincere condolences to the family
members and communities of sexual diversity. We
appreciate the support that the United States of America
has offered to my Government to help to clarify that
crime. Impunity will not be tolerated.
Honduras is a country with severe resource
limitations, but with a strong will to further strengthen
programmes for prevention, care, treatment, support
and respect for people living with HIV. We have made
progress, but much remains to be done. I therefore
appeal for the solidarity of the donor countries as they
continue to support our efforts and programmes. We
also appeal to those who, for various reasons, have
withdrawn their assistance to restore it because progress
on HIV at the national level is also a contribution to the
international community. The fight is not an individual
one; it is up to us all.
The situation of the human rights of people with
HIV and of key and neglected populations who lack
assistance should be a priority. Respect for their rights
should be guaranteed and all forms of violence and
discrimination that persist in my country should be
eliminated, along with the legal barriers to their access
to testing and care services, including antiretroviral
treatment. We must focus on adolescents, young people
and the exercise of other rights besides health services,
such as the rights to work, education and decent housing.
The efficient use of available resources to respond to the
epidemic must focus on the key populations exposed,
as well as Afro-descendants, indigenous persons,
detainess, migrant and mobile populations, women and
men, adolescents and youth.
I stress that the response to the HIV epidemic is
not an individual task, but a task for us all, helping
the various sectors and actors to join forces with the
political leadership, with the support of international
cooperation, to address those gaps and challenges and
22/28

08/06/2016

achieve the ultimate goal of zero new infections, zero
deaths from HIV and zero discrimination through
sustainable and lasting strategies to utilize and allocate
resources on a permanent basis and without conditions.
We must make use of diagnostic tests, strategies
of comprehensive sex education, the promotion of
responsible sexual behaviour, national laws that protect
the live of the unborn, and comprehensive health care
and antiretroviral treatment for all who need it in a
timely manner and at no cost, with access to generic
drugs of quality and at low cost.
I cannot close this statement without emphasizing the
leadership of UNAIDS in our country as a coordinating
body for political and technical dialogue at the level of
Government, civil society and development partners. It
is essential that the Organization continues to support
the national agenda to eliminate the epidemic by 2030.
I respectfully request donor countries to maintain their
support to UNAIDS so that its presence in Honduras
can be maintained. We acknowledge the help of the
Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria,
the agencies of the United States President’s Emergency
Plan for AIDS Relief, sponsor agencies of UNAIDS and
cooperation bodies for their support to our countries,
where inequality persists as a social barrier.
On behalf of Honduras, I affirm that time has run
out. There is no tomorrow. Today is the day. This is
the moment. We are talking about human beings; we
are talking about valuable human lives. In Honduras,
we value life, even the lives of those who are not yet
born. I wish to share the feeling of a Honduran who
lives day to day with HIV, and who is a member of
our delegation. In Garifuna, she says, “Migra jamaba
wabuwua”, which means “Do not abandon us”. I thank
members for listening to the anguished feelings of
Honduras. Ending this tragedy once and for all depends
on everyone present here.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): The
General Assembly will now hear a statement by His
Excellency Mr. Timothy Harris, Prime Minister,
Minister for Sustainable Development, National
Security, People Empowerment and Constituency
Empowerment of St. Kitts and Nevis.
Mr. Harris (Saint Kitts and Nevis): I am pleased
to address the Assembly on behalf of the 14 States
members of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) at
the United Nations. In that regard, I speak in my capacity
as the CARICOM Lead Head with responsibility for
16-16375

08/06/2016

human resources, health and HIV. More than ever,
CARICOM member States recognize that confronting
the challenges to fast-tracking the response to HIV
and AIDS collectively and in global solidarity is our
best option for ending the AIDS epidemic by 2030.
Moreover, we in the Caribbean aspire to be the first
region in the world to get to zero. We can certainly reach
that goal with the support of the global community.
Since the most recent United Nations high-level
meeting on AIDS, held in June 2011, our region has
made great strides. That is demonstrated by the facts
that between 2006 and 2015, the HIV prevalence
rate was halved from 2.2 per cent to 1.1 per cent; the
estimated number of people living with HIV receiving
antiretroviral therapy increased from under 5 per cent
to 44 per cent; and deaths from AIDS-related causes
declined from approximately 20,000 to 8,800. Our
aspiration is to be the first region in the world to end
mother-to-child transmission of HIV.
Those successes should not lure us into a state of
complacency. The Caribbean, for all its successes, is
still second to sub-Saharan Africa in its prevalence
rate. The vast majority of people living with HIV are
concentrated in three Caribbean countries. In those
three countries, prevalence among the key risk groups,
such as men who have sex with men, can be as high
as 32 per cent. In many countries, data is increasingly
revealing a spike in prevalence among women and girls.
That trend, of course, needs to be stopped.
What are the lessons learned and how can we
eliminate AIDS by 2030 in keeping with the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1)
to which all CARICOM member States are committed?
We are fortunate to enjoy the global and regional
leadership of Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS). It has demonstrated what can
be achieved through a coordinated policy to fast-track
the response to AIDS. We are fortunate, too, to have
the Global Fund for AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria,
without whose investments many countries like ours in
CARICOM would not survive those diseases. We are
particularly indebted to the United States President’s
Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief, among other
development partners, for keeping faith in the region as
a whole as we move forward towards 2030.
Like many other regions in the world, CARICOM
recognizes that the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (resolution 70/1) provides new perspectives,

A/70/PV.97

challenges and opportunities. Consequently, we are
placing greater emphasis on building capacity to gather
and analyse reliable disaggregated data in a timely basis
to inform our policies; applying the lessons learned
from the AIDS movement to strengthen our health
systems and to consolidate an integrated public health
response, which is so essential in this period of health
emergencies of which Zika, dengue and Ebola are
among the latest manifestations, as well as to address
HIV and non-communicable diseases; identifying the
imperative of health convergence and universal health
coverage as mechanisms for effectively coordinating
approaches and monitoring progress on a range of health
and development issues; placing emphasis on access to
affordable medicines in fulfilling the right to health,
thereby maintaining the momentum of activists in the
early 2000s and the call by the Global Commission
on HIV and the Law for using the flexibility of the
trade-related aspects of intellectual property rights to
achieve this end.
In this regard, it is worth mentioning that through
the initiative of CARICOM Ministers of Heath with the
technical assistance of UNAIDS and the Pan American
Health Organization, the Caribbean was the first region
in the world to negotiate and sign an agreement with
six pharmaceutical companies in 2002 in Barcelona.
This reduced the price of drugs by between 85 and
90 per cent. It started a process in collaboration with
the Clinton Foundation, leading to a dramatic increase
in the number of people on HIV treatment in low
and middle-income countries with very significant
cost savings, estimated at $325 billion to date. Yes,
the Caribbean takes credit for being a catalyst in this
venture and is pleased to note that the SecretaryGeneral has appointed a high-level panel to look at the
challenges of access to medicines. We look forward to
the outcome of its work.
On behalf of the Caribbean Community, I join in
solidarity with representatives from across the world in
commending the Assembly and the co-facilitators who
were appointed for the negotiation of the bold Political
Declaration (resolution 70/266, annex) that has been
adopted at this meeting. These sentiments were echoed
at a breakfast caucus of representatives from our region
only this morning.
As we move forward, we recognize that the
Political Declaration from this high-level meeting
provides useful guidelines. We realize too, that these
global guidelines are most effective if we take into

16-1637523/28

A/70/PV.97

consideration the special cultural, political, social and
economic circumstances of the regional and national
communities to which they apply. Our approach
includes, among other elements, an emphasis on the
health of women, girls and adolescents in the Every
Caribbean Woman Every Caribbean Girl Initiative
and complementarity between the Pan-Caribbean
Partnership against HIV/AIDS and the Caribbean
Public Health Agency.
CARICOM countries are making every effort to
achieve the level of financial sustainability required
to achieve the targets for ending AIDS. Nevertheless,
we will continue to advocate against the insidious
classification based on gross domestic product only. We
call for greater access to concessional funding for HIV
and other development areas. We take this view because
such a classification fails to include other conditions and
vulnerabilities that impede small economies like our
own and those of other small island developing States.
In this vein, we call on the international community,
in particular development partners, to safeguard access
to special funding and financing for middle-income
countries, in particular those in the Caribbean, as we
work to maintain the gains of our HIV response and
commit to accelerating action towards ending AIDS
by 2030.
In closing, on behalf of my fellow CARICOM Heads
of Government, in thanking the Secretary-General for
his leadership, which extends beyond this High-level
Meeting, we in the Caribbean pledge our support for the
Political Declaration to be implemented in accordance
with our national circumstances and priorities. We
acknowledge that it is part of a legacy to the world
order, as well as a significant commitment to promoting
the health and well-being of all of our citizens.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Assembly will
now hear an address by His Excellency Mr. Barnabas
Sibusiso Dlamini, Prime Minister of the Kingdom
of Swaziland.
Mr. Dlamini (Swaziland): The Kingdom of
Swaziland is pleased to participate in this high-level
meeting on ending AIDS, and proud to have been a
signatory to all global declarations for HIV from the
first in 2001 to 2011. We thank the regional clusters, and
for our part the African Union, which has advocated
for the continuation of high-level commitments to HIV
and AIDS as a priority in the global agenda. These
24/28

08/06/2016

endeavours have culminated in a common African
position to this high-level meeting on ending AIDS.
Allow me to join the other Heads of States in
applauding the unanimous adoption of the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) last year. It is important
to acknowledge that the SDGs mainstream HIV, as it
features prominently in five of the Goals. The 2016
Political Declaration on HIV and AIDS: On the FastTrack to Accelerate the Fight against HIV and to end
the AIDS Epidemic by 2030 (resolution 70/266, annex)
in the age of sustainable development comes at a time
when, while acknowledging the major successes in the
HIV response, we commit fully to the new Declaration
and the next steps.
Swaziland subscribes to the global agenda to
end AIDS by 2030. In fact, we aim to end AIDS in
the Kingdom of Swaziland by 2022. That means
accelerating to reach our targets in reducing new
HIV infections, in the roll-out of treatment and
in the elimination of all forms of HIV stigma and
discrimination. This will require a greater involvement
of people living with HIV and of men as strategic
partners for HIV prevention and treatment. We must
create safety nets that address the vulnerabilities faced
by young women and girls. HIV treatment needs to
be extended beyond the health system and people
who are living with HIV by strengthening the role of
communities. This will improve adherence to lifelong
treatment, create efficiencies in service delivery and
reduce new infections. I recognize the need to frontload
the midterm costs for the HIV and AIDS response.
While the Kingdom of Swaziland remains committed
to financing the response, we also encourage global
development forums to prioritize discussions about
sustainable financing for HIV and AIDS.
The agenda for ending AIDS by 2030 will be
accomplished through the identification and improved
collaboration within regional blocs. This will create
efficiencies in pool procurement, HIV research and
technology thereby reducing costs and promoting
sustainable regional HIV response. I would like to
conclude by echoing that the Kingdom of Swaziland
remains committed to the global and regional agenda
to end AIDS.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): The
Assembly will now hear an address by His Excellency
Mr. Ruhakana Rugunda, Prime Minister of the Republic
of Uganda.
16-16375

08/06/2016

Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I am here representing
President Museveni of Uganda, who would have wanted
to be present, but due to other engagements, he could
not be. The subject of combating HIV/AIDS is a top
priority for him. His leadership on the matter started
in the late 1980s and continues to bear fruit today. This
high-level meeting of the General Assembly to adopt
the Political Declaration on HIV and AIDS: On the FastTrack to Accelerate the Fight against HIV and to End
the AIDS Epidemic by 2030 (resolution 70/266, annex)
is timely and urgent and deserves our total support.
The Government of Uganda — working with
development partners, the private sector, civil society,
religious and cultural leaders and communities — has
made significant strides in combating the HIV and
AIDS epidemic since the last high-level meeting in
2011. The focus of Uganda’s national AIDS response
has been to implement high-impact structural,
behavioural and biomedical interventions on a scale
and intensity sufficient to achieve HIV epidemic
control. The implementation of these interventions has
led to a reduction in the number of new HIV infections
among adults and children, reduction in AIDS-related
mortality and improved quality of life among HIV
infected individuals. By way of illustration, I would
like to share the following details.
Data from the Ministry of Health in Uganda
indicate that by the end of 2015, the number of new
HIV infections had declined from a peak of 162,000
in 2011 to 83,265. The country is also on the verge of
eliminating mother to-child HIV transmission. The
prevalence among HIV-exposed infants fell from 19 per
cent in 2007 to 9 per cent in 2012, 4.6 per cent in 2013
and 3 per cent by the end of 2015. Accordingly, the
number of new infections among children aged zero
to 14 years declined from a peak of 31,000 in 2010 to
3,000 at the end of 2015.
The number of people accessing antiretroviral
therapy increased from 588,000 at the end of December
2013 to 834,000 in December 2015. There has been
an increase in the number of children accessing
antiretroviral therapy from 43,000 in December 2013 to
60,000, which is 62 per cent of the estimated 96,000 in
need as of December 2015. Consequently, the number
of AIDS-related deaths declined from 63,000 in 2011 to
28,000 in December 2015.
An in-depth statistical analysis indicates that
Uganda is making steady progress towards the Joint

A/70/PV.97

United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS)
90-90-90 targets, as illustrated by the following data.
First of all, as of December 2015, 945,000 of the
estimated 1.4 million HIV-infected population had
been diagnosed and linked to care. Secondly, of the
945,000 diagnosed and linked to care, 834,000, which
is 88 per cent, were on antiretroviral therapy. Thirdly,
based on the viral load testing data, 88 per cent of
those on treatment achieved viral load suppression.
The Uganda population HIV impact assessment survey,
which will commence in July, will provide us with
better and current estimates of the number of people
infected with HIV, and thereby with a better estimate
of the first 90 target.
Despite these achievements, challenges remain that
must be overcome in order to fast track the response.
For instance, only 55 per cent of Ugandans have ever
been tested for HIV. Forty-three per cent of those
eligible for antiretroviral therapy are not on treatment.
There are limited programmes targeting adolescents
and young people and inadequate data for planning for
these populations. The response is highly affected by
the declining global financing for HIV and AIDS. There
is limited domestic funding for sustaining the gains
achieved, and stigma and discrimination still exist.
Despite these challenges, the Government of
Uganda is striving towards zero new infections,
zero HIV-related mortality and morbidity, and zero
discrimination by, first, strengthening the adolescent
HIV and AIDS programmes to reduce the number of
new youth and adult HIV infections by 70 per cent
and the number of new pediatric HIV infections by
95 per cent, which is the target for the year 2020;
secondly, decreasing HIV-associated morbidity and
mortality by 70 per cent by adopting a test-and-treat
policy in line with the World Health Organization 2015
guidelines and achieving and maintaining 90 per cent
viral suppression by 2020; thirdly, ensuring sustained
financing for the HIV and AIDS response through
legislation that established the AIDS Trust Fund
with a clear accountability framework; and fourthly,
upholding human rights during the implementation
of interventions without discrimination against key
vulnerable populations.
In conclusion, Uganda joins Member States in
committing to implement the targets set by UNAIDS
and reporting on the 90-90-90 targets. We also stand by
the common African position at this high-level meeting,
which includes advocating for 95-95-95 targets by 2030

16-1637525/28

A/70/PV.97

and supporting a political declaration that commits to
the bold strategies that aim to end the AIDS epidemic
as a public health threat by 2030.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): The
Assembly will now hear an address by His Excellency
Mr. Mothetjoa Metsing, Deputy Prime Minister
of the Kingdom of Lesotho.
Mr. Metsing (Lesotho): At the outset, let me
congratulate Mr. Lykketoft on convening this important
and timely meeting, which presents a monumental
opportunity for us not only to review progress achieved
so far in realizing the Declaration of Commitment on
HIV/AIDS, but also to chart a united global response
to AIDS, and thereby fast-track the end of the epidemic
by 2030.
My delegation wishes to align itself with the
statements that will be delivered on behalf of the
Group of African States and the Southern African
Development Community.
Lesotho has one of the world’s highest adult HIV
prevalences, at 23 per cent. There are an estimated
52 new infections and 26 deaths due to AIDS each
day. An estimated 19,000 children and 300,000 adults
are living with HIV in Lesotho. The epidemic has a
significant gender bias, with a prevalence rate of 26.7 per
cent for women and 18 per cent for men. Although the
HIV epidemic has been stable over the years, there has
been no significant change in the national adult HIV
prevalence since 2005. New HIV infections are still
very high, at 17,000 annually, and the challenge is that
they surpass the number of HIV-positive clients newly
enrolled on antitretroviral therapy.
Lesotho is one of the countries with the world’s
highest per capita tuberculosis case incidence, at 103 per
100,000, according to the World Health Organization
(WHO) Global Tuberculosis Report 2014. In 2014 alone,
9,780 new cases of tuberculosis were reported — 47 per
cent male, 53 per cent female. Lesotho has the second
highest tuberculosis/HIV-positive prevalence. The level
is too high to realize the set targets. Although there has
been a decline of HIV incidence, the level is still too
high to realize the set targets of 90-90-90.
The Government established an AIDS control
programme in 2002, and since then its HIV and
tuberculosis programmes have repeatedly been scaled
up. The proportion of women and men who have been
tested for HIV is 84 per cent and 63 per cent, respectively.
26/28

08/06/2016

Forty-one per cent of adults and 57 per cent of children
living with HIV were accessing treatment in 2014. Other
services that have been scaled up include prevention of
mother-to-child transmission of HIV, with 74 per cent
of women accessing the services.
Lesotho has also adopted and rolled out the WHO
2015 HIV testing services and HIV prevention, care
and treatment guidelines. The Right Honourable Prime
Minister of Lesotho, Mr. Pakalitha Mosisili, launched
the test-and-treat strategy on 14 April, and the national
roll-out was on 1 June, which was last week. The
Government, through the Ministry of Health, wants to
be more pragmatic in HIV testing services — that is,
it is not about just testing everybody, but it is about
testing where the yield will be high and identify the
number of positive cases.
It is indeed gratifying to note that the Political
Declaration adopted at this high-level meeting
(resolution 70/266, annex) affirms the global
endorsement of the 90-90-90 target, and I specifically
note that it extends to children and adolescents living
with HIV. We also appreciated the fact that ending
pediatric AIDS has been recognized as a major global
health priority in the Political Declaration, and that
the Declaration has taken on board issues concerning
children’s and adolescents’ timely and ready access to
HIV testing, treatment, care and prevention services.
The Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/
AIDS should ensure that all partners and initiatives at
raising various aspects of HIV treatment are effectively
coordinated at the global, regional and national levels in
order to ensure coherence, standardized measurements
for age-disaggregated data, avoidance of duplication
and thereby maximizing their impact.
As a country, we are focusing on an innovative
targeted, community-based HIV testing services
approach. Our aim is to reach key populations, such
as men having sex with men, sex workers, migrant
populations, prisoners, tuberculosis patients and people
with disability, to mention but a few. The Government
has set itself a target aligned to the fast-track strategy
of achieving the 90-90-90 targets by 2020, that is,
90 per cent of all people with HIV infection are
diagnosed, 90 per cent of all those diagnosed receive
sustained antiretroviral therapy, and 90 per cent of all
people receiving antiretroviral therapy have their viral
load suppressed. Moreover, the proper execution of the
16-16375

08/06/2016

revised HIV/AIDS national strategic plan will help us
meet our national and global commitments.
As we fast-track our efforts and investment in the
coming five years towards ending AIDS as a public
health threat by 2030, it is critical that we leave no one
behind. As a country, I believe that we can and must
do more to reach the most affected populations of our
society. With the launch of test-and-treat we are on
the right path. However, test-and-treat is not enough.
We need to urgently close the gap on new infections
that occur daily among the key populations, especially
young girls, factory workers, sex workers and men
having sex with men.
It is evident that domestic resources are seldom
available for reaching key populations. In spite of
overwhelming evidence of the high burden and risk
faced by them, the global community therefore must not
allow these populations to be left behind. Investment
for key populations must be increased, and innovative
funding methods or models be explored. Reaching the
most affected populations of our society must continue
to be the hallmark of our global response if we are to
achieve our goal. As we look towards the post-2015 era
and the new Sustainable Development Goals, there are
important lessons learned that we must take forward
from the HIV response. Ending HIV and AIDS as a
public health threat is not an option, but a must. It can
be and must be achieved in our lifetimes. Business as
usual is not an option.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): The
Assembly will now hear an address by His Excellency
Mr. Paul Biyoghé Mba, Deputy Prime Minister of the
Gabonese Republic.
Mr. Biyoghé Mba (Gabon) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I wish to convey the warm greetings of the
President of the Gabonese Republic, His Excellency
Ali Bongo Ondimba, who has granted me the honour
of representing him at this high-level meeting. These
meetings are effectively an opportunity to take stock of
the progress made and the difficulties encountered in
our efforts to combat this global health and development
problem. That is why I would like to express my deep
appreciation to His Excellency Mr. Mogens Lykketoft,
President of the General Assembly, for taking the
initiative to organize this important meeting.
Five years after the adoption of the 2011 Political
Declaration, the time has naturally come to take stock.
All together, we must learn from our past experiences

A/70/PV.97

and define priorities for the future in the context of the
Sustainable Development Goals. Since the first case of
AIDS in Gabon was declared in 1986, the Government
of my country has been firmly committed to the fight
against this pandemic — which is one of its priorities
for action — in particular through the establishment of
a therapeutic solidarity fund to enable infected persons
to receive antiretroviral treatment free of charge.
Similarly, in the context of the implementation of
the 2011 Declaration, my country, Gabon, has taken
significant steps, including by providing free screening,
comprehensive care for pregnant women and universal
health insurance for laboratory tests and opportunistic
infections. In Africa, HIV remains a major threat to public
health, as do malaria and non-communicable diseases.
It affects our families, our sons, our daughters — all
segments of society — without distinction.
Gabon is not immune to its many devastating
effects, despite the combined efforts of the Government,
civil society organizations, faith-based organizations
and the private sector, and the involvement of people
living with HIV. The establishment of strategies at
the national level is enhanced by my country’s active
support for all declarations adopted by the international
community on this scourge. In Gabon, despite the
tremendous efforts made, the fight against HIV/AIDS
is far from being won. We must further strengthen our
response. The average rate of prevalence of 4.1 per cent
that prevailed in 2012 appears to be on the rise since.
The HIV prevalence rate of the female population is
5.8 per cent, compared with 2.2 per cent for men.
The acceleration of the response to HIV/AIDS
requires a greater mobilization by all. This mobilization
should entail, in particular, new forms of stronger
partnerships and predictable and sustainable financing
mechanisms adapted to the realities on the ground. The
economic and financial crisis that the world is facing
today has a significant impact on developing countries
and thus undermines their capacity to effectively fight
against the AIDS pandemic. The progress made thus
far could become meaningless if certain countries,
such as middle-income countries, including my
country, Gabon, remain excluded from the process of
international assistance.
Our goal of ending the HIV/AIDS epidemic by 2030,
as rightly underscored in the report of the SecretaryGeneral, is possible only if all countries benefit
upstream from increased and diversified resources.

16-1637527/28

A/70/PV.97

Since 2011, several States have achieved tangible
results in the AIDS response, but that should not slow
down our momentum. In Gabon, the President of the
Republic, Head of State, His Excellency Ali Bongo
Ondimba, believes that only a strengthened solidarity

28/28

08/06/2016

and an intense mobilization for substantial funding will
consolidate gains and accelerate the response to HIV/
AIDS.
The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m.

16-16375
