A/59/816–S/2005/350

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.: General
27 May 2005
Original: English

General Assembly
Fifty-ninth session
Agenda item 108
Programme budget for the biennium 2004-2005

Security Council
Sixtieth year

Identical letters dated 26 May 2005 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the General Assembly and the
President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to General Assembly resolution 58/284 of 8 April
2004 in which the Assembly requested the Secretary-General to invite the Special
Court for Sierra Leone to adopt a completion strategy and also requested the
Secretary-General to inform both the Security Council and the General Assembly at
its fifty-ninth session about this matter.
In accordance with the above-mentioned resolution I am pleased to forward
the final completion strategy, which has been prepared by the Special Court and
endorsed by the Management Committee of the Court which is responsible for
advising me on the non-judicial aspects of the Court’s work (see annex).
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

05-36432 (E) 200605

*0536432*

A/59/816
S/2005/350

Annex
Special Court for Sierra Leone
Completion strategy (18 May 2005)
Page

I.

Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3

II.

Activities to date . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4

A.

Judicial and institutional activities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4

B.

Administrative and support activities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

7

Completion phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

9

A.

Trials completion strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

9

1.

Courtroom capacity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

9

2.

Factors influencing the conduct of the trial process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

10

3.

Administrative factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

12

Appeals and subsequent actions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

12

1.

Appeals and transfer of sentenced persons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

12

2.

Completion of administrative and support activities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

13

Proposed actions of the Special Court Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

14

1.

Reporting to the Management Committee . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

14

2.

Representations to the Organs within the Special Court . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

14

Funding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

15

III.

B.

C.

IV.

2

A/59/816
S/2005/350

I.

INTRODUCTION

1.

The Special Court for Sierra Leone (“Special Court”) began its operations in July 2002 following the
signing on 16 January 2002 of the Agreement between the United Nations and the Government of Sierra
Leone on the Establishment of a Special Court for Sierra Leone (“Agreement”). Since then, significant
progress has been made, including the recruitment of more than 300 international and national personnel;
the renovation of a former Sierra Leonean prison into the Special Court Detention Facility; the setting up
of pre-fabricated office facilities; the construction of a new landmark courthouse; the issuance and
approval of thirteen indictments; the conduct of hearings on a number of pre-trial motions; and the start
of trials. The Special Court, though still in its early stages in 2004, started its planning for the completion
of its mandate as set out in the Agreement and the Statute of the Special Court for Sierra Leone
(“Statute”). The initial Completion Strategy paper was approved by the Management Committee on
6 October 2004. As indicated to the Management Committee at the time of the first submission, the
document will be updated at regular intervals of between 4 to 6 months and resubmitted to the
Management Committee.

2.

In his report on the establishment of the Special Court submitted to the Security Council in October
2000, the Secretary-General indicated that the lifespan of the Special Court would be determined by “a
subsequent agreement between the parties upon the completion of its judicial activities, an indication of
the capacity acquired by the local courts to assume the prosecution of the remaining cases, or the
unavailability of resources.”1 The Secretary-General subsequently stated that three years would be the
“minimum time required for the investigation, prosecution and trial of a very limited number of
accused.”2

3.

The completion of the Special Court’s mandate will be carried out in two phases. During the completion
phase, the Special Court will wind-down its core activities by rendering final judgements3 against all
accused in custody and transferring those who are convicted to appropriate prisons in or outside Sierra
Leone to serve their sentences. This will coincide with the winding-down of the administrative and
support activities of the Special Court, and will include the downsizing of staff as well as the transfer and
liquidation of buildings and equipment. Thereafter, during the post-completion phase, the Special Court
will continue certain “residual activities” after it no longer exists in its current form and capacity. These
activities include: the supervision of the enforcement of sentences; the continued provision of support
and protection to witnesses; the conduct of contempt and review proceedings; and the conduct of
proceedings against any accused who surrender or are apprehended after the Special Court winds down.
A residual mechanism, whether a restructured (miniaturized) Special Court or another institution to
which has been delegated the Special Court’s authority, will be needed to carry out these activities.

4.

This paper will focus on the completion phase and the conditions necessary for the Special Court to meet
its trial-related objectives in a timely fashion and in accordance with the framework prescribed by its
main stakeholders, including the Management Committee, the United Nations and the donor countries.

5.

This paper has been developed by the Registrar in close co-operation with the Management Board which
is made up of senior staff from the Registry, the Office of the Prosecutor (OTP) and the Office of the
Principal Defender. Certain aspects have also been discussed with the Chambers. Its purpose is to provide
a conceptual strategy for the completion phase of the Special Court’s trials.

1 Report of the Secretary-General on the Establishment of a Special Court for Sierra Leone (“Secretary-General’s Report”),
S/2000/915, paragraph 28.
2 Letter dated 12 January 2001 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security Council (“Letter dated
12 January 2001 from the Secretary-General”), S/2001/40, paragraph 12.
3 The term “final judgements” refers to judgements which are no longer subject to appeal and which are enforceable.

3

A/59/816
S/2005/350

II.

ACTIVITIES TO DATE

A.

Judicial and Institutional Activities

6.

The Special Court for Sierra Leone was established on 16 January 2002 to “prosecute persons who bear
the greatest responsibility for serious violations of international humanitarian law and Sierra Leonean
law committed in the territory of Sierra Leone since 30 November 1996.”4 The Prosecutor and the
Registrar, who were appointed by the Secretary-General on 17 April 2002 and 10 June 2002 respectively,
arrived in Freetown between 22 July 2002 and 6 August 2002. On 13 November 2002, the Government
of Sierra Leone appointed the Deputy Prosecutor. This was followed, on 2 December 2002, by the
swearing-in of eight Judges comprising the three-member Trial Chamber and the five-member Appeals
Chamber. The Acting Principal Defender was appointed in July 2003, and the Principal Defender took
office in March 2004. Following a request by the President of the Special Court on 2 February 2004,
three additional Judges forming the second Trial Chamber were sworn in on 17 January 2005.

7.

To date, thirteen indictments against thirteen accused have been issued by the Prosecutor and approved
by a Judge. In December 2003, the indictments against Foday Saybana Sankoh and Sam Bockarie were
withdrawn as a result of their deaths,5 leaving eleven indictments still active. While the Prosecutor has
indicated the possibility of additional indictments, the number would be extremely limited and possibly
linked to existing indictees.

8.

Of the eleven accused, nine accused are currently in the custody of the Special Court. With respect to the
two remaining accused, former Liberian President Charles Ghankay Taylor was granted asylum by the
Government of Nigeria in August 2003 and Johnny Paul Koroma remains at large. Efforts to have both
Taylor and Koroma apprehended and transferred to the Special Court are ongoing. The Warrant of Arrest
against Taylor was transmitted to the Governments of Nigeria and Liberia in November 2003, while the
Warrant of Arrest against Koroma was transmitted to the Government of Liberia in December 2003. Also
in December 2003, the International Criminal Police Organization (Interpol) issued “Red Notices”
against Taylor and Koroma upon requests by the Special Court. Table 1 below summarises the
indictments and arrests to date.

4 Agreement between the United Nations and the Government of Sierra Leone on the Establishment of a Special Court for Sierra
Leone (“Agreement”), Article 1 (1).
5 Prosecutor against Sam Bockarie (Case No. SCSL-03-04), “Withdrawal of Indictment,” 8 December 2003; Prosecutor against
Foday Saybana Sankoh (Case No. SCSL-03-02), “Withdrawal of Indictment,” 8 December 2003.

4

A/59/816
S/2005/350

Table 1. Indictment and Detention Status
Accused
Sam Bockarie

Indictment
Filed
3 Mar 03

Indictment
Approved
7 Mar 03

Indictment/Detention Status
Indictment withdrawn 8 Dec 03

Alex Tamba Brima

3 Mar 03

7 Mar 03

Detained since 10 Mar 03

Moinina Fofana

24 June 03

26 June 03

Detained since 29 May 036

Augustine Gbao

16 Apr 03

16 Apr 03

Detained since 19 Mar 037

Morris Kallon

3 Mar 03

7 Mar 03

Detained since 10 Mar 03

Brima Bazzy Kamara

26 May 03

28 May 03

Detained since 29 May 03

Santigie Borbor Kanu

15 Sept 03

16 Sept 03

Detained since 17 Sept 03

Allieu Kondewa

24 June 03

26 June 03

Detained since 29 May 038

Johnny Paul Koroma

3 Mar 03

7 Mar 03

At large

Samuel Hinga Norman

3 Mar 03

7 Mar 03

Detained since 10 Mar 03

Foday Saybana Sankoh

3 Mar 03

7 Mar 03

Indictment withdrawn 8 Dec 03

Issa Hassan Sesay

3 Mar 03

7 Mar 03

Detained since 10 Mar 03

Charles Ghankay Taylor

3 Mar 03

7 Mar 03

Granted asylum in Nigeria

9.

The accused who were arrested between March to June 2003 were detained in an existing Sierra Leonean
prison on Bonthe Island which the Special Court had renovated along with a guesthouse for staff and
visitors. On 10 August 2003, these accused were transferred from Bonthe Island to the new Special Court
Detention Facility (“Detention Facility”) created from the renovated former New England Prison. The
Detention Facility, which comprises 18 cells, an exercise area, visiting rooms, a clinic, a small library, a
kitchen and several common areas, is now fully operational. It is headed by a Chief of Detention
supported by highly experienced international supervisors, a Medical Officer and Sierra Leonean
correctional officers seconded from the Sierra Leone Prison Service.

10.

Upon transfer to the Special Court, all accused were provided initial legal advice and assistance by duty
counsel in the Special Court’s Office of the Principal Defender.9 The accused thereafter requested legal
assistance on the basis of indigence or partial indigence, and were assigned Defence counsel by the
Registrar or the Principal Defender. All accused are represented by teams of qualified Sierra Leonean and
international Defence counsel.

6 Provisionally detained as a suspect.
7 Provisionally detained as a suspect and transferred to the Bonthe Island facility at on 19 March 2002.
8 Provisionally detained as a suspect.

The Office of the Principal Defender (also referred to as Defence Office), which is headed by the Principal Defender and is part
of the Registry, is responsible for providing: a) initial advice and assistance to suspects and accused; b) legal assistance as
ordered by the Special Court at the initial appearance; and c) adequate facilities for counsel in the preparation of the defence.
Rules of Procedure and Evidence of the Special Court for Sierra Leone (“Rules”), Rule 45.
9

5

A/59/816
S/2005/350

11.

Prior to the start of trials, a number of preliminary motions were filed by the accused. Many of these
motions raised significant questions regarding the jurisdiction of the Special Court, and were determined
by the Appeals Chamber. These included such questions as whether the Special Court was established in
violation of the Constitution of Sierra Leone10 and the amnesty provisions of the Lomé Peace Accord,11
whether Charles Taylor was entitled to sovereign immunity12 and whether the recruitment of child
soldiers was a crime at the relevant time.13 Other preliminary motions which did not concern matters of
jurisdiction or which the Trial Chamber found not necessary to refer to the Appeals Chamber were dealt
with by the Trial Chamber.

12.

On 27 January 2004, the Trial Chamber issued a decision ordering the joint trial of Issa Hassan Sesay,
Morris Kallon and Augustine Gbao of the Revolutionary United Front (RUF), and a separate joint trial of
Alex Tamba Brima, Brima Bazzy Kamara and Santigie Borbor Kanu of the Armed Forces Revolutionary
Council (AFRC).14 On the same date, the Trial Chamber also issued a decision ordering the joint trial of
Samuel Hinga Norman, Allieu Kondewa and Moinina Fofana of the Civil Defence Forces (CDF).15 As a
result, three trials instead of nine separate trials were to be held against the nine accused currently in the
custody of the Special Court. All of these trials, for the CDF case, the RUF case and the AFRC case,
have already begun. Table 2 below lists the cases currently pending before the Special Court.
Table 2. Cases Currently Pending before the Special Court
Accused

Trial Start Date

CDF

Case

Samuel Hinga Norman
Allieu Kondewa
Moinina Fofana

3 June 04

RUF

Issa Hassan Sesay
Morris Kallon
Augustine Gbao

5 July 04

AFRC

Alex Tamba Brima
Brima Bazzy Kamara
Santigie Borbor Kanu

7 March 05

Taylor

Charles Ghankay Taylor

Not yet determined
(not in custody)
Not yet determined
(not in custody)

Koroma 16

Johnny Paul Koroma

10
Prosecutor against Allieu Kondewa (Case No. SCSL-04-14), “Decision on Preliminary Motion on Lack of Jurisdiction:
Establishment of Special Court Violates Constitution of Sierra Leone,” 25 May 2004.
11 Prosecutor against Morris Kallon (Case No. SCSL-04-15) and Brima Bazzy Kamara (Case No. SCSL-04-16), “Decision on
Challenge to Jurisdiction (Lomé Accord Amnesty),” 13 March 2004.
12 Prosecutor against Charles Ghankay Taylor (Case No. SCSL-03-01), “Decision on Immunity from Jurisdiction,” 31 May 2004.
13 Prosecutor against Samuel Hinga Norman (Case No. SCSL-04-14), “Decision on Preliminary Motion Based on Lack of
Jurisdiction (Child Recruitment),” 31 May 2004.
14 Prosecutor against Issa Hassan Sesay (Case No. SCSL-03-05), Alex Tamba Brima (Case No. SCSL-03-06), Morris Kallon
(Case No. SCSL-03-07), Augustine Gbao (Case No. SCSL-03-09), Brima Bazzy Kamara (Case No. SCSL-03-10) and Santigie
Borbor Kanu (Case No. 03-13), “Decision and Order on Prosecution Motions for Joinder,” 27 January 2004. The Prosecutor
subsequently requested leave to file an interlocutory appeal against this decision, but the application was denied by the Trial
Chamber. Prosecutor against Issa Hassan Sesay (Case No. SCSL-03-05), Morris Kallon (Case No. SCSL-03-07) and Augustine
Gbao (Case No. SCSL-03-09), “Decision on Prosecution’s Application for Leave to File an Interlocutory Appeal against the
Decision on the Prosecution Motions for Joinder,” 13 February 2004.
15
Prosecutor against Samuel Hinga Norman (Case No. SCSL-03-08), Moinina Fofana (Case No. SCSL-03-11) and Allieu
Kondewa (Case No. SCSL-03-12), “Decision and Order on Prosecution Motions for Joinder,” 27 January 2004.
16 The Prosecutor has indicated that he would have sought to have Koroma jointly tried with the other AFRC accused. However,
this no longer appears likely as Koroma remains at large.

6

A/59/816
S/2005/350

13.

To facilitate the proceedings before the Special Court, a number of basic legal documents have been
adopted. These include the Rules of Procedure and Evidence(amended on 7 March 2003, 1 August 2003,
30 October 2003, 14 March 2004 and 29 May 2004), the Rules Governing the Detention of Persons
Awaiting Trial or Appeal before the Special Court for Sierra Leone or Otherwise Detained on the
Authority of the Special Court for Sierra Leone (adopted on 7 March 2003 and amended on
25 September 2003 and 4 May 2004), the Directive on the Assignment of Counsel (adopted on 1 October
2003), and various Practice Directions on procedural matters.17

14.

Finally, in his capacity as the channel of communications for the Special Court, the Registrar has
negotiated and concluded cooperation agreements with States and organisations on various matters.
These include the Memorandum of Understanding with the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL); the Exchange of Letters with the International Committee of the Red Cross; the
Co-operation Agreement between the International Criminal Police Organization - Interpol and the
Special Court; and the Headquarters Agreement with the Government of Sierra Leone. Agreements with
States on the relocation of witnesses (which are confidential by their nature) as well as contributions of
personnel and funding have also been concluded. Negotiations on other co-operation agreements are
ongoing, including those on the operational transfer procedure following arrests of suspects and accused,
the enforcement of sentences, the medical treatment of detainees and additional agreements on the
relocation of witnesses.

B.

Administrative and Support Activities

15.

As of April 2005, the three organs of the Special Court – the Chambers, the Office of the Prosecutor and
the Registry (including the Office of the Principal Defender) – had a total combined staff of 340 locallyand internationally-recruited personnel. In addition, an internship programme was formally established in
January 2004 under which 10 funded and additional unfunded internships have been granted to Sierra
Leonean and international junior professionals during 2004/2005. The total number of staff authorised in
the current 2004/2005 budget is 341 and remained akin to that figure in the 2005/2006 proposal.
However, as mentioned in the Registrar’s foreword to the 2005/2006 budget, whilst this number
constituted the overall number of posts estimated as being necessary for going into the next fiscal period
which will still see the operational phase in full flow, the indications are that, during the period, a number
of post reductions will occur, the majority of which will be inevitably in the Office of the Prosecutor.
That Office estimates about 37% of their asset complement to be reduced during the period.

16.

With respect to the facilities of the Special Court, assessments made by United Nations teams in
September 200018 and January 200219 concluded that none of the facilities and buildings proposed by
the Government of Sierra Leone to accommodate the Special Court were suitable, due to the high cost of
required renovations or substantial security risks. As a result, it was recommended that the courthouse
would be constructed as a permanent building and that office facilities be accommodated in prefabricated

17 Practice Direction on Filing Documents before the Special Court for Sierra Leone (adopted on 27 February 2003 and amended
on 1 June 2004); Practice Direction on the Procedure Following a Request by a State, the Truth and Reconciliation Commission,
or other Legitimate Authority to Take a Statement from a Person in the Custody of the Special Court for Sierra Leone (adopted on
9 September 2003 and amended on 4 October 2003); Practice Direction on Filing Documents under Rule 72 of the Rules of
Procedure and Evidence before the Appeals Chamber of the Special Court for Sierra Leone (adopted on 22 September 2003);
Practice Direction on Disclosure by the Prosecutor Pursuant to Rule 66 of the Rules of Procedure and Evidence of the Special
Court for Sierra Leone (adopted on 23 February 2004); Practice Direction on Allowances for Witnesses and Expert Witnesses
(adopted on 16 July 2004).
18 Secretary-General’s Report, paragraph 60.
19 Report of the Planning Mission on the Establishment of the Special Court for Sierra Leone (“Planning Mission Report”),
S/2002/246, paragraph 17.

7

A/59/816
S/2005/350

structures.20 Prefabricated structures could be obtained and erected quickly, and could also be easily
added on or moved according to the Special Court’s changing space needs.21
17.

Initially, the Office of the Prosecutor and the Registry were located at two temporary sites, Seaview (a
rented building) and the Bank of Sierra Leone complex (facilitated by the Government of Sierra Leone)
respectively. In January 2003, the Registry moved to the prefabricated office facilities set up on the
permanent premises of the Special Court in New England, Freetown. During July 2003, the Office of the
Prosecutor moved to the site, with Seaview retaining a much reduced operational role.

18.

From July 2003, a small building on the New England site which was specifically renovated as a
temporary courthouse was used by the Trial Chamber and the Appeals Chamber for hearings. On
10 March 2004, the opening ceremony for a newly-constructed permanent courthouse with two state-ofthe-art courtrooms was held, attended by the President of Sierra Leone and the United Nations Legal
Counsel on behalf of the Secretary-General. The courthouse was designed by a UK-based architectural
firm (selected as a result of a design competition) and was constructed by a Sierra Leonean-based
construction company. Additional buildings have since been constructed, including a new office block,
temporary accommodation for witnesses, and a canteen for Special Court staff.

19.

To support the judicial and institutional activities of the Special Court, a number of offices were
established within the Registry which are now fully operational. These include:

20.

20
21

8

a.

the Court Management Section, which is responsible for the filing and service of court
documents; the maintenance of transcripts and audio-visual recordings of court proceedings and
the general smooth running of court proceedings; and the management of the Special Court
library, which provides access to computer databases and jurisprudence from global sources;

b.

the Outreach Section, whose Regional Officers upcountry and in Freetown ensure two-way
communications between the Special Court and the population of Sierra Leone through
sensitisation/familiarisation meetings, radio programmes, publications and Accountability Now
Clubs for university students;

c.

the Press and Public Affairs Office, which serves as a link between the Special Court and the
national and international media by issuing press releases, holding press conferences and
producing radio and other programmes for the purpose of providing accurate, accessible and
understandable information about the Special Court. In particular, the regular production of both
audio and video summaries of the trials for viewing locally by the Sierra Leonean public across
the country has been an innovative feature;

d.

the Witnesses and Victims Section, which provides protection and support to witnesses and
victims who provide evidence before the Special Court. The section is protecting a significant
number of witnesses both in Sierra Leone and in Europe and North America;

The location of the Special Court in the country where the conflict took place has required the allocation
of a significant part of the Special Court’s budget to security-related matters. The security and safety of
Special Court personnel and premises are currently provided by Special Court security staff, the Sierra

Id., paragraph 18.
Id., paragraph 19.

A/59/816
S/2005/350

Leonean Police and troops of the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL).22 The crucial
issue of ongoing security is dealt with in more detail later in this paper at paragraphs 50 and 51.

III.

COMPLETION PHASE

A.

Trials Completion Strategy

1.

Courtroom Capacity

21.

A total of five cases are currently pending before the Special Court. Of these, the CDF, RUF and AFRC
trials involve the nine accused who are presently in the custody of the Special Court, while two trials
involve accused who are yet to be brought before the Special Court. Additional trials may be required if
the Prosecutor issues further indictments.

22.

In order to meet the operational goals of the Special Court within a reasonable timeframe, the Special
Court notes that, in the context of the complex process of conducting its trials, all the key elements need
to come together at the right time. The court is working to that end by way of pro-active trial
management.

23.

In comparison with the submissions contained in the Completion Strategy document approved in October
2004, the Special Court now finds itself in a better position to be able to estimate the trial-related
requirements. This is due to a significant increase in the efficiency of trial management for the first Trial
Chamber as well as to the trial-related indicators emanating from the new second Trial Chamber which
started its operations in March 2005.

24.

The Registry notes that the events before the Trial Chambers are, to a large extent, driven by the parties
before it (by way of the presentation of both documentary evidence and witness testimony) and the
subsequent decisions made by the Trial Chamber. These areas, which are neither within the direct ambit
nor under the control of the Registry for a variety of reasons, including judicial independence, are
examined under sub-headings 2 and 3 below.

25.

The initial trial schedule for the period June to July 2004 was based on an initial target of 160 court days
per year, with an intention of achieving an average of 5.0 court hours per court day.

26.

In order to assist and support the existing Trial Chamber in meeting its objectives of making optimum
use of these court days available, a Judicial Services Co-ordinating Committee was put in place, chaired
by the Court Management Section and including representatives from Prosecution, Defence, Chambers,
and Witness and Victims Support. This initiative has since proved to have been effective. The
co-ordination between the parties to the proceedings and those Registry Sections involved has
significantly increased the efficiency of courtroom usage and kept the discussion relating to these issues
out of the courtroom proceedings themselves, thereby making more efficient use of court time. Data
relating to courtroom usage has been included in the monthly updates provided to the Management
Committee since October 2004.

22 According to the Agreement, the Government of Sierra Leone has the responsibility under international law to ensure the
security, safety and protection of Special Court personnel, Defence counsel and witnesses. However, the Agreement also
recognises the “present incapacity [of the Government of Sierra Leone] to do so pending the restructuring and rebuilding of its
security forces,” and therefore requires that UNAMSIL provide the “necessary security to premises and personnel of the Special
Court, subject to an appropriate mandate by the Security Council and within its capabilities.” Agreement, Article 16. See also
Headquarters Agreement between the Republic of Sierra Leone and the Special Court for Sierra Leone, Article 6.

9

A/59/816
S/2005/350

27.

Following internal discussions within the Special Court, the Registry identified an increased availability
to 180 court days per year, with an intention to achieve an average of 6.0 court hours per court day,
which represents the maximum obtainable in the court’s operational settings, in view of annual leave,
Occasional Recuperative Break (ORB) days and official holidays. However, it was recognised that those
respective targets were ambitious when set against both the experience of the other ad hoc Tribunals and,
indeed, against performance in national jurisdictions, e.g. the average court times in England and Wales
(4.3 court hours per court day).

2.

Factors Influencing the Progress of the Trial Process

a.

Number of Witnesses

28.

As stated in the Completion Strategy paper approved in October 2004, a significant part of the evidence
presented by the Prosecution and the Defence has taken the form of witness testimony, therefore
determining the pace and length of trials. The Registry has now been provided with updated estimates by
the Prosecutor and the Principal Defender relating to the number of witnesses expected to be called for
the CDF, RUF and AFRC trials respectively and has observed a significant reduction in numbers in
comparison to the previous estimates. The Prosecutor provided estimates of the number of witnesses for
the Prosecution Case and any Prosecution Rebuttal. Based on these numbers, the Principal Defender, in
consultation with the Defence teams, estimated the number of witnesses likely to be called for each
Defence Case. As a result, it is estimated that 166 witnesses will be called for the CDF trial, 206
witnesses will be called for the RUF trial and another 140 witnesses will be called for the AFRC trials,
bringing the total estimated number of witnesses to 512. This constitutes a significant decrease in
comparison to the total estimated number presented in the completion strategy document presented in
October 2004 (830). To date, 108 prosecution witnesses have been called and dealt with in all three
ongoing trials.

29.

It should be emphasised that the Office of the Principal Defender, in consultation with the Defence
teams, has calculated its own witness numbers in order to mirror those of the Prosecution. This procedure
reflects the balanced treatment both parties are entitled to receive from the Trial Chambers and is not
necessarily an indication of the total number of witnesses that will be called by either party. Experience
at the ICTY and ICTR has shown that, in general, the number of Defence witnesses tends to be somewhat
lower than that of Prosecution witnesses.

30.

Based on the current usage of court time as well as the actual witness hearing time, it is estimated that
two of the three ongoing trials, namely the those of the CDF and the AFRC, could be completed at the
trial chamber stage around the end of 2005 or early 2006. Taking into account an estimated time of
appeals between 4 and 6 months, the appeals could be finished by mid-2006, at the end of the 2005/2006
fiscal year. The completion of the AFRC trial would, in theory, free up the second Trial Chamber to be
able to commence another trial. On the assumption that it is possible to secure the transfer of Charles
Taylor in the second half of 2005 (having noted various initiatives on the international level, as described
below), the trial could commence as early as the beginning of 2006.

31.

Based on the actual figures, the completion of the RUF trial at the trial chamber stage is estimated by the
end of 2006. This would mean that the appeals stage would be completed by early to mid-2007. The
Registry, in consultation with the other organs, is actively working to ensure that this provisional
estimate is further improved and that the appeals stage be completed by the end of 2006. It should be
noted, however, that the appeals stage will require a smaller establishment compared to the trial stage.

10

A/59/816
S/2005/350

32.

These estimates, however, are subject to a number of variables that might influence the duration of the
different trial stages. These factors are set out below:

b.

Duration of the various trial stages

33.

Other additional factors need to be taken into account, including the time necessary for the sentencing
procedure; the time necessary to draft judgements; and the frequency and duration of judicial recesses.23

34.

Other variables which may result in either longer or shorter trials include the number and nature of
motions that may be filed; practical and logistical impediments to the conduct of proceedings; the
possibility of guilty pleas; changes to the court schedule; the illness or sudden unavailability of key
individuals participating in the proceedings; and amendments to the Rules of Procedure and Evidence
which result in additional or lesser time requirements.

35.

Trials at the Special Court may also take additional time due to specific factors such as the location of the
Special Court in Sierra Leone amidst the still fragile and unpredictable political and security climate; and
the need for protective measures and security arrangements for the majority of witnesses testifying before
the Special Court.

36.

While the Registry is able to estimate the potential length of the CDF, RUF and AFRC trials, the fact that
two of the accused, Charles Ghankay Taylor and Johnny Paul Koroma, remain at large and therefore
cannot be tried until they appear before the Special Court, may still affect the completion of all trials.
Under the Rules of Procedure and Evidence of the Special Court, an accused may not be tried in his
absence unless he has made his initial appearance and has been afforded the right to appear at trial but
has refused to do so, or alternatively, has made his initial appearance but is at large and refuses to appear
in court.24 As noted above, Taylor is currently residing in Nigeria where he has been afforded asylum,
while Koroma’s whereabouts remain unknown. Until both accused are brought before the Special Court
or the indictments against them withdrawn, it is not possible to determine when all trials may be
completed. The Special Court notes with satisfaction and gratitude the recent initiatives taken by the
international community to urge Nigeria to transfer Charles Taylor to the custody of the Special Court
and the Court remains committed to use all appropriate means at its disposal, with the ongoing assistance
of the international community, to ensure the apprehension and transfer of all indictees.

37.

While the Special Court is aware that the international community has, in principle, aimed for the work
of the institution to be completed within three years, even if all current accused are brought before the
Special Court, the inherent unpredictability of the judicial proceedings renders it difficult to estimate the
end date for all trials. In this regard, it should be emphasised that the Secretary-General indicated that
three years would be the minimum time required to carry out trials25, although pledges for voluntary
contributions were only sought for a three-year lifespan. This is recognised in the Agreement, which
provides that the Judges, the Registrar and the Prosecutor shall be appointed to three-year terms, and
shall be eligible for re-appointment.26 In addition, the Agreement refers to the “first three years” of the

23 To date, judicial recesses have been called in December (three weeks), April (two weeks) and August (three weeks), in
accordance with the applicable rules and regulations of the Special Court regarding leave and recuperative breaks for judges and
staff. In addition, adjournments and other non-recess periods during which the Trial Chamber is not sitting in court (e.g., to
attend to other Special Court matters not relating to trials) must also be considered in estimating the length of trials.
24 Rules of Procedure and Evidence of the Special Court for Sierra Leone (“Rules of Procedure and Evidence”), Rule 60 (A).
25 Letter dated 12 January 2001 from the Secretary-General, supra fn. 2.
26 Agreement, Articles 2 – 5.

11

A/59/816
S/2005/350

Special Court’s operations with respect to its financing.27 The need for judicial efficiency and speedy
trials must be balanced by the requirements of judicial fairness and the proper administration of justice.
3.

Administrative Factors

38.

In addition to the above-mentioned courtroom capacity and the factors influencing the conduct of the
trial process, the Special Court depends on a number of administrative factors which need to be secured
for the institution to be able to meet its objectives.

39.

First, stabilised funding needs to be secured in order to enable the Special Court to take the necessary
steps with regard to its completion strategy. A detailed account of past funding is given in Chapter IV of
this paper.

40.

Second, the Court requires a clear fundraising strategy in order to secure the stabilised funding necessary
for its completion and post-completion work, from January 2006 onwards. In this regard, the Registry has
identified a fundraising consultant, funded by the Ford Foundation, who is at present developing a fundraising strategy, a draft of which will be submitted to the Management Committee in the near future for
their approval.

41.

Third, the conduct of the work of the Special Court is highly dependent upon the security situation in
Sierra Leone. While the current situation can be described as relatively stable, any changes could have
far-reaching consequences for the Court, especially in light of the impending departure of UNAMSIL.

42.

Fourth, the Special Court needs to maintain its ability to recruit and retain staff, especially during the
completion stage in order to counter a possible damaging loss of its most experienced staff in the most
crucial stage of its operations, with the inevitable impact on both performance and morale.

B.

Appeals and Subsequent Actions

1.

Appeals and Transfer of Sentenced Persons

43.

Judicial proceedings will not end with the completion of trials, as the Trial Chamber’s judgements and
sentences, including acquittals, will be subject to appeal.28 It should be noted that, at the time of the
drafting of this paper, no data relating to the appeals of judgements exists within the Special Court, since
no judgements have been rendered to date. The scope of possible judicial grounds for appeals seems,
therefore, to be potentially broad.

44.

However, in reaching estimates of the length of any appeals proceedings, the time needed for the
issuance of the Trial Chamber’s written judgements and sentences (and any translations which may be
required), the filing of submissions by the Parties (which will take a minimum of 40 days pursuant to the
relevant provisions of the Rules of Procedure and Evidence),29 the conduct of any hearings, and the
drafting of appeals judgements must be considered. Further, additional time will be required if the
Appeals Chamber orders in its judgements that an accused be re-tried.30 This will add considerably to the
time necessary to complete a given case, and in turn to the total time necessary for the completion of all
cases. As has been indicated earlier, it is impossible at this stage of the proceedings to provide any
realistic estimate.

Agreement, Article 6.
Rules of Procedure and Evidence, Rule 106 (A) and Rule 99 (B).
29 Rules of Procedure and Evidence, Rules 111 – 113.
30 Rules of Procedure and Evidence, Rule 118 (C).
27
28

12

A/59/816
S/2005/350

45.

After final judgements are issued, the time required to transfer convicted persons to appropriate prisons
to serve their sentences will depend on the outcome of negotiations on bilateral agreements on the
enforcement of sentences, as well as the implementation of any such agreements. The Statute provides
that imprisonment is to be served in: a) Sierra Leone; b) a State which has entered into an enforcement
agreement with the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) or the ICTY and which has
indicated a willingness to accept persons convicted by the Special Court; or c) other States which have
entered into enforcement agreements with the Special Court.31 It is unlikely that sentences will be served
in Sierra Leone due to the poor conditions and overcrowded capacity of its prisons compounded by the
high incidence of escapes; the current state of the Sierra Leonean law enforcement and security forces;
and the frailty of the overall political and security situation.32 Sentences therefore will most probably be
enforced in prisons outside of Sierra Leone rather than within the country, at least for the foreseeable
future.

46.

The Registrar began negotiations to reach enforcement agreements in November 2003. As of April 2005,
two agreements have been signed with two more negotiations nearing a conclusion. However, it must be
noted that the number of States potentially willing to enter into enforcement agreements is limited due to
the shortage of States which meet all, or most, of the necessary criteria. These include a stable political
environment; the capacity of security, law enforcement and correctional agencies; the conformity of
prison conditions to international human rights standards;33 the capacity to meet the linguistic and sociocultural needs of convicted persons; the proximity to convicted persons’ families; and the capacity to
bear the relevant costs.

2.

Completion of Administrative and Support Activities

47.

As its judicial and institutional activities reach a peak and subsequently wind down, the Special Court
will be required to take actions with respect to administrative and support matters. One matter which will
require careful and continuous planning will be the downsizing of personnel. It was always likely that
fewer investigation staff, for example, would be necessary as investigations were completed and trials
began. The nature and quantity of personnel and other resource needs will also change dramatically
between the trial and post-trial appellate phases. A schedule will need to be formulated detailing the
gradual elimination or re-assignment of posts, along with the financial and budgetary implications of
such adjustments. Some contracts may need to be terminated prior to their expiration, with sufficient
notice and career guidance to those affected. The downsizing of local staff will need to be treated
particularly sensitively, as their post-Special Court employment opportunities are likely to be more
limited than those of international staff.

48.

Special efforts must also be made to retain key personnel who may otherwise resign to take up new
opportunities as the conclusion of the Special Court draws near. Serious consideration should be given to
assisting such personnel in procuring post-Special Court employment as well as providing other

Statute of the Special Court for Sierra Leone (“Statute”), Article 22. See also Rules of Procedure and Evidence, Rule 103.
The Secretary-General has stated that “while imprisonment shall normally be in Sierra Leone, particular circumstances, such
as the security risk entailed in the continued imprisonment of some of the convicted persons on Sierra Leonean territory, may
require their relocation to a third State.” Secretary-General’s Report, paragraph 49. The Secretary-General also noted the
preference of the Government of Sierra Leone for enforcement to take place in an East African State. Id., paragraph 50.
33 Pursuant to its agreements on the enforcement of sentences with Benin, Mali and Swaziland respectively, the ICTR has
undertaken to approach donor countries for funding so that prison conditions in these States can be upgraded to conform to
international standards. Agreement between the Government of the Republic of Benin and the United Nations on the
Enforcement of Sentences of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, Article 11; Agreement between the Government of
the Republic of Mali and the United Nations on the Enforcement of Sentences of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda ,
Article 11; and Accord entre le Royaume de Swaziland et L’Organisation des Nations Unies concernant l’exécution des peines
pronocées par le Tribunal pénal international pour le Rwanda, Article 11.
31
32

13

A/59/816
S/2005/350

appropriate “incentives” to remain with the Special Court for the required time. The operation of the
Special Court and its ability to complete its mandate in a satisfactory and timely manner may otherwise
be greatly compromised. The formulation and subsequent implementation of transparent personnel
guidelines is, therefore, required in order to counter a possible decrease of staff morale.
49.

Arrangements will need to be made with respect to contractors, facilities and equipment. Contracts and
commercial arrangements will need to be settled, and in some cases, may require re-negotiation.
Appropriate and timely handover of property to the Government of Sierra Leone and other beneficiaries,
and the liquidation of any other property, must also be planned and carried out. Training must also be
provided to ensure the proper handling and maintenance of facilities and equipment donated by the
Special Court.

50.

Finally, the safety and security of its premises and personnel will need careful review on a continual
basis. As noted above, UNAMSIL troops are currently essential in maintaining the security of the Special
Court. The Security Section in conjunction with UNAMSIL, the Sierra Leone Police and the Sierra
Leone Office of National Security continue to monitor potential security threats to the Special Court.
Presently the capability of groups opposed to the Court appears to be low. However there is clear
evidence that AFRC/RUF and CDF members continue to actively seek information on the Special
Court’s security arrangements. Reliable reporting indicates that visitors to the Courts’ public gallery and
visitors to the detainees have used the opportunity to gather information on military and security guard
dispositions. Additionally, evidence indicates that there are active efforts by former CDF and AFRC
members to gain access to witnesses. Thus, while the situation remains outwardly calm, the Special Court
assesses that there is a security threat against the Special Court posed by supporters of the detainees who
continue to seek an opportunity to disrupt the judicial process. The Court’s position on this front is not
expected to be tested until after UNAMSIL draws down by 31 December 2005. The continued presence
of international troops dedicated to the protection of Special Court facilities and staff is deemed critical
at least until the trial proceedings are concluded and Sierra Leone security organizations develop the
capability to ensure the security of the Special Court and its staff.

51.

To that end, there recently has been a significant number of discussions including UNAMSIL, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, military and civilian police advisors, the Office of Legal Affairs
and the Special Court to identify the various options available and, based on these options, select and
implement an appropriate security regime. The Government of Sierra Leone has been kept informed of
the progress and will also be consulted once a regime has been identified.

C.

Proposed Actions of the Special Court Management

1.

Reporting to the Management Committee

52.

The Registry will continue its pro-active approach with regard to trial management. In addition to the
inclusion of courtroom usage data in its monthly status reports and additional liaison with the
Management Committee, the co-operation was further enhanced during a fact-finding mission by the
Management Committee to the Special Court in March 2005. To that end, the Court ‘s Liaison Officer in
New York continues to play an important role in, amongst other matters, strengthening that relationship.

2.

Representations to the Organs within the Special Court

53.

The Registry will, through the appropriate internal channels, including the periodical meetings of the
Judicial Services Co-ordinating Committee, continue to stress the need for efficient trial management as

14

A/59/816
S/2005/350

the cornerstone of the Special Court’s mission. The senior management of all organs will take the
necessary steps in this regard, with due regard to judicial independence.
54.

In addition, the Registry will continue to use the completion strategy paper (in its most recent version) as
a general guideline for the implementation of its overall policy with regard to the completion and postcompletion phases. The Management Committee will be informed with regard to the internal measures
taken in accordance with this policy.

IV.

FUNDING

55.

Under the Agreement, the expenses of the Special Court are to be borne by voluntary contributions from
the international community, and the establishment of the Special Court would commence once the
Secretary-General had contributions for 12 months of operations and pledges for an additional 24 months
of operations.34 Accordingly, the Secretary-General initially estimated that the Special Court would cost
US$ 30.2 million in its first year of operations and US$ 84.4 million in the following two years of
operations, for a total of US$ 114.6 million.35 However, donor States were not prepared to finance the
Special Court to that extent and the initial three year estimate, against which donations and pledges were
secured, was lowered to approximately US$ 57 million for the period 1 July 2002 to 30 June 2005. 36

56.

The Special Court operated on a budget of US$ 19.219 million in its first year of operations (1 July
2002 – 30 June 2003) and a budget of US$ 32.534 million in its second year of operations (1 July 2003 –
30 June 2004). The budget required for the current third year of operations (1 July 2004 – 30 June 2005)
is US$ 29.9 million. The Management Committee has approved the Court’s proposed budget for the
fourth year in the sum of US$ 25.5 million.

57.

As of December 2004, the Special Court had received a total of US$ 54.9 million in voluntary
contributions from 33 States. Given its anticipated three-year budget of US$ 82 million (July 2002 to
June 2005), the Special Court faced a potential shortfall of US$ 28 million for the same period. In March
2004, due to continuing uncertainty that sufficient contributions would be secured, the Secretary-General
sought a subvention from the General Assembly for US $40 million – US$ 16.7 million for the period
1 July to 31 December 2004 and the remaining US$ 23.3 million for 2005.37 On 26 April 2004, the
General Assembly authorised a subvention of up to US $16.7 million for the period 1 July to
31 December 2004, on the understanding that any regular budget funds appropriated for the Court would
be refunded to the UN at the time of liquidation of the Court, should sufficient voluntary contributions be
received.38 As at 31 December 2004, the Special Court had not required access to the subvention funding
and the General Assembly in its Resolution A/RES/59/276 authorised the Secretary General to enter into
commitments not exceeding $20 million with effect from 1 January 2005 to 30 June 2005.

58.

At the time of preparing this paper the present situation is that, following a meeting of the ACABQ on
19 April 2005, attended by the Registrar and colleagues from Freetown by video conference, a
recommendation has been made by the ACABQ to the Fifth Committee that the Court be given US $ 13
million up until the end of 2005 with further consideration to be given to the remaining US $ 7 million in
the next UN biennium. The Special Court noted with appreciation the assistance of the Secretary
General, the Management Committee, the Budgetary Division of the United Nations, and the Advisory

Agreement, Article 6.
Letter dated 12 July 2001 from the Secretary-General, S/2001/693, paragraph 3.
36 Id., paragraph 5.
37
Request for a Subvention to the Special Court for Sierra Leone, Report of the Secretary-General, A/58/733, 15 March 2004.
38
General Assembly Resolution 58/284, A/RES/58/284, paragraph 2.
34
35

15

A/59/816
S/2005/350

Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions in the budgetary process for the financing of the
Special Court until the end of 2005, through the above-mentioned subvention grant.
59.

16

As stated above, it appears uncertain that the Special Court will have funding past December 2005.
Alternative sources of funding will therefore be required as of January 2006, for the year 2006 as well as
for the post-completion phase of its mandate. The Special Court has started its extra-budgetary planning
with the fundraising consultant and will report to the Management Committee on the progress made in
this regard.
