A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/52/226
27 April 1998

Fifty-second session
Agenda item 114
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/52/746/Add.1)]
52/226. Procurement reform and outsourcing
A
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolutions 49/216 C of 23 December 1994, 51/231 of 13 June 1997, 51/243 of 15
September 1997 and 52/220 of 22 December 1997,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on procurement reform1 and the related report
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,2
Having also considered the note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Office of
Internal Oversight Services on the review of the implementation of procurement reform,3
1. Calls upon the Secretary-General to ensure strict adherence to the regulations and rules governing
the procurement process;

1

A/52/534 and Corr.1.

2

A/52/7/Add.3. For the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-second Session,
Supplement No. 7A.
3

A/52/813, annex.

98-77239

/...

A/RES/52/226
Page 2

2. Notes with concern that its resolution 51/231 and a number of the recommendations contained
in the report of the High-level Group of Experts on Procurement remain largely unimplemented, and
therefore calls on the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation without any further delay;
3. Notes that the revised procurement manual has not been issued, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to publish the manual no later than 31 March 1998, as stated in his report;
4. Also notes the delay in submission of proposals for revision of the Financial Regulations and
Rules of the United Nations, which may be necessary to facilitate the implementation of the procurement
reform process, and requests the Secretary-General to submit such proposals to the General Assembly,
through the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, for consideration by the
Assembly at the second part of its resumed fifty-second session;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in the context of his next report on procurement reform, to
evolve and provide the standards for measuring the efficiency of procurement, taking into account the
optimal duration of the procurement decision-making process, the total workload in the Procurement
Division of the Secretariat and the cost-efficiency of procurement, against which the performance should
be measured;
6. Notes the decline in ex post facto cases, and underscores the need to reduce further the number
of such cases through better procurement planning;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that all departments and offices at Headquarters and
in the field develop, in cooperation with the Procurement Division, annual procurement plans, which
should be made publicly available;
8. Emphasizes the need for a sharper definition of exigency needs,4 and urges the Secretary-General
to submit his proposal to the General Assembly, through the Advisory Committee, no later than 31 March
1998, as stated in his report;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to consider measures to improve the working methods of the
Headquarters Committee on Contracts in order to enhance and expedite the procurement decision-making
process;
10. Regrets that the report of the Secretary-General does not contain information on the action taken
regarding guidelines on methods of invitation to bid, which was recommended by the Board of Auditors
in its report on procurement for the biennium ended 31 December 1995,5 and requests the SecretaryGeneral to submit the guidelines, through the Advisory Committee, for consideration by the General
Assembly at the second part of its resumed fifty-second session;

4

A/52/534 and Corr.1, para. 24.

5

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-first Session, Supplement No. 5 (A/51/5), vol. I,
sect. II.
/...

A/RES/52/226
Page 3

11. Also regrets that the information requested in paragraphs 18 and 37 of its resolution 51/231 was
not provided in the report of the Secretary-General, and emphasizes that immediate action should be taken
for the full implementation of the resolution;
12. Further regrets that, despite the initial efforts of the Secretary-General, the supplier roster is still
not representative of the membership of the Organization, and requests him to intensify further and focus
his efforts to broaden the geographical base of the supplier roster;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to take all possible measures to increase procurement from
developing countries and countries with economies in transition, including the following measures:
(a) All invitations to bid should be posted on the Procurement Division Web site homepage as soon
as they are prepared, in accordance with the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations;
(b) All invitations to bid should be sent to the permanent missions, as well as to all United Nations
information centres and other United Nations offices;
(c) Procurement Division officials may undertake visits to developing countries and countries with
economies in transition to attend seminars and exhibitions, with a view to identifying potential vendors
from those countries;
(d) All commercial opportunities should be published in Development Business, which is issued by
the Office of Communications and Public Information of the Secretariat;
14. Also requests the Secretary-General to examine ways to increase opportunities for developing
countries in the award of procurement contracts, in particular least developed countries, African countries
and countries with economies in transition, taking into account the experience of preferential treatment
in this regard in the funds and programmes of United Nations organizations and other intergovernmental
institutions, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its fifty-third session;
15. Further requests the Secretary-General to examine the possibility of awarding procurement
contracts to equally qualified vendors from countries that are current in the payment of their assessed
contributions, taking into account the experience of other intergovernmental institutions with such
practices, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its fifty-third session;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to develop a standard procedure for the preparation of
performance evaluation reports on suppliers, as requested by the General Assembly in paragraph 15 of its
resolution 51/231;
17. Reiterates its concern about the use of suppliers recommended by requisitioners and, noting that
this practice undermines the principle of segregation of responsibilities between requesting and
procurement entities, requests the Secretary-General to discontinue the practice;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to revise paragraphs (f) and (g) of financial rule 110.19 to include
professional services, medicines, medical supplies, hospital or surgical supplies and prosthetic appliances
in the open bidding process;

/...

A/RES/52/226
Page 4

19. Emphasizes that the procurement of goods and services in the field missions could be sourced
competitively at the local or regional level;
20. Notes the progress made in the area of staff training, and requests the Secretary-General to
develop further a formal training programme for all procurement staff;
21. Reiterates its decision that all procurement-related functions should be performed only by United
Nations staff, and requests the Secretary-General to phase out gratis personnel from the Procurement
Division expeditiously, and no later than 31 July 1998;
22. Requests the Secretary-General to review the organizational structure of the Procurement Division
in order to ensure effective and efficient management, taking into account the implementation of
procurement reform, including the recommendations contained in the reports of the Advisory Committee,2
the Board of Auditors5 and the Office of Internal Oversight Services,3 and to report thereon, through the
Advisory Committee, to the General Assembly;
23. Underlines the need to maintain inventory records in accordance with the relevant regulations
and rules;
24. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Office of Internal Oversight Services with
conducting a comprehensive review and analysis of the procurement-related arbitration cases and to report
to the General Assembly at its fifty-third session on measures to be taken;
25. Also requests the Secretary-General to define and publish the procedures governing the role of
the ombudsman and to examine the feasibility of assigning that position to a division other than one under
the direct authority of the Assistant Secretary-General for Central Support Services;
26. Regrets the continued delay in the publication of the procurement manual, and notes with
concern the apparent absence of effective communication between the various key Secretariat departments
involved in its preparation;
27. Requests the Secretary-General to examine alternative methods of collecting statistical data in
order to provide a more transparent view of the true national provenance of companies benefiting from
procurement contracts;
28. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit proposals on possible amendments to the Financial
Regulations and Rules of the United Nations and the Staff Regulations and Rules of the United Nations
in order to address issues of potential conflict of interest, such as the employment of former United
Nations procurement officers by United Nations suppliers and vice versa;
29. Further requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at the main part of its
fifty-third session on the implementation of all of the provisions of the present resolution.
82nd plenary meeting
31 March 1998

/...

A/RES/52/226
Page 5

B
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Joint Inspection Unit entitled "The challenge of outsourcing for
the United Nations system"6 and the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the review of
the implementation of procurement reform,7
1. Welcomes the continued coordination of efforts between the Office of Internal Oversight Services
and the Joint Inspection Unit to improve and streamline the outsourcing activities of the United Nations
and the organizations of the United Nations system;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to submit, for consideration by the General Assembly at the main
part of its fifty-third session, a comprehensive report on outsourcing practices, duly taking into account
the reports of the Joint Inspection Unit6 and the Office of Internal Oversight Services.7
82nd plenary meeting
31 March 1998

6

See A/52/338.

7

A/52/813, annex.
