S/2012/793

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
5 November 2012
Original: English

Letter dated 31 October 2012 from the President of the
Security Council to the Secretary-General
I have the honour to inform you that the members of the Security Council have
decided to send a mission to Timor-Leste from 1 to 7 November 2012. The mission
will be led by Ambassador Baso Sangqu of South Africa. The members of the
Council have agreed on the terms of reference of the mission (see annex).
Following consultations with the members, it has been agreed that the
composition of the mission is as follows:
Ambassador Agshin Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan)
Ambassador Manjeev Singh Puri (India)
Ambassador Raza Bashir Tarar (Pakistan)
Ambassador João Maria Cabral (Portugal)
Ambassador Baso Sangqu (South Africa)
Ambassador Kodjo Menan (Togo)
I should be grateful if you would have the present letter and its annex
circulated as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Gert Rosenthal
President of the Security Council

12-57270 (E) 061112

*1257270*

S/2012/793

Annex
Terms of reference for the Security Council mission to Timor-Leste,
from 1 to 7 November 2012
Led by Ambassador Baso Sangqu (South Africa)
1.
To reaffirm the commitment of the Security Council to the sovereignty,
independence, territorial integrity and national unity of Timor-Leste and the
promotion of long-term stability in the country;
2.
To commend the people of Timor-Leste for their successful presidential and
legislative elections and efforts aimed at consolidating peace and democracy in their
country;
3.
To encourage the Government, the Parliament, the political parties and the
people of Timor-Leste to continue to work together and engage in inclusive dialogue
to promote the further consolidation of peace, democracy, the rule of law, security
sector reform, sustainable social and economic development and national
reconciliation in the country, including fostering the role of women in the process;
4.
To express the support of the Security Council to Timorese leadership and
ownership of the next phase of development;
5.
To acknowledge and express gratitude to the Government and people of TimorLeste for their continued cooperation and collaboration throughout the mandate of
the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT);
6.
To commend and express the full support of the Security Council for the work
of UNMIT and for the United Nations country team in Timor-Leste, and to assess
the progress in the phased drawdown of UNMIT operations;
7.
To discuss with the Government of Timor-Leste their vision of an innovative
working relationship of cooperation with the United Nations;
8.
To underscore the long-term commitment of the international community to
sustainable peace and development in Timor-Leste and the continuing support of
bilateral and international partners to those Timorese efforts as needed.

2

12-57270
