A /69/PV.55

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-ninth session

55th plenary meeting

Tuesday, 18 November 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kutesa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Uganda)

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 66
Elimination of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance
(b) Comprehensive implementation of and
follow-up to the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action
Draft resolution (A/69/L.3)
Agenda item 132 (continued)
Programme budget for the biennium 2014-2015
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/69/563)
The President: It is with a sense of pride and
satisfaction that I preside over the General Assembly
at this historic moment when the United Nations is
about to embark on the observation of the International
Decade for People of African Descent.
When one thinks of the courage and fortitude
of the people of African descent emerging from the
devastating reality that was slavery and the transatlantic
slave trade, one cannot but be humbled to know how
far they have come. However, while recognizing the
progress made, we need to go much further. Racism
and cultural, structural and institutional discrimination
against people of African descent continue to manifest
themselves in situations that limit access to quality
education, employment, housing and health care.
Worldwide, people of African descent are frequently
among the most marginalized members of society.

They also inhabit the poorest districts with the most
precarious and neglected infrastructure. They are
vulnerable to crime and violence. In attempts to seek
legal redress, they too often face discrimination in
access to justice.
In 2001 we adopted the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action at the World Conference against
Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related
Intolerance. The Programme of Action confirmed what
we all know to be true — that people of African descent
still suffer as victims from the consequences of slavery,
the slave trade and colonialism. With the adoption of the
theme of the International Decade — “People of African
descent: recognition, justice and development” — the
international community has provided an opportunity
to have a global conversation about the burdens and the
accomplishments of people of African descent.
Evidence of the contributions of people of African
descent to the development of our societies is abundant
and irrefutable. The International Decade is designed
to celebrate those contributions. In so doing, the
International Decade can help break down the walls
of stereotype and stigma that often surround people
of African descent. It is equally important for the
International Decade to raise awareness and contribute
to the efforts of Member States and the international
community to ensure the promotion, respect, protection
and fulfilment of human rights of peoples of African
dissent and their full and equal participation in all
aspects of society.
Today we have a unique opportunity to make this
International Decade one of the actions of promise.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

14-63492 (E)

*1463492*

A/69/PV.55

By adopting the draft resolution and the programme
of action before us, the General Assembly will take a
bold step towards that objective. African descendants
around the world are watching and counting on us to
do so.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/69/L.3, entitled “Programme of activities
for the implementation of the International Decade for
People of African Descent”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/69/L.3?
Draft resolution A/69/L.3 was adopted (resolution
69/16).
The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of position, may I remind delegations
that explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should
be made by delegations from their seats.
Ms. Bova (Italy): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union (EU).
At the outset, I would like to thank the South
African facilitator, Ambassador Mamabolo, for his
stewardship of this process. I would also like to take this
opportunity to thank the African Group, the Caribbean
Community, Brazil and other delegations that have
been engaged interlocutors during the consultation
process leading to today’s unanimous adoption of the
programme activities for the International Decade for
People of African Descent (resolution 69/16, annex).
The EU has been, is and will remain a firm believer
in the international fight against all forms of racism,
xenophobia and intolerance, and will always advocate
for the promotion and protection of the human rights of
all, including those of people of African descent.
As we have repeated throughout this process, it
is only through the ownership and engagement of all
States that the Decade can successfully achieve its
objectives. In this light, we expect the Decade to be
implemented in an effective and collaborative manner at
the local, national and international levels. To that end,
national action and political will are paramount. The
European Union and its member States look forward to
continue playing an active role in the implementation
of the Decade.
One of the main concerns for my delegation, prior
to the adoption of resolution 69/16 today, was the
budgetary implications of the programme activities. It

2/25

18/11/2014

is therefore important that the programme just adopted
be implemented in an efficient and effective manner,
under the leadership of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights.
Let me conclude by reiterating the EU’s commitment
to ensuring a successful Decade, with a focus on the
added value and concrete improvements in the fight
against racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance everywhere in the world.
Mr. Israeli (Israel): Israel recognizes that
resolution 69/16 contains extremely important
elements, and Israel supports its goal. However,
Israel must disassociate itself from the reference in
several preambular paragraphs in the resolution to the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action adopted
by the World Conference against Racism, Racial
Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance in
2001 and related processes.
Thirteen years ago, the majority of countries
remained silent while the Durban Conference became
a vehicle for incitement, racism, anti-Semitism,
intolerance and prejudice against the State of Israel. The
Jewish people have fought against racism throughout
our history, and Israel remains committed to this goal.
Mr. Dempsey (Canada): While Canada supports
the essence and objectives of resolution 69/16, it
opposes the references to the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action adopted by the World Conference
against Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related
Intolerance in 2001 and related processes contained in
the perambular sections of the resolution. Instead of
fostering concerted global action against racism, the
2001 Conference degenerated into a politicized forum
that served to promote intolerance and anti-Semitism
rather than combat it. Canada firmly believes that
the Durban process remains highly politicized to this
day and that it has been unable to distance itself from
its controversial past, including its open and divisive
expressions of intolerance and anti-Semitism.
While Canada disapproves of the reference to that
process in this resolution, Canada will nevertheless
continue to work in practical ways with the United
Nations and its Member States towards addressing
racism, promoting tolerance and non-discrimination
and recognizing and promoting the rights of people of
African descent.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position.
14-63492

18/11/2014

Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil): Brazil takes this
opportunity to welcome the adoption of resolution 69/16,
on the programme of activities for the implementation
of the International Decade for People of African
Descent. Allow me to take this opportunity to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing a high-level event
to officially launch, on 10 December – Human Rights
Day – the International Decade for People of African
Descent, as mandated by resolution 68/237.
We agree with you, Mr. President, that 13 years
after the 2001 World Conference against Racism, Racial
Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance,
discrimination faced by people of African descent is
still a challenge due to violence and lack of education
and employment. To that we can add social and
economic inequality and a lack of national legislation
on combating racial discrimination.
Brazil has arduously worked, both in Geneva
and in New York, towards a strong agreement on the
programme of activities that could serve as a road map
for promoting racial equality worldwide. Allow me
to take this opportunity to congratulate Ambassador
Kingsley Mamabolo for successfully concluding the
consultation process on the programme of activities, as
well as to thank the regional groups, the African group,
the Caribbean Community and the European Union for
contributing to this successful outcome.
Brazil has the largest population of Afro-descendants
outside of Africa. In 2013, that segment of the Brazilian
population accounted for over 100 million, and that
number is expected to rise to over 115 million by 2042.
However, more than three centuries of slavery have
taken their toll. Although people of African descent are
a majority in Brazil, they still live on the outskirts of
urban centres, earn lower wages and have less access
to education. In addition, according to statistics, their
sons and daughters are more vulnerable to violence.
President Dilma Rousseff has made it clear that
racism is not only a heinous crime but also an outrage
that we must spare no effort to punish and eradicate.
Public policies and the engagement of the State
are essential. Brazil has implemented affirmative
programmes and national policies aimed at ending
extreme poverty, including conditional cash transfers,
social safety nets, minimum wage legislation and
Government procurement of food and services within
local communities. Those have contributed significantly
to poverty eradication in general and the reduction of
the inequalities among different racial and vulnerable
groups in particular.

A/69/PV.55

Over the past 10 years, Brazil has lifted over
36 million people out of extreme poverty. Seventyfive per cent of this new emerging middle class are of
African descent. Whereas in 2002 only 38 per cent of
the middle class was comprised of African-Brazilians,
in 2012 they made up 51 per cent of the Brazilian
population.
Brazil attaches immense importance to the
International Decade for People of African Descent and
to the programme of activities, which, we expect, will
contribute to the full implementation of the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action and raise
awareness on combating prejudice, intolerance and
racism.
The theme for the International Decade for People
of African Descent is “People of African descent:
recognition, justice and development”. We expect
that by launching the Decade and implementing its
programme of activities, Member States, along with
civil society, the United Nations and all other relevant
stakeholders, will show their resolve to promote respect
for and the protection and fulfilment of all human rights
and fundamental freedoms to the benefit of people of
African descent. Brazil also expects that we will be
able to raise awareness of the rich cultural legacy of
people of African descent and their knowledge, diverse
heritage and culture all over the world.
Ten years from now, we hope our work will have
brought justice to people of African descent, honoured
their culture and history and rectified the social and
economic inequality they have been subjected to.
We believe diversity is an asset. By promoting
respect for the human rights of all people of African
descent, we are unmistakably strengthening our
common bonds as human beings.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item (b)
of agenda item 66.
Agenda item 113
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(a) Appointment of members of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/69/564)
The President: In paragraph 4 of its report,
the Fifth Committee recommends that the General

14-634923/25

A/69/PV.55

18/11/2014

Assembly appoint the following persons as members
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions for a three-year term of office
beginning on 1 January 2015: Mr. Pavel Chernikov
(Russian Federation), Mr. Ali A. Ali Kurer (Libya),
Mr. Dietrich Lingenthal (Germany), Mr. Fernando
de Oliveira Sena (Brazil) and Mr. David Traystman
(United States of America).

office beginning on 18 November 2014 and ending on
31 December 2016?

May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to appoint Mr. Pavel Chernikov, Mr. Ali A. Ali Kurer,
Mr. Dietrich Lingenthal, Mr. Fernando de Oliveira
Sena and Mr. David Traystman as members of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions for a three-year term of office beginning on
1 January 2015?

The President: In paragraph 5 of its report,
the Fifth Committee recommends that the General
Assembly confirm the reappointment by the SecretaryGeneral of the following persons as regular members
of the Investments Committee for a one-year term of
office beginning on 1 January 2015: Mr. Masakazu
Arikawa (Japan), Mr. Madhav Dhar (India), Mr. Nemir
A. Kirdar (Iraq), Mr. Michael Klein (United States of
America) and Mr. Ivan Pictet (Switzerland), in addition
to the conversion of the membership of Gumersindo
Oliveros (Spain) from ad hoc to regular membership,
for a one-year term of office beginning on 1 January
2015.

It was so decided.
(b) Appointment of members of the Committee
on Contributions
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/69/565)
The President: In paragraph 5 (a) of its report,
the Fifth Committee recommends that the General
Assembly appoint the following persons as members of
the Committee on Contributions for a three-year term
of office beginning 1 January 2015: Mr. Fu Daopeng
(China), Mr. Kuna1 Khatri (United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland), Mr. Nikolay Lozinskiy
(Russian Federation), Mr. Henrique da Silveira Sardinha
Pinto (Brazil), Mr. Thomas Schlesinger (Austria) and
Mr. Yoo Dae-jong (Republic of Korea).
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to
appoint Mr. Fu Daopeng, Mr. Kuna1 Khatri, Mr. Nikolay
Lozinskiy, Mr. Henrique da Silveira Sardinha Pinto,
Mr. Thomas Schlesinger and Mr. Yoo Dae-jong as
members of the Committee on Contributions for a
three-year term of office beginning on 1 January 2015?
It was so decided.
The President: In paragraph 5 (b) of the same
report, the Fifth Committee also recommends that
the General Assembly appoint Mr. Mohamed A.
Elshakshuki (Libya) as a member of the Committee on
Contributions for a term of office beginning on the date
of adoption of the decision and ending on 31 December
2016.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to appoint Mr. Mohamed A. Elshakshuki as a member
of the Committee on Contributions for a term of
4/25

It was so decided.
(c) Confirmation of the appointment of members of
the Investments Committee
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/69/566)

May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to
confirm the reappointments by the Secretary-General of
Mr. Masakazu Arikawa, Mr. Madhav Dhar, Mr. Nemir
A. Kirdar, Mr. Michael Klein and Mr. Ivan Pictet as
regular members of the Investments Committee for a
one-year term of office beginning on 1 January 2015,
and to convert the membership of Mr. Gumersindo
Oliveros from ad hoc to regular membership for a
one-year term of office beginning on 1 January 2015?
It was so decided.
(d) Appointment of members of the International
Civil Service Commission
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/69/567)
The President: In paragraph 5 (a) of its report,
the Fifth Committee recommends that the General
Assembly appoint the following persons as members
of the International Civil Service Commission for a
four-year term of office beginning on 1 January 2015:
Ms. Marie-Françoise Bechtel (France), Mr. Emmanuel
Oti Boateng (Ghana), Ms. Carleen Gardner (Jamaica),
Mr. Kingston Papie Rhodes (Sierra Leone) and
Mr. Eugeniusz Wyzner (Poland).
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to
appoint Ms. Marie-Françoise Bechtel, Mr. Emmanuel
Oti Boateng, Ms. Carleen Gardner, Mr. Kingston Papie
Rhodes and Mr. Eugeniusz Wyzner as members of the
14-63492

18/11/2014

International Civil Service Commission for a four-year
term of office beginning on 1 January 2015?
It was so decided.
The President: In paragraph 5 (b) of the same
report, the Fifth Committee also recommends the
designation of Mr. Kingston Papie Rhodes (Sierra
Leone) as Chair of the International Civil Service
Commission for a four-year term of office beginning
on 1 January 2015.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to
designate Mr. Kingston Papie Rhodes as Chair of the
International Civil Service Commission for a four-year
term of office beginning on 1 January 2015?
It was so decided.
(e) Appointment of members of the Independent
Audit Advisory Committee
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/69/568)
The President: In paragraph 4 of its report,
the Fifth Committee recommends that the General
Assembly appoint Mr. J. Christopher Mihm (United
States of America) and Mr. Richard Quartei Quartey
(Ghana) as members of the Independent Audit Advisory
Committee for a three-year term of office beginning on
1 January 2015.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to appoint Mr. J. Christopher Mihm and Mr. Richard
Quartei Quartey as members of the Independent Audit
Advisory Committee for a three-year term of office
beginning on 1 January 2015?
It was so decided.
The President: May I take it that is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-items (a) to (e) of agenda item 113?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 113 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(g) Appointment of members of the Joint
Inspection Unit
Note by the Secretary-General (A/69/106)
The President: As indicated in document A/69/106,
the General Assembly is required, during the sixty-

A/69/PV.55

ninth session, to appoint four members to fill the four
vacancies on the Joint Inspection Unit that will arise
from the expiration of the term of office on 31 December
2015 of Mr. Gérard Biraud (France), Mr. Papa Louis Fall
(Senegal), Mr. István Posta (Hungary) and Mr. Cihan
Terzi (Turkey).
As also indicated in document A/69/106, in
accordance with article 3, paragraph 1, of the statute
of the Joint Inspection Unit, the President of the
General Assembly shall consult with Member States to
draw up a list of countries, in this case four countries,
which would be requested to propose candidates for
appointment to the Joint Inspection Unit.
Also, as indicated in paragraph 2 of document
A/69/106, the General Assembly, by its resolution
61/238, decided that beginning on 1 January 2008, the
President of the General Assembly, when drawing up the
list of countries in accordance with article 3, paragraph
1, of the statute of the Unit, will invite Member States to
submit the names of the countries and their respective
candidates simultaneously, on the understanding that
the candidates submitted would be the candidates that
the respective Member States intended to propose, to
the extent possible, for appointment by the Assembly in
accordance with article 3, paragraph 2, of the statute.
I would like to inform members that the Permanent
Representative of Mauritania to the United Nations, in
his capacity as Chair of the Group of African States
for the month of November 2014, has requested the
postponement of the election for the seat allocated to
the African States.
I would like to communicate the following
information to the Assembly received from the Chairs
of regional groups. For the one vacancy from among
the Eastern European States, the Group has endorsed
Romania; for the two vacancies from among Western
European and other States, there are two endorsed
candidates, namely, Canada and Germany. In accordance
with Article 3, paragraph 1, of the statute of the Joint
Inspection Unit, Canada, Germany and Romania will
be requested to submit the names of candidates and the
curriculums vitae highlighting the candidates’ relevant
qualifications for the tasks ahead.
I would like to remind members that, in accordance
with resolution 59/267, of 23 December 2004, the
candidates should have experience in at least one
of the following fields: oversight, audit, inspection,
investigation, evaluation, finance, project evaluation,

14-634925/25

A/69/PV.55

programme evaluation, human resource management,
public administration, monitoring and all-programme
performance, as well as knowledge of the United
Nations system and its role in international relations.
After holding the appropriate consultation
described in Article 3, paragraph 2, of the statute of the
Joint Inspection Unit, including consultations with the
President of the Economic and Social Council and with
the Secretary-General, in his capacity as Chairman of
the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for
Coordination, I will submit the names of the candidates
to the Assembly for appointment to the Joint Inspection
Unit.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of our consideration of sub-item (g) of agenda
item 113.
Agenda item 133
Programme Planning
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/69/539)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. The
Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution, entitled
“Programme Planning”, without a vote. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 69/17).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
113.
Agenda items 117 and 118
Implementation of the resolutions of the
United Nations
Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
The President: For more than two decades,
this body has considered the agenda item entitled
“Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly”
as an integral part of its efforts to strengthen the
Organization as a whole. Although the world has
drastically changed from what it was almost 70 years
ago, the role of the General Assembly, as the chief
deliberative body and representative organ of the United
Nations, has remained central. We are now at a defining
moment as we deliberate this item. We are reaching the
target date for achieving the Millennium Development
6/25

18/11/2014

Goals, which will be succeeded by the sustainable
development goals, currently being formulated, as key
components of the post-2015 development agenda. As
we pursue this agenda, it is essential that we continue
giving urgent attention to enhancing the role, authority,
effectiveness and efficiency of the General Assembly.
That is one of the priorities I have laid out during this
session.
Resolution 68/307, of 10 September 2014, established
an ad hoc working group on the revitalization of the
work of the General Assembly. The resolution called
for the Working Group to be open to all Member States
and
“To identify further ways to enhance the
role, authority, effectiveness and efficiency of the
Assembly, inter alia, by building on the progress
achieved in past sessions as well as on previous
resolutions, including evaluating the status of their
implementation” (resolution 68/307, para. 3 (a)).
I thank Ambassador František Ružička, Permanent
Representative of Slovakia, and Ambassador Norachit
Sinhaseni, Permanent Representative of Thailand,
co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the
Revitalization of the Work of the General Assembly, for
their leadership and the work done during the previous
session.
Through the four clusters, the Working Group has
made efforts to explore how best to enhance the voice
and impact of the Assembly, in line with its mandate
and the realities of today’s world. Let me recall some
highlights of that work.
The first cluster relates to the role and authority of
the General Assembly. It is essential that the resolutions
adopted by this body be implemented and that
cooperation between the Assembly and the principle
organs of the United Nations be continuously pursued.
I intend to strengthen that cooperation, coordination
and exchange of information with the other principle
organs, and also with the Secretariat and, in particular,
the Secretary-General.
I welcome the progress made in improving the
working methods of the Assembly and its Main
Committees — the second cluster of our revitalization
agenda. We have to maintain that steadfastness, as the
efficient and coherent work of the Committees has
far-reaching impact, particularly in the Assembly’s
ability to make timely and meaningful decisions.
By rationalizing our agenda and making it more
14-63492

18/11/2014

focused we also enhance the quality and impact of the
consideration of topics, while reflecting the priorities
of Member States.
We should preserve the integrity and eminence of
the general debate. An important lesson from the general
debate heard this year is that we need to rationalize the
number of meetings and side events held on the margins
of the general debate so as to enable greater focus
on the matters being discussed in the Hall by world
leaders. During this session, I will convene high-level
meetings and thematic debates on current issues of
critical importance to the international community. In
my previous statements at the Assembly, I outlined the
specific meetings and events. I will continue to consult
with the General Committee and Member States on the
preliminary programme of those debates, as well as
on the possibilities for achieving results-oriented and
productive outcomes from them.
I wish to note the important and tangible outcome
of the scheduling of early elections for members of the
Security Council and the Economic and Social Council.
Beginning with the seventieth session, elections to
these organs will take place six months before the
elected States assume their responsibilities.
I also note that work has been progressing
with regard to the third cluster, on the selection and
appointment of the Secretary-General and of other
executive heads. That is consistent with resolution
68/307, which, inter alia, re-emphasizes the need for the
Secretary-General’s selection process to be transparent
and inclusive, in accordance with Article 97 of the
Charter of the United Nations.
The fourth, and final, cluster — strengthening the
institutional memory of the Office of the President of
the General Assembly — will also play an important
role in reinvigorating the Assembly. I commend the
President of the Assembly at its sixty-eighth session for
facilitating transition and continuity in the Office of the
President of the General Assembly. I also recognize the
vital support provided by the Secretariat, in particular
the Department for General Assembly and Conference
Management. In the coming period, I look forward
to briefing Member States on my Office’s activities
against the backdrop of an increased workload. I thank
Member States for their continued support to the Office
of the President of the General Assembly.
I will actively involve Member States in the
work of the Assembly. During the last few weeks, I

A/69/PV.55

appointed Chairs and facilitators for different items of
our work agenda. In that regard, I thank Ambassador
Vladimir Drobnjak, Permanent Representative of
Croatia, and Ambassador Wilfried Emvula, Permanent
Representative of Namibia, for agreeing to serve as the
new co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the
Revitalization of the Work of the General Assembly.
I call on all Member States to support their efforts to
advance the agenda of the Ad Hoc Working Group.
Finally, I wish to reiterate that the revitalization of
the work of the Assembly will remain a priority during
this session. I look forward to the Assembly’s collective
support and contribution.
Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM).
At the outset, the gratitude of NAM members
goes out to His Excellency Mr. František Ružička,
Permanent Representative of Slovakia, and to our friend
Mr. Norachit Sinhaseni, Permanent Representative of
Thailand, for their tireless efforts and excellent work
in co-chairing the Ad Hoc Working Group on the
Revitalization of the Work of the General Assembly
during the sixty-eighth session. I would also like to
take this opportunity to congratulate His Excellency
Mr. Wilfried I. Emvula, Permanent Representative
of Namibia, and Mr. Vladimir Drobnjak, Permanent
Representative of Croatia, for their appointment as
co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working Group during the
sixty-ninth session and to wish them every success.
I would like to remind the General Assembly that
NAM welcomed the adoption of the resolution 68/307
in September, by which the Assembly established the
Ad Hoc Working Group to discuss issues related to the
revitalization of the General Assembly during the this
session. The Non-Aligned Movement underlines that
the revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
is a political process, rather than a procedural one,
that aims mainly at strengthening the role of the
Assembly as the chief deliberative policymaking and
representative organ of the Organization in the broader
United Nations system. The process should therefore
be conducted in an inclusive, transparent and efficient
manner. Hence, the Movement reiterates the importance
of the revitalization of the General Assembly as an item
that deserves consideration on an equal footing with
other reform processes and important topics of the
United Nations.
We wish to reaffirm the role and authority
of the General Assembly, including on questions

14-634927/25

A/69/PV.55

related to international peace and security, and its
intergovernmental, inclusive and democratic character,
which have immensely contributed to the promotion of
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and the goals of the Organization. Our group
reaffirms as well the intergovernmental nature of the
United Nations as such and draws attention to the need
to consult with Members States on the initiatives and
activities undertaken within the Organization and to
the right of all Member States to express their positions
before the General Assembly at any time they wish to
do so.
The General Assembly, as the policymaking
organ of the Organization, holds the authority and
the essential role of drawing the framework, setting
the principles and identifying the objectives for the
wider United Nations system and its numerous organs,
agencies and programmes. Furthermore, the Assembly
should remain the principal organ that reviews the work
of all its subsidiary organs and bodies.
The General Assembly should also maintain its role
and mandate in setting the priorities of the United Nations
in considering all budgetary and administrative issues
and reforms, including its absolute authority to allocate
and reallocate financial and human resources and in
the appointment of senior officials of the Secretariat,
in accordance with the Charter and relevant General
Assembly resolutions. In that regard, the prerogatives
of the General Assembly as the chief oversight organ
of the Organization, including on management and
procurement for peacekeeping operations, must be
respected.
While expressing its readiness to continue to
support all ongoing efforts to strengthen the central
role and authority of the Assembly, NAM wishes to
state that it will not accept any approach that seeks to
undermine or minimize the achievements of the General
Assembly, diminish its current role and functioning or
raise questions about its relevance and credibility.
The Movement recalls the decision taken in
paragraph 4 of resolution 68/307 requesting the Ad
Hoc Working Group to continue the process of the
comprehensive review of the inventory on the status of
implementation of the resolutions on the revitalization
of the General Assembly and to issue an updated version.
NAM also recalls that in paragraph 5 of the same
resolution the Secretary-General is requested to submit
an update on the related provisions that have not been

8/25

18/11/2014

implemented, with an indication as to the constraints
and reasons behind the lack of implementation.
Furthermore, the group believes firmly, as set out in
paragraph 7 of the resolution, that the implementation of
General Assembly resolutions, including those related
to the revitalization of its work, enhances the role,
authority, effectiveness and efficiency of the Assembly,
and underlines the important role and responsibility of
Member States in their full implementation.
Obviously, political will is indeed key to ensuring
the effective implementation of the resolutions adopted
by the General Assembly. In that regard, NAM welcomes
the decision to issue the updated inventory chart of the
Assembly’s resolutions on revitalization, to be annexed
to the report of the Ad Hoc Working Group submitted
to the Assembly at its sixty-ninth session. The annex
will provide Member States with an opportunity to
assess the progress achieved in the implementation of
the previous resolutions since the sixty-third session.
I would like to take this opportunity to say
that NAM emphasizes the need to fully respect the
functions and powers of each principal organ of the
United Nations, in particular the General Assembly,
and to maintain the balance among the organs within
their respective Charter-based functions and powers.
In that regard, the Security Council must fully observe
all Charter provisions, as well as all General Assembly
resolutions that clarify the Council’s relationship with
the Assembly and other principal organs.
In that context, NAM again expresses its concern,
raised during previous sessions, with regard to the
continuous attempt by the Security Council to encroach
upon the powers and prerogatives of the General
Assembly. In fact, Article 24, paragraph 1, of the
Charter does not provide the Security Council with
the competence to address issues that fall within the
functions and powers of the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council. In the same vein, NAM
reiterates its request to the Security Council to submit a
more explanatory, comprehensive and analytical annual
report to the General Assembly, assessing the work of
the Council, including in such cases where the Council
has failed to act.
Furthermore, in resolutions 58/126, 59/313 and
60/286, annex, paragraph 7, the General Assembly
invited the Security Council to submit periodically,
in accordance with Articles 15 and 24 of the Charter,
special subject-oriented reports to the General

14-63492

18/11/2014

Assembly for its consideration on issues of current
international concern. Since the adoption of resolution
58/126, no special subject-oriented reports have been
formally submitted to the General Assembly. The
special subjects are to some extent covered only by the
monthly assessments presented by the Presidents of the
Security Council.
Moreover, NAM is convinced that activities of
the Special Committee on the Charter of the United
Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of the
Organization will contribute greatly to the whole
process of revitalization. NAM supports in particular
the two proposals that are discussed by the Special
Committee: first, the creation of an open-ended
working group to study the proper implementation of
the Charter with respect to the functional relationship
of its organs, and second, the working paper on the
strengthening of the role of the Organization and
enhancing its effectiveness.
Among other prerogatives and mandates of the
General Assembly, there is the issue of the selection
and appointment of Secretaries-General of the United
Nations. NAM attaches the utmost importance to that
question. NAM reaffirms the need for the selection
of the Secretary-General to be more transparent and
inclusive of all Member States. NAM deplores that up
to now no consultations on the appointment of a new
Secretary-General have ever taken place, as reflected in
the updated inventory chart annexed to the report of the
Ad Hoc Working Group. The Movement emphasizes,
therefore, the necessity that the participation of the
General Assembly in the selection and the appointment
of future Secretaries-General should be more active,
effective and efficient, in conformity with the Charter
and rules of procedures of the General Assembly and
in accordance with the provisions of resolutions 51/241,
60/286, 64/301, 66/294, 67/297 and 68/307.
NAM stresses the importance of the full
implementation of the aforementioned resolutions in the
immediate next process of selection and appointment of
the Secretary-General. In the run-up to the selection
and appointment of the next Secretary-General,
which is expected to take place in two years, NAM
encourages the holding of timely hearings or meetings
of the General Assembly for an exchange of views
and dialogue with candidates running for the post of
Secretary-General. NAM also encourages the President
of the General Assembly to play a proactive role in that
process.

A/69/PV.55

The Movement emphasizes the importance of
ensuring the effectiveness of the Office of the President
of the General Assembly, including through the
strengthening of its institutional memory. While noting
with appreciation the progress already achieved in that
regard, we are of the view that a particular effort should
be devoted to the implementation of existing resolutions
on the matter, as well as to identifying, during the
upcoming discussions of the Working Group, ways and
means to pursue that objective progressively and with
determination.
It is clear that while the prerogatives of the President
of the General Assembly have not changed, his role and
his activities have evolved over the past years, both in
adapting to the growing activities, conferences and
initiatives of the Assembly and in performing official
protocol functions in representing the Assembly all
over the world and making the Assembly’s work more
known and more visible. Thus, the activities of the
Office of the President have increased drastically over
the years.
The agenda of the Assembly, and consequently
that of its President, includes a tremendous number of
issues. The expansion in the activities of the General
Assembly, including the yearly adoption of nearly 300
resolutions and decisions, the establishment of working
groups and the appointment of facilitators who convene
meetings and consultations throughout the year have
made the presence of the President and his or her active
participation necessary during the entire session.
Moreover, the Assembly’s workload is no longer
limited to its main session, but rather covers the whole
period from the opening of the session in September to
its closing the following September. Those enormous
increasing activities should of course be matched with
all the necessary resources, both human and financial.
Hence, in order to provide further insight on the
diversity and complexity of the activities and duties of
the President, NAM recalls the request of Member States
addressed to the President of the General Assembly
at the sixty-eighth session, in cooperation with the
Secretariat, to report to the Ad Hoc Working Group on
the role, mandate and activities of the President.
In the same spirit, the Movement seeks more
clarification regarding the budgetary basis for the
provision by the Secretariat of sources of the funding and
staffing of the Office of the President of the Assembly,
as stipulated in paragraph 35 of resolution 68/307. The

14-634929/25

A/69/PV.55

Movement recalls, in that regard, that resolution 68/307
requests the Secretary-General to submit proposals, in
the context of the proposed programme budget for the
biennium 2016-2017, to review the budget allocation to
the Office of the President.
In conclusion, NAM reaffirms that a reinvigorated
General Assembly, in a more responsive environment,
exerting fully its role and authority, would significantly
contribute to the strengthening of the wider United
Nations system and to improving international
governance and enhancing multilateralism.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union.
Mr. Van Den Akker (European Union): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union and
its member States. The candidate countries Turkey, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Serbia and Albania, the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina, as well as the Republic of Moldova,
Armenia and Georgia, align themselves with this
statement.
I would like to thank the previous co-Chairs of the Ad
Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of the General
Assembly, the Permanent Representatives of Slovakia
and Thailand, for the excellent work done. I would also
like to thank the President of the General Assembly for
his appointment of the Permanent Representative of
Croatia and the Permanent Representative of Namibia
to serve as co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working Group on
the Revitalization of the General Assembly. We wish
them success and express our support.
The European Union and its member States are
strongly attached to effective multilateralism with the
United Nations at its core. The strengthening the United
Nations, based on effective and sustainable funding in
line with the real capacity to pay, and increasing the
efficiency of its functioning, on which there is scope
to do more, remain our top priorities. In that context,
we continue to be committed to revitalization and to
supporting efforts aimed at strengthening the role and
authority of the General Assembly, in line with the
Charter of the United Nations and relevant resolutions.
Indeed, we wish that the General Assembly,
as the only intergovernmental body with universal
membership and given its broad mandate with farreaching responsibilities, would be able to take up the

10/25

18/11/2014

challenge of conciliating legitimacy and efficiency in a
context of emerging global challenges. At the same time,
we wish to reiterate that it is imperative that concrete
steps be taken at all levels to spend more wisely, to
deliver in new ways and to ensure that the Organization
lives within the agreed budget levels. That applies to
all activities of the United Nations, from peacekeeping
to construction to the regular budget. An unceasing
effort to find new and creative ways to work is essential
to achieve a more effective delivery on mandates and
sustainable use of resources.
We believe that revitalization can be ensured only
when the General Assembly takes relevant action
on issues of common concern to the international
community and produces results. By doing so, it lives
up to its role as one of the principal organs of the
United Nations. The European Union and its member
States welcome the adoption of resolution 68/307, with
important provisions such as earlier election of the
non-permanent members of the Security Council and
the members of the Economic and Social Council. We
welcome the reiteration of the interim arrangement
on the rotation pattern of the Chairs of the Main
Committees, adopted in decision 68/505 in connection
with guidelines for future arrangements contained in
the annex to resolution 68/307.
Also, we would like to stress the importance of
the implementation of all resolutions of the General
Assembly, including on the revitalization of its work,
and to note its impact on the Assembly’s authority,
effectiveness and efficiency. The revitalization of the
work of the General Assembly is clearly interlinked
with the overall reform of the United Nations.
The General Assembly revitalization process
has already led to positive developments such as the
thematic debates, which facilitate more in-depth
discussions on current issues of critical importance
to the international community. The European Union
and its member States especially value the interactive
character of thematic debates, which allows for closer
engagement by the Assembly with other stakeholders,
international and regional organizations and groups
outside the United Nations system. We look forward to
the continuation of that practice and invite the President
of the General Assembly to consult with Member States
on the possibilities, where appropriate, in the spirit of
partnerships, engaging a broad range of stakeholders and
achieving results-oriented outcomes in such debates.
We also recognize the importance of the interaction

14-63492

18/11/2014

between the General Assembly and international and
regional forums and organizations dealing with global
matters of concern to the international community, as
well as the benefits to be drawn from such interaction.
We appreciate the continued practice of convening
periodic informal briefings by the Secretary-General
on his priorities, travels and most recent activities,
including his participation in international meetings
and events organized outside the United Nations, and
we encourage him to continue that practice.
As to the relationship of the General Assembly
with other principal organs of the United Nations,
the European Union and its member States believe
that improving transparency and cooperation remain
important goals. The Assembly should benefit from
information about the meetings between the Presidents
of the General Assembly, the Security Council and
the Economic and Social Council, as well as with the
chairs of subsidiary bodies. Periodic briefings by the
Assembly President on his recent activities, including
official travels, continue to be an appreciated practice
and are a valuable source of information.
On the issue of working methods, we wish to
recall the need to consider and take steps towards the
rationalization of the agenda of the General Assembly
and of the Economic and Social Council with a view
to eliminating duplication and overlap and promoting
complementarity in the consideration and negotiation
of similar and related issues.
In that context, it is important to point out resolution
68/1. We are of the opinion that it would be appropriate
to examine further biennialization and triennialization
of certain items, as well as their clustering or
elimination, including through the introduction of a
sunset clause, with the clear consent of the sponsoring
State or States. In that regard, the leadership of the
Chairs and the Bureaus of the Main Committees is of
particular importance. We look forward to the briefings
to the Ad Hoc Working Group on working methods by
the Chairs of the Main Committees. Although each of
the Main Committees has its own authority over the
rules of procedure, we believe that streamlining and
standardizing some should lead to the more efficient
work by the Committees.
We would like to stress as well the importance
of making full use of e-services provided by the
Secretariat. The widespread use by Main Committees
and Member States alike of such e-services, including

A/69/PV.55

the PaperSmart portal, has had a positive impact on
the work of the General Assembly during its main
session, while it has also saved a considerable amount
of resources, energy and paper. We have to continue to
work in that direction.
We look forward to the active roles of the SecretaryGeneral, the President of the General Assembly,
including in his capacity as the Chair of the General
Committee, and the Chairs of the Main Committees,
in consultation with Member States, in enhancing
the coordination of the scheduling of high-level
meetings with the view to optimizing their number and
distribution throughout the year, while bearing in mind
the need to preserve the integrity of the general debate.
We believe that the General Committee could play a
useful role in the process.
Finally, let me emphasize the important role that
the Ad Hoc Working Group plays in the revitalization
of the work of General Assembly. I would like to assure
the Assembly that the European Union and its member
States will continue to engage in a constructive manner
in the proceedings of the Ad Hoc Working Group. We
look forward to receiving a workplan soon.
Mr. Tuy (Cambodia): At the outset, before I
deliver a statement on behalf of the member States of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
allow me to say a few words on the issue of the list of
speakers.
I would like to draw your kind attention,
Mr. President, to the matter of the order of speakers.
ASEAN member States have considered paragraph 1 (b)
to the annex of resolution 65/276, on the participation of
the European Union in the work of the United Nations.
It states that the observer of the European Union, in
order to present the position of the European Union and
its member States as agreed by them, shall be invited
to participate in the general debate of the General
Assembly in accordance with the order of precedence
as established in the practice for participating
observers and their level of participation. In keeping
to the letter and spirit of resolution 65/276, the member
States of ASEAN are therefore of the opinion that the
European Union delegation, in its capacity as observer,
should speak after all regional and major groupings
that are represented by States, unless the European
Union is also represented by a Member State. That is
a principled application of resolution 65/276. Hence,
ASEAN requests that an ASEAN member State, when
speaking on behalf of the grouping, should speak before

14-6349211/25

A/69/PV.55

the European Union if the latter is represented by the
European Union delegation.
Turning to agenda item 118, on the revitalization of
the work of the General Assembly, let me express our
appreciation to the co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working
Group on the Revitalization of the Work of the General
Assembly, Ambassador František Ružička of Slovakia
and Ambassador Norachit Sinhaseni of Thailand, for
their stewardship in facilitating the Ad Hoc Working
Group during the Assembly’s sixty-eighth session.
We are pleased by the progress made under their
co-chairmanship. We are also pleased that resolution
68/307 was adopted by consensus on 10 September
2014. Let me also take this opportunity to express our
appreciation to His Excellency Mr. John Ashe, President
of the General Assembly at its sixty-eighth session,
for his selection of the co-Chairs and the importance
he accorded to the revitalization of the work of the
General Assembly. We welcome the opening address
by Mr. Sam Kahamba Kutesa, President of the General
Assembly at its current session, on 16 September 2014
(see A/69/PV.1), in which he highlighted his priorities,
including the continued focus on both the revitalization
of the General Assembly and the reform of the Security
Council. We look forward to working with the new
Co-chairs of the Ad Hoc Working Group appointed by
Mr. Kutesa.
Next year we will celebrate the seventieth
anniversary of the United Nations. That special occasion
provides us with a unique opportunity to reinvigorate
the reform of the United Nations. We should take
advantage of that opportunity not only to celebrate the
achievements of the United Nations over the past seven
decades, but also to contemplate a fresh approach to the
reform of the Organization in order to enable it to more
effectively respond to the needs of Member States and
to address both current and future challenges.

18/11/2014

establishment of the ASEAN Community. As one of
the most successful regional organizations, ASEAN
looks forward to interacting with all international and
regional forums to address issues of common interest
and concern. I hope that concrete measures and actions
will be taken to follow up on the important directive
given by the General Assembly.
Secondly, we welcome the General Assembly’s
decision, beginning with the seventieth session, to hold
the election for non-permanent members of the Security
Council and members of the Economic and Social
Council approximately six months before the elected
members assume their responsibilities. We hope that
the elected members, especially those from small and
medium-sized developing countries, will thereby have
more time to prepare for their new responsibilities. We
particularly hope that the earlier election will provide
an earlier opportunity for the elected non-permanent
members to observe Security Council meetings.
Thirdly, with respect to the selection and
appointment of the Secretary-General, we welcome the
reaffirmation in resolution 68/307 that the process of
selecting and appointing the Secretary-General differs
from that used for other executive heads in the United
Nations system, given the important and unique role
of the Secretary-General. We appreciate the common
call by a number of Member States for the selection
process to be improved without amending the Charter.
For example, convening hearings or meetings of the
General Assembly for an exchange of views with
candidates could help to make the selection process
more inclusive, transparent, interactive and credible.

One critical component of that reform is the
revitalization of the work of the General Assembly,
which is the chief deliberative, policymaking and
representative organ of the United Nations. Let me
highlight some of the key issues that we believe deserve
special consideration in the sixty-ninth session.

We hope that concrete improvement will be agreed
upon in the Ad Hoc Working Group during the sixtyninth session so that it can be implemented at the
seventieth session, well in time for the selection of the
next Secretary-General, which is expected to take place
in 2016. We also hope that the President of the General
Assembly will play an active role in that process in
accordance with the role accorded to him or her by
the relevant resolutions, while at the same time fully
respecting the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations.

First, we welcome the reaffirmation, in accordance
with resolution 68/307, of the importance and benefit
of continued interaction between the General Assembly
and international and regional forums. The year
2015 is special not only for the United Nations but
also for ASEAN, which next year will celebrate the

Last but not least, we hope to see further
strengthening of the institutional memory of the
Office of the President of the General Assembly. We
are pleased that the Assembly, in resolution 68/307,
repeated its request to the Secretary-General to submit,
in the context of the proposed programme budget for

12/25

14-63492

18/11/2014

the biennium 2016-2017, proposals to review the budget
allocation to the Office of the President of the General
Assembly in accordance with existing procedures.
It is important to note that a number of Member
States have continually called for an increase in the
budget allocation to the Office of the President of the
General Assembly, which has remained unchanged
since 1998. With only minor adjustments for inflation,
that salary currently stands at $300,000. As one of the
most important multilateral posts, the presidency of
the General Assembly, no matter which country holds
that important office, should not be under financial
constraints. We therefore hope that the SecretaryGeneral’s proposals will be submitted and considered
in the preparation for the next biennium.
Before concluding, let me repeat the words of
Martin Luther King, Jr., that Mr. Sam Kahamba
Kutesa cited in his opening address to the Assembly:
“Everything that is done in the world is done by hope.”
I have expressed our hopes, on behalf of ASEAN
member States, and wish to assure the Assembly of the
Association’s continued commitment to constructively
engage in the deliberations of the Ad Hoc Working
Group during the sixty-ninth session, with the aim of
achieving concrete outcomes for the revitalization of
the work of the Assembly on the eve of its seventieth
anniversary.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): Pakistan associates
itself with the statement made by the representative of
Algeria on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
We commend the efforts of the Permanent
Representatives of Slovakia and Thailand as co-Chairs
of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of
the Work of the General Assembly during the sixtyeighth session. We look forward to working with the
Permanent Representatives of Namibia and Croatia as
they lead our efforts to revitalize the General Assembly.
The General Assembly, despite its perceived
operational inaction, has been working diligently on
its mandated tasks. The finalization of the sustainable
development goals and the creation of the highlevel political forum on sustainable development are
examples of its recent successes. Leadership on issues
like the Millennium Development Goals, sustainable
development, human rights and women’s empowerment
and the creation of new architecture such as the
Human Rights Council and UN-Women, testify to the
normative and substantive vitality and creativity of

A/69/PV.55

the General Assembly over the past decade. The Ad
Hoc Working Group itself has succeeded in bringing
forward elections for the members of the Economic
and Social Council and the non-permanent member of
the Security Council to six months before the start of
their terms. This will help the newly elected members
prepare and contribute in a better way.
The roles and mandates of the General Assembly
and the Security Council have been defined clearly by
the Charter of the United Nations. Instead of a discourse
focused on contradictions and encroachments, we
should look at areas of convergence so that the two
bodies can work harmoniously in a shared space to
advance our common agenda. The Charter provides
enormous space to the General Assembly to play its
role in the maintenance of international peace and
security, economic development and the promotion and
protection of human rights. The Assembly should use
that space in an optimal manner. It has a leadership role
to play on peacekeeping by using the full potential of
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations.
From time to time, resorting to the Uniting for Peace
mechanism would enable the Assembly to leave its
indelible imprint on international peace and stability.
In this millennium, the General Assembly would
play a landmark and seminal role by crafting the post2015 development agenda, which would contribute
directly to the alleviation of poverty, the empowerment
of the marginalized men, women and children of the
world, promoting equality, and stimulating economic
growth and development. The implementation of
the agenda would put the Assembly at the centre of
decision-making processes and enhance its structures
and stature. In addition, the Assembly has the
responsibility to deliver on sustainable development
in partnership with the high-level political forum on
sustainable development and the Economic and Social
Council.
The Security Council, for its part, while taking up
thematic issues, such as climate change, sexual violence
in armed conflict, women and children’s rights and
peacebuilding, should work in close partnership with the
relevant intergovernmental forums and organizations.
Two-way communication between the Council and
the Assembly should not remain symbolic and cosmetic
but should become substantive and consequential.
Small steps could improve communication between
the two bodies. These include making the largely pro
forma monthly meetings between the Presidents of the

14-6349213/25

A/69/PV.55

General Assembly and the Council more substantive
by discussing collaboration, based on the agendas
of the two bodies; making the annual reports of the
Council to the Assembly more analytical and allowing
the Assembly’s views to feed back into the Council’s
work; and by having better scrutiny and evaluation of
Council’s work by the general membership.
Lastly, the Ad Hoc Working Group, the
intergovernmental negotiations on Security Council
reform and the General Assembly itself should work
with the Security Council and its Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions to refine and improve the Security Council’s
working methods to make it more accountable and
transparent for the general membership.
Security Council reform is an historic opportunity
for the General Assembly. This time, we should get
the reform process right. It should not be a partial
and lopsided reform, focusing on increasing the
membership, especially permanent seats. The reform
has to focus on increasing representation, as well as
on other equally important matters — the veto, size
and working methods, regional representation and the
relationship between the General Assembly and the
Security Council.
The General Assembly should not allow the
creation of new permanent seats because that would be
a negation of its own democratic character. It should
pursue the principle of the greatest good of the greatest
number by ensuring that all Member States — small,
medium-sized and large — that make up the family of
the United Nations are adequately and appropriately
represented in the reformed Council. Council reform
should reflect the aspirations and interests of all, not
the ambitions of a few.
The faithful implementation of General Assembly
resolutions and decisions requires two essential
conditions: the critical political will of Member
States and adequate resources. Appropriate measures
should be taken to avoid the selective implementation
of resolutions, by design or by default. Updating the
inventory of resolutions is a good practice, and the
Secretariat has done a good job in this regard. The
mechanism should, however, be further improved
by including information on the reasons for
non-implementation or delay. The Secretariat may also
explore the establishment of a unit to track instances of
non-implementation.

14/25

18/11/2014

As we move towards the selection of the SecretaryGeneral in 2016, a major challenge will be to meet
the expectations of Member States with regard to the
transparency and inclusiveness of the process. The Ad
Hoc Working Group should pursue this as an important
objective this year.
Finally, the United Nations is the sum of its
Member States. The revitalization of the General
Assembly and the faithful implementation of its
decisions and resolutions would act as force multiplier
in empowering the United Nations to resolve difficult
issues of peace and security, development and human
rights. We are glad that a statesman of your stature and
wisdom, Mr. President, will lead our efforts during this
momentous year.
Mr. Minami (Japan): At the outset, I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for your initiative on the
revitalization of the work of the General Assembly.
Like the other delegations, I would also like to extend
my sincere gratitude to the co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc
Working Group on the Revitalization of the Work of
the General Assembly during the previous session, the
Permanent Representatives of Slovakia and Thailand,
and welcome the appointment of the Permanent
Representatives of Croatia and Namibia as the new
co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working Group during the
current session.
Both in your acceptance speech (see A/68/PV.93) in
June and in your speech at the opening of the Assembly’s
sixty-ninth session (see A/69/PV.1) in September,
Mr. President, you emphasized the importance of
revitalizing the General Assembly. Japan completely
shares your views. Revitalizing the General Assembly
and Security Council reform are crucial components
of the reform agenda. We must make steady progress
towards achieving feasible and realistic results on this
item.
In this context, Japan welcomes the adoption
of resolution 68/307 during the previous session.
In particular, the decision to hold the elections for
members of the Security Council and the Economic and
Social Council earlier is highly regarded. We believe it
will definitely resolve the legitimate concerns of newly
elected members. It is also an achievement that the
resolution says the General Assembly decides to reiterate
the interim arrangement recommending the pattern for
the rotation of the Chairs of the Main Committees from
the sixty-ninth to the seventy-third sessions.

14-63492

18/11/2014

It is true that in previous sessions we made some
achievements regarding the revitalization of the work
of the General Assembly. However, much more has to
be done and much more effort is needed. Enhancing
fairness in the management of this United Nations body
remains an important aspect for discussion. We argued
last year during this same occasion that the speakers
list during the high-level week should more closely
reflect reality. Countries like mine, Japan, in which the
Head of State plays a ceremonial role and the Head of
Government has the highest political mandate, should
be dealt with as such. It is appreciated that this year
the Assembly has reflected on our argument to some
extent.
We would also like to stress the importance of strict
adherence to time restraints for each speaker. In this
regard, it is highly appreciated that President Kutesa
starts each meeting on time. The General Assembly
needs to continue discussions to achieve disciplined
management.
The rationalization of the General Assembly’s
work is an urgent challenge. As the amount of tasks in
the Assembly has increased, agenda prioritization has
been indispensable. By sorting through more than 170
agenda items, as well as through the biennialization
and triennialization of agenda items that are currently
being discussed every year, the work of the Assembly
should be rationalized. However, the process still has a
long way to go. For instance, late-night sessions have
become more common in some Main Committees.
We hope that such situations will be improved upon
immediately.
The President’s strong initiative in hosting the
high-level meetings next year is appreciated. In order
to make these meetings even more high profile, I would
like to suggest they be more distinct from similar
international conferences and meetings,so that senior
representatives from each capital can attend.
The importance of exercising the leadership of the
President of the General Assembly should also be noted.
Considering United Nations budget restraints, Member
States should support the activities of the President as
much as possible.
These are some ideas Japan believes are worth
discussing under this agenda item. The revitalization
of the General Assembly is, together with the reform
of the Security Council, an important task that we have
to address. Let me finalize my statement by saying

A/69/PV.55

that Japan stands ready to contribute in a constructive
way to the discussions aimed at further enhancing the
effectiveness and efficiency of the United Nations.
Mr. Mukerji (India): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important meeting.
At the outset, let me to align myself with the
statement made by the representative of Algeria on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
I would like to express our appreciation for
the good work done by the co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc
Working Group on the Revitalization of the General
Assembly during the previous session, the Permanent
Representatives of Slovakia and Thailand. I also wish to
congratulate the Permanent Representatives of Namibia
and Croatia for their appointments as co-Chairs of the
Ad Hoc Working Group during the sixty-ninth session
and wish them success in this endeavour.
We believe that the issue of General Assembly
revitalization has assumed particular significance
in recent years. This is quite vividly captured in the
emphasis which you, Mr. President, have placed on
United Nations reform, including the revitalization
of the General Assembly and reform of the Security
Council. In your acceptance speech in June, you rightly
pointed out that,
“Today, the world is vastly different from what
it was in 1945. While the principles of the
Organization remain solid, the changing world
obliges us to adjust to new and changing realities.
Central to that is the continued revitalization of the
General Assembly and the reform of the Security
Council and other relevant United Nations bodies.”
(A/68/PV.93, p. 2)
Similarly, we also believe that urgent and
comprehensive United Nations reform is imperative
to make it reflective of current geopolitical realities
and to enhance its capability to meet the increasingly
complex and pressing transnational challenges of our
time. Those include the issues of peace and security,
development, human rights, the environment and
health, among others. We appreciate the importance
that you, Mr. President, have attached to those issues.
You can count on India’s support in those endeavours
of yours.
We believe that the General Assembly will not be
empowered merely by strengthening procedures and
streamlining working methods. It will be empowered

14-6349215/25

A/69/PV.55

only if its position as the chief deliberative, policymaking and representative organ of the United Nations,
under Article 10 of the Charter of the United Nations,
is respected in letter and in spirit. This requires that
the Assembly take the lead in setting the global agenda
and restoring the centrality of the United Nations
in formulating multilateral approaches to resolving
transnational issues. In particular, revitalization
must restore the primacy of the United Nations in
development matters. We would like to make three
points in this context.
First, it is critical to address the issue of preventing
encroachment on the mandate of the General Assembly
and making the Security Council more responsive
to it. The Council’s encroachment on issues that
traditionally fall within the Assembly’s competence
is of particular concern. The consequent undermining
of the Assembly’s role and authority needs to be
redressed. Resorting to thematic debates and, of late,
resolutions in the Security Council on issues that very
often fall within the purview of the General Assembly
or the Economic and Social Council remains an area of
concern. The balance among the principal organs of the
United Nations, as stipulated by the Charter, must be
respected and maintained.
Secondly, the General Assembly, being the voice
of the international community, must be given a
greater say in the selection of the Secretary-General.
The continued circumscribing of the Assembly’s role
and responsibilities in the process of the selection and
appointment of the Secretary-General needs to change.
This is in the interests of the United Nations system in
general and the Assembly’s prerogatives in particular.
Efforts to put in place a more inclusive and transparent
procedure for the appointment of the SecretaryGeneral, consistent with Article 97 of the Charter, need
to be undertaken without further delay.
Thirdly, the Assembly and the other entities that
form part of the United Nations system must reflect
best practices in their day-to-day functioning. This will
require a review of the way the Assembly conducts its
business, including, for example, the recently concluded
elections to the International Court of Justice.
Our attention is also drawn to the fact that the
report of the Human Rights Council (A/69/53) is being
debated both in the plenary and the Third Committee.
Some delegations that spoke on this subject in this
plenary yesterday, for example, even as I speak are

16/25

18/11/2014

making the same statements in the Third Committee
today. This is perhaps not fruitful.
In our view, the primacy of the Assembly flows
from the universality of its membership, as well as the
diligent application of the principle of the sovereign
equality of its members. Therefore, ownership, of the
Assembly’s decisions and activities is reflected in the
degree of the participation by Member States. So, the
presence of political will on the part of Member States
to take on concrete measures to reinforce the role and
authority of the Assembly is of utmost importance.
In conclusion, let me re-emphasize the need to
discuss substantive measures that would strengthen the
role of the General Assembly as the chief deliberative,
policy-making and representative body of the
international community. Members can count on my
delegation’s constructive support and participation in
these efforts.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome today’s meeting on the
revitalization of the work of the General Assembly. I
take this opportunity to congratulate the Permanent
Representatives of Croatia and Namibia on their
appointments as co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working
Group on the Revitalization of the Work of the General
Assembly and wish them every success in their work.
We note the work of the Permanent Representatives of
Slovakia and Thailand as co-Chairs during the sixtyeighth session.
The Russian Federation supports realistic
initiatives aimed at improving the effectiveness of the
General Assembly’s work, on the condition that we
remain focused on improving the Assembly’s working
methods and streamlining its agenda, which is largely
overburdened. We believe that it is necessary to
continue the practice of transferring some agenda items
from consideration on a biennial basis to a triennial
schedule and of eliminating items that are no longer
relevant.
We endorse the proposals on lightening the highlevel week in the framework of the general debate,
because during their stay in New York, Heads of State
and Government, a well as ministers for foreign affairs,
already have a busy schedule of bilateral meetings. We
must limit the number of high-level events during that
period. The rest should be carried out systematically
throughout the full Assembly session. That will
facilitate and improve the efficiency of our work.

14-63492

18/11/2014

At the same time, we believe that any reform
innovations should be based on strict compliance with
the prerogatives of the principal organs of the United
Nations, as set out in the Charter of the United Nations.
In particular, we call for maintaining the current role of
the General Assembly in the selection and appointment
of the Secretary-General, pursuant to Article 97
of the Charter, according to which the SecretaryGeneral is appointed by the General Assembly on the
recommendation of the Security Council.
We must carefully consider proposals to strengthen
the institutional memory of the Office of the President
of the General Assembly. However, we note that, as with
any other issue that might have financial implications
for the regular budget of the United Nations, it should
be addressed in full compliance with the generally
accepted procedure, that is, in the Fifth Committee
and the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions.
Mr. Elhamamy (Egypt): Egypt associates itself
with the statement delivered by the representative of
Algeria on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
At the outset, I would like to express Egypt’s
appreciation for your decision, Mr. President, to
include the revitalization of the work of the General
Assembly at the top of your priorities during the sixtyninth session, and for stressing the need to do more to
make the Assembly effective and efficient. I seize this
opportunity to thank the Permanent Representatives of
Slovakia and Thailand for their efforts in co-chairing
the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of
the Work of the General Assembly during the sixtyeighth session. Those efforts led to the adoption of
resolution 68/307, which represents a strong basis for
the discussions during the current session under the
leadership of the newly appointed co-facilitators. We
pledge our full support to them to achieve tangible
results in the process of revitalizing the work of the
Assembly.
The international community is confronted with
unprecedented challenges that necessitate a strong and
responsive General Assembly in order to allow this
universal parliament of nations to play its leading role
in global governance at the political, economic and
social levels. Egypt believes that the first step to achieve
tangible progress in this regard is to implement various
resolutions containing specific measures to revitalize
the work of the Assembly as the main deliberative,

A/69/PV.55

policymaking and representative principal organ of the
United Nations.
Furthermore, we think that the main challenge facing
the revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
is the continuous and unprecedented encroachment
by the Security Council on the Assembly’s role
and functions. The Security Council is constantly
attempting to redefine its scope of competence through
a wider interpretation of what issues constitute a threat
to international peace and security, including issues
that are already under consideration in the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council. The
Ad Hoc Working Group could identify those areas of
encroachment and also areas of coordination between
those two principal organs during its upcoming
deliberations – for example, how to enhance the
coordination between the General Assembly and the
Security Council in the admission of new Members to
the United Nations pursuant to Article 4, paragraph 2
of the Charter.
We stress that focusing only on the procedural
aspects and working methods of the General Assembly
will not suffice in leading to the comprehensive
improvement of the Assembly’s work that we all aspire
to. Ensuring the effectiveness of the Office of the
President of the General Assembly is also important to
improve the Assembly’s role and authority. We reiterate
the need to strengthen the Office of the President
through the allocation of more human and financial
resources from the regular budget for the biennium
2016-2017 in order to allow equal opportunities for all
Member States to successfully manage the presidency
of the General Assembly, since voluntary contributions
tend to involve unpredictable and unreliable financing,
which has a negative effect on the institutional memory
of this Office.
Finally, the selection and appointment of the
Secretary-General is yet another issue of great interest
to the wider membership. We note that the selection
and appointment of the next Secretary-General will
take place in 2016. We encourage the President of the
General Assembly to actively support the process in
accordance with the role accorded to him by relevant
resolutions, taking into consideration Article 97 of
the Charter. Moreover, we re-emphasize the need for
the selection process for the Secretary-General to be
transparent and inclusive of all Member States at an
early stage when identifying candidates for this key
post.

14-6349217/25

A/69/PV.55

Tthe revitalization of the General Assembly
is a critical component of the overall reform of the
United Nations. Therefore, it must be treated on equal
footing with other reform processes of the United
Nations principal organs and should be given greater
attention and consideration. I would like to assure you,
Mr. President, of the full support of the delegation of
my country for all your efforts in order to enhance
the role of the General Assembly in achieving peace,
stability and prosperity for all.
Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): Let me begin by thanking
you, Mr. President, for convening this important
debate on the revitalization of the work of the General
Assembly. We wish to thank Ambassador Ružička
of Slovakia and Ambassador Sinhaseni of Thailand
for their valuable leadership of the Ad Hoc Working
Group on the Revitalization of the Work of the General
Assembly and their hard work during the sixty-eighth
session.
We also congratulate the new co-facilitators,
Ambassador Drobnjak of Croatia and Ambassador Emvula of
Namibia. The Indonesian delegation assures them of its
wholehearted support in their stewardship of the Working
Group’s work to help realize a General Assembly that can
become a powerful pivot for achieving a more peaceful
and prosperous world for all people.
Indonesia associates itself with the statements
made by the representatives of Algeria on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement and of Cambodia on behalf of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.

18/11/2014

corresponding influence on international affairs of
concern to its membership.
My delegation has participated actively in the Ad
Hoc Working Group over the years. In the meetings in
the past session, very important discussions took place
with the Chairs of the Main Committees on improving
the Committees’ working methods, deepening the
institutional memory of the Office of the President of
the General Assembly, improving the selection and
appointment process of the Secretaries-General and
other United Nations executive heads, and enhancing
the Assembly’s role and authority.
Unquestionably, Indonesia stands for meaningful
progress on the aforementioned issues, because our
domestic stakeholders demand such progress. We will
continue to play our role in advancing the Group’s
efforts to support the Assembly in assuming its rightful
place in global affairs in an effective manner.
However, the Group can only do so much. While its
meetings and processes, including the inventory chart
of decisions and actions that accompanies the Group’s
annual reports, remain highly useful in monitoring and
orienting efforts to bolster the Assembly’s status, the
Assembly’s revitalization is fundamentally a political
process. It will require significantly greater political
resolve by everyone, with sincere implementation of
existing Assembly resolutions on revitalization.

As the seventieth anniversary of our United Nations
approaches next year, this debate and the forthcoming
sessions of the Working Group are very important in
taking stock of the revitalization efforts thus far and
deliberating on how a more robust, widespread and
dedicated undertaking that strengthens the Assembly’s
functioning can be developed. Certainly, since General
Assembly revitalization became a distinct agenda item
in 1991, and following the 2005 World Summit, at
which the Ad Hoc Working Group was formed, much
important work — with some results — has transpired
under the Group’s four thematic clusters, for which the
Group can rightly be proud.

Resolution 68/307, adopted by consensus on
10 September 2014, reflects the willingness of
the Member States to reinforce the gravity of the
Assembly’s reform and to bolster its functioning as an
invaluable principal organ of the United Nations. It is
in that context that we wish to reiterate the importance
of the General Assembly’s role and scope, in particular
in the realm of international peace and security. We
indeed believe that the Assembly can be more assertive
in assuming its rightful role on issues of peace and
security, which all members need to support. We are
concerned by the continuing shift to the Security
Council of issues that traditionally fall within the
purview of the General Assembly. All Member States,
in our view, should and must have a stake and a say in
issues pertaining to international peace and security.

Yet the Assembly has yet to truly be the chief
deliberative, policymaking and representative organ
of the United Nations, as envisaged in the Charter.
There remains a gap in ensuring that the Assembly
will indeed be the universal parliament of nations, with

If we work together better, cooperate more and,
most importantly, are ready to exercise our respective
political principles to empower the General Assembly
to fully perform its Charter-mandated role, we have
no doubt that the much-sought-after and effective

18/25

14-63492

18/11/2014

revitalization of the Assembly will indeed materialize.
Indonesia calls upon all countries to display their
political will and support the Working Group’s work to
help attain a General Assembly that is able to optimally
heed the calls by the entire spectrum of the international
community in all social, political, peace and security
dimensions.
Mr. Raja Zaib Shah (Malaysia): At the outset,
allow me to commend the Permanent Representatives of
Namibia and Croatia on their appointments as co-chairs
of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization
of the General Assembly at the sixty-ninth session.
Let me also express my appreciation to Mr. František
Ružička, Permanent Representative of Slovakia, and
Mr. Norachit Sinhaseni, Permanent Representative of
Thailand, for their stewardship in the discussion in the
Ad Hoc Working Group during the sixty-eight session.
I wish to align my statement with the statements
delivered by the representatives of Cambodia on behalf
of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and of
Algeria on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. My
delegation would like to highlight some pertinent views
on this agenda item in our collective pursuit of the
revitalization of the work of the General Assembly.
Malaysia has remained consistent in reiterating
that the General Assembly is the chief deliberative,
policymaking and representative organ of the United
Nations, and in highlighting the Asembly’s role in
the process of standard-setting and the codification
of international law. The Assembly represents 193
Member States, and therefore we must duly accord it
the rightful and authoritative place it deserves. We must
ensure that the General Assembly continues its role as
the principal policymaking and norm-setting organ of
the United Nations.
The Ad Hoc Working Group made significant
strides during the sixty-eighth session of the Assembly.
Malaysia was happy to see the adoption of resolution
68/307, on advancing the work of the Working Group.
One important development is the inclusion of
paragraph 17 in the resolution, in which the General
Assembly has agreed to conduct the elections of the
non-permanent members of the Security Council and
the members of the Economic and Social Council
six months before the elected members assume their
responsibilities, beginning at the seventieth session.
That will allow new members to plan ahead and to
increase their missions’ capacity before assuming their
responsibility and enabling their preparations.

A/69/PV.55

While we have made some significant progress,
my delegation is still concerned with the lack
of implementation of various General Assembly
resolutions. That has incapacitated the Assembly, as
it undermines the effectiveness of the body. Malaysia
appreciates the Assembly’s decision to evaluate the
status of implementation of its resolutions and to
build on the progress achieved in past sessions. We
welcome the decision that the Ad Hoc Working Group
will continue its review of the inventory of Assembly
resolutions on revitalization and to update the inventory
chart annexed to those resolutions. That is the first step
in realizing the implementation of all General Assembly
resolutions.
Apart from that, my delegation also believes
that we should consider further deliberations on the
biennialization and triennialization of resolutions.
Malaysia is of the view that that would improve
the work of the General Assembly through a better
scheduling of agenda items. We call on those who call
for the biennialization and triennialization of agenda
items and resolutions to lead by example. In pursuit of
that effort, it is vital that the sponsoring State or States
consent to such measures prior to implementation.
Without a doubt, the General Assembly today
considers a greater number of agenda items and issues
than previously. The increasing number of agenda
items and issues also means the role and activities of
the President of the General Assembly will continue
to increase over the years to come. In that regard, my
delegation wishes to call for the President to be allocated
the necessary resources for him or her to perform the
role entrusted to the Office by the Charter of the United
Nations. At the same time, Malaysia also welcomes the
Ad Hoc Working Group’s proposal to strengthen the
institutional memory of the Office of the President and
its relationship with the Secretariat.
Malaysia would also like to highlight the need for
transparency and inclusiveness in the selection and
appointment of the Secretary-General. The SecretaryGeneral represents all States Members of the United
Nations, and not exclusively Security Council members.
Therefore, the selection process for that important
personality must respect the aspirations of Member
States. We call for the implementation of past resolutions
on the issue, especially paragraphs 17 to 22 of the annex to
resolution 60/286, in future selections and appointments
of the Secretary-General and in view of the selection and
appointment of the next Secretary-General in 2016.

14-6349219/25

A/69/PV.55

Malaysia welcomes the convening of high-level
meetings and high-level thematic debates on issues
that are important to Member States. We believe that
there needs to be greater coordination with all relevant
parties in organizing such meetings so as to avoid or
at least minimize scheduling problems for delegations,
especially during the high-level week of the General
Assembly. We look forward to the implementation of
the proposal to resolve the problem of having too many
meetings and events during the high-level week, such
as exploring the possibility of scheduling such meetings
during the early part of the year.
We must take note of the progress we have made
thus far in our collective quest to revitalize the General
Assembly. Member States must be reminded that the
work of revitalization of the Assembly is not new,
nor will it end anytime soon. We must continue to
press on for further deliberations and to maintain the
momentum in order to attain meaningful progress.
We invite Member States to approach this issue with
openness and demonstrate the political will necessary
to enable us to make real substantial progress on further
enhancing the effectiveness of the General Assembly.
Mr. León González (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
The Cuban delegation aligns itself with the statement
made by the representative of Algeria on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement and would like to make a few
additional comments on this topic.
I would first like to thank the co-Chairs of the
Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of the
Work of the General Assembly for preparing resolution
68/307 on this subject and for their efforts to advance
the process of revitalization of the Assembly. We would
also like to congratulate the representatives of Namibia
and Croatia for their appointment as co-Chairs of the
Ad Hoc Working Group.
The revitalization of the General Assembly is a
critical element in achieving true reform of the United
Nations. At the present time, it will not be possible to
address the overall process of United Nations reform
if we do not prioritize the objective of ensuring a more
democratic and effective Organization that has at its
centre a General Assembly that fully exercises the
powers assigned to it under the Charter. Cuba has stated
on many occasions that this process of revitalization
should seek to recover and strengthen the Assembly’s
central role as the chief deliberative, policymaking
and representative body of the United Nations, as
recognized in the Charter and numerous resolutions
and declarations adopted by the United Nations.
20/25

18/11/2014

In the present circumstances, the goals of the
revitalization process should be directed towards
helping the Assembly strengthen its independence and
its nature as a comprehensive debate body, in which
the freedom of Member States to consider matters of
interest to them is not restricted or limited. To restore
the confidence of the international community in the
United Nations and its credibility in the global public
opinion, we should ensure that our Organization truly
responds to the collective interests of its Member States.
That can be achieved only if we revitalize the guiding
role of the General Assembly, the only organ of the
United Nations where there is no place for hegemony,
where everyone has a say and a vote, and where the
obsolete right to the veto does not exist.
The General Assembly has the ability, de facto
and de jure, to consider crucial and urgent topics
of international reality in order to adopt concrete,
action-oriented resolutions. In our opinion, the
Organization’s main problem is precisely the lack of
implementation of the many Assembly resolutions,
which constitute an important set of standards but
are not always applied because their implementation
depends on the political will of States. That also applies
to the many resolutions on the very subject of Assembly
revitalization, the execution of which is unfortunately
very limited.
Cuba stresses the need to find an appropriate balance
among the principal organs of the United Nations, in
accordance with the Charter, and to put an end to the
growing trend of the Security Council to address issues
that fall within the jurisdiction of General Assembly
or another principal organ of the Organization. The
Security Council should strictly observe the mandate
conferred on it by the Charter and resolutions of the
General Assembly in its capacity as a principal organ
of the United Nations.
The revitalization of the General Assembly cannot
be a bureaucratic process. As Padre Miguel d’Escoto
Brockmann, of the sister Republic of Nicaragua, wisely
stated in his farewell address as President of the General
Assembly at its sixty-third session, revitalization is a
political rather than a technical issue (see A/63/PV.105).
We hope that as a result of the revitalization process,
interaction between the Secretariat and the Assembly
will be strengthened so that the former can respond
more effectively to the mandates set by Member States.
The Ad Hoc Working Group on Revitalization
must maintain strict control over the implementation
14-63492

18/11/2014

A/69/PV.55

of resolutions related to its mandate and maintain the
appropriate updated inventory chart, which includes
resolutions relating to the revitalization of the General
Assembly. We already possess a broad legal arsenal
with respect to the needed revitalization of this essential
organ. The priority now is to amplify the numerous
resolutions already adopted and to move forward
decisively towards the practical implementation of the
reform process.

working methods of the Main Committees, and free
the Assembly’s agenda of outdated topics in order to
allocate more time to addressing important, pressing
and contemporary issues. Those should be among the
Working Group’s highest priorities. By suggesting
key areas for tangible improvement of the Assembly’s
working methods, the Working Group can maintain its
focus on aspects of revitalization that will result in a
real difference for the work of the General Assembly.

We must urgently take specific, practical steps in
the revitalization of the work of the General Assembly.
The Organizatin will not be capable of acting effectively
within the system of contemporary international
relations without reforming the Security Council and
making the General Assembly the centre of multilateral
debate and work.

We recognize that many delegations continue to
focus on other aspects of the Assembly’s work, such as
the role and authority of the President of the General
Assembly, the working methods of the Security Council
or the process to select the Secretary-General. While
these are important topics, we do not believe that they
should be the primary focus of the Working Group’s
efforts. The Charter of the United Nations makes clear
the coequal relationship between the General Assembly
and the Security Council, which should be respected.
In our view, the selection process for the SecretaryGeneral has already been adequately addressed. Article
97 of the Charter provides a straightforward and clear
process.

The delegation of Cuba would like to close by
reiterating its readiness to continue to work together to
achieve the true revitalization of the General Assembly.
Ms. Hamilton (United States of America): The
United States would like to thank last year’s co-Chairs
of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of
the Work of the General Assembly — the Permanent
Representative of Slovakia, Mr. František Ružička, and
the Permanent Representative of Thailand, Mr. Norachit
Sinhaseni — for their leadership of the Group. We
welcome the new co-Chairs, Ambassador Vladimir
Drobnjak of Croatia and Ambassador Wilfried I.
Emvula of Namibia, and offer them our full support.
We also look forward to working with fellow Member
States as we consider the best options for revitalizing
the General Assembly.
During the sixty-eighth session, the Working Group
discussed many issues of paramount importance to the
efficacy of the General Assembly, which we strongly
hope will continue in the sixty-ninth session under the
leadership of our esteemed co-Chairs. We believe that
the Assembly is a unique body of great importance
in today’s world — a fact that was emphasized by the
attendance of world leaders at the general debate in
September, as well as the by day-to-day work of all our
colleagues here today.
In order to ensure that the General Assembly
maintains its unique status among the world’s
deliberative bodies, the United States believes that we
must increase the Assembly’s efficiency, effectiveness
and transparency. To do so, we must streamline and
prioritize the agenda, improve the practices and

The United States is fully committed to multilateral
engagement in a strong United Nations system. We
support the contributions of the General Assembly in
that regard. Accordingly, our delegation has made it
a priority to make the work of the General Assembly
more focused and relevant. We call on Member States
to refocus their attention on efforts to reform the
Asssembly’s working methods.
My delegation looks forward to working closely with
you, Mr. President, the co-Chairs, and our counterparts
from other delegations towards a constructive dialogue
for concrete reform.
Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like first of all to commend the
remarkable work and tireless efforts of Mr. František
Ružička and Mr. Norachit Sinhaseni, Permanent
Representatives of Slovakia and Thailand, respectively,
for their role as co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working
Group on the Revitalization of the Working Methods
of the General Assembly at its sixty-eighth session. We
also take this opportunity to congratulate Mr. Vladimir
Drobnjak, Permanent Representative of Croatia, and
Mr. Wilfried Emvula, Permanent Representative of
Nambia, on their recent appointment as facilitators of
the Ad Hoc Working Group, and to assure them of our
full cooperation.

14-6349221/25

A/69/PV.55

My delegation would like to associate itself with
the statement delivered on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
Today’s debate addresses an issue that occupies
a central place in the reform of the United Nations. It
involves the major challenges that concern us, namely,
the balance between the organs of the United Nations;
the role, responsibility and effectiveness of the General
Assembly; and the modernization of its working
methods. The General Assembly holds a central place
as the primary deliberative organ tasked with setting the
direction of the Organization, defining international
economic, social and cultural cooperation; and
establishing norms and codifying the implementation
of international law.
For the past 20 years, the Assembly has adopted
various measures to strengthen its role and authority,
as well as those of its President. The Assembly has also
sought to refocus its work in order to better address
contemporary and future global challenges such
as strengthening international peace and security,
combating the ever-growing phenomenon of terrorism,
strengthening the means to prevent and combat the
re-emergence of crises and conflicts, and preventing
the deterioration of our environment and biodiversity.
Furthermore, the countdown has begun. Within the next
few months, world leaders must adopt a programme for
the post-2015 development agenda, agreeing on new
development goals designed to improve the people’s
lives and protect our planet for future generations.
The recent resolutions adopted by the General
Assembly have made possible a certain degree of
progress towards the revitalization of the work of the
General Assembly. However, much remains to be done.
The strategic objectives on which we need to continue
to work include improving the practices and working
methods of the Main Committees; strengthening the role
of the Office of the President of the General Assembly
and providing it with a permanent structure in order to
preserve the institutional memory of the Assembly and
to enable the President to more effectively discharge
the functions with which he has been entrusted;
consolidating the role and authority of the President;
and more efficiently organizing the Assembly’s agenda.
Achieving those objectives will make the main
deliberative organ a strong, credible and effective body
that is able to meet the new challenges of the twentyfirst century and to contribute to building a peaceful,
more prosperous and more just world. That work must be
22/25

18/11/2014

conducted with respect for the provisions of the Charter
of the United Nations and for the balance it establishes,
particularly between the General Assembly and the
Security Council, in order to preserve the harmonious
relationship between those two principal organs and to
avoid any interference or encroachment.
A bigger effort at rationalization is needed in order
to fill the gaps, avoid redundancies and strengthen
the Assembly’s effectiveness, while bearing in mind
the need to rationalize the financial aspects of the
Organization. That revitalization effort should include
a search for ways and means to make more effective the
work of the various subsidiary organs of the Assembly,
particularly its Main Committees.
We should not lose sight of the fact that through the
revitalization of the General Assembly and the reform of
the Security Council, the international community seeks
to restore and strengthen confidence in multilateralism,
and thereby in the United Nations, as the proper
framework to ensure fair and equal consideration of
the legitimate interests and aspirations of all Member
States. Promoting the revitalization process requires
the commitment of all Member States and unwavering
political will to advance multilateralism and its noble
objectives.
Finally, the establishment of effective and fair
governance remains dependant on revitalizing the
United Nations system on the basis of realism,
effectiveness and innovation as the key parameters in
the search for solutions that meet the aspirations of both
present and future generations.
Mrs. Zarrouk Boumiza (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, I would like to thank the representatives
of Slovakia and Thailand for their efforts in co-chairing
the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of the
Work of the General Assembly.
My delegation concurs with the statement made
by the representative of Algeria on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement. We would also like to make
the following comments.
With regard to strengthening the role and authority
of the General Assembly, we believe that revitalization
is one of the pillars of the comprehensive reform of
the United Nations. The General Assembly is the main
deliberative organ of the Organization. It plays a role
in the codification of international law and addresses
administrative and budgetary issues. We must redouble
our efforts to revitalize the Assembly. Indeed, we must
14-63492

18/11/2014

continue to review resolutions on the subject, as they
represent important criteria for assessing progress.
My delegation believes that strengthening
the Assembly’s role also requires considering the
viewpoints and interests of all countries and the
international community as a whole. The Assembly
must assist in dealing with emerging challenges. We
must also accelerate efforts to achieve the Millennium
Development Goals as we approach 2015.
My delegation also highlights the importance of the
General Assembly’s continuing to organize thematic
debates as a tool to enable the international community
to exchange opinions and views on important issues.
We are convinced that such debates will continue at this
session and result in pragmatic, concrete results. My
delegation also underscores the importance of followup.
Strengthening the work of the General Assembly
also involves recognizing its role in the maintenance
of international peace and security. The Charter of the
United Nations attributes the major responsibility in
that area to the Security Council, but my delegation
believes that this authority is not absolute. We believe
that the Assembly should respond more quickly on
issues related to international peace and security.
We also believe that the contents of the annual
Security Council report should be improved. The report
should be more analytical and in-depth and should
reflect the context of decision-making, keeping in mind
situations for which no solution was found.
We believe it important to hold periodic meetings
among the heads of the main bodies and that countries
must be kept informed of such meetings. I also note
the importance of strengthening cooperation among the
main bodies, including with respect to their respective
programmes of work, with a view to strengthening
complementarity.
Regarding the working methods of the Assembly
and their improvement, my delegation notes that a
number of measures that have been taken have led to
improvements in that respect, including the convening of
high-level meetings. However, we must engage in more
in-depth discussion of a number of recommendations,
in particular concerning the appointment of Committee
Chairs with sufficient advance notice; planning shorter
meeting; exchanging best practices, bearing in mind the
specificities of each of the Main Committees; avoiding

A/69/PV.55

simultaneous meetings of the General Assembly and
the other main bodies with respect to agenda items; and
coordinating the planning of high-level meetings.
We thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for
his efforts to strengthen the overall role of the United
Nations and to consult with Member States in a spirit
of transparency and cooperation, in order to develop a
common vision to enable the Organization to attain the
goals set by the international community.
We also call for improving the process of electing
and appointing the executive heads of the United
Nations bodies. In that regard, we should take into
account the recommendations of the Joint Inspection
Unit on interviews for candidates, as well as the
principle of equitable geographic distribution in such
appointments.
With respect to the support to be given to the
Office of the President of the General Assembly, it
must be sufficient so that the President can deal with
his areas of responsibility. Moreover, the duties of that
Office should not increase financial burden on lower
income States. However, it is important to maintain the
Organization’s institutional memory, bearing in mind
lessons learned, in order to improve the administration
of the work of the General Assembly.
We reiterate our support for resolution 68/307,
including the decision to establish, at the sixty-ninth
session, an ad hoc working group on the revitalization
of the work of the Assembly. We congratulate the
representatives of Namibia and Croatia on their
appointments to as co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working
Group.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
current international situation is undergoing profound
changes. All manner of new threats and challenges
continue to emerge one after another. Interlinked
security issues, traditional and non-traditional, require
joint responses from the international community. The
international community expects the United Nations to
play a more important role in safeguarding global peace,
promoting multilateral development and advancing
international cooperation.
The General Assembly, with its 193 members, is
the most universal and representative organ under the
Charter of the United Nations, as well as the chief
policymaking and deliberative organ. Member States in
general, and the developing countries in particular, hope

14-6349223/25

A/69/PV.55

that the Assembly will continue to improve its work,
enhance its role and authority, and fully implement its
Charter-mandated functions.
The General Assembly should focus more on its
policy-deliberation function and promote the vigorous
participation of Member States in its work. It should
also set its priorities in the light of current developments
in the international situation and concentrate on major
issues touching on the interests of Member States,
especially development, which is a common concern
of the developing countries. At this session the
Assembly should focus on prioritizing and increasing
investment in development and play an important role
in formulating the post-2015 development agenda and
promoting sustainable development.
As principal organs of the United Nations, the
General Assembly, the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council should improve their
coordination and division of labour and continue
to exploit the comparative advantages in their
respective fields, while enhancing interaction and
information-exchange and forming synergies. In the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
General Assembly should enhance coordination and
cooperation with the Security Council in accordance
with the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations.
China takes note of the results achieved by the
General Assembly in improving its working methods
in the election of the non-permanent members of the
Security Council and the members of the Economic
and Social Council. We will continue to support the
Assembly’s efforts to improve its working methods, to
rationalize its decision-making process, strengthen its
efficiency and build a pragmatic and action-oriented
culture.
The efficient functioning of the Office of the
President of the General Assembly is important in
guaranteeing the success of the Assembly’s. efforts
China favours enhancing support for the Office of
the President in terms of the budget and human
resources, particularly in connection with resolving the
difficulties encountered by developing countries when
they assume the presidency of the General Assembly.
In recent years, China has contributed to the trust fund
to support of the Office of the President of the General
Assembly. We hope that all parties will take concrete
measures to support that Office.
The revitalization of the General Assembly
involves the interests of all Member States. China
24/25

18/11/2014

firmly supports revitalizing the Assembly and the
President’s efforts in that regard. China congratulates
the Permanent Representatives of Croatia and Namibia
on their assumption of the co-chairmanship of the Ad
Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of the Work
of the General Assembly at this session. It is our hope
that, in the framework of the Ad Hoc Working Group,
all parties will pursue the principles of democratic
consultations and incremental progress and will
address the easier issues first, while steadily pushing
for the implementation of Assembly resolutions on
revitalization.
The membership as a whole maintains high
expectations regarding revitalization. We stand ready
to work with other Member States in jointly seeking
progress at this session on the important item of the
revitalization of the General Assembly.
Mr. Adamov (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): The
delegation of the Republic of Belarus aligns itself with
the statement made by the representative of Algeria
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM).
We take this opportunity to express our gratitude to
Algeria for its consistent and systematic formulation
and advancement of the NAM position in the work of
the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of the
Work of the General Assembly.
We also express our sincere appreciation for the
organization of the work of the Ad Hoc Working Group
by the representatives and experts of the delegations of
Slovakia and Thailand. Our delegation is prepared to
work actively and constructively under the chairmanship
of the representatives of Croatia and Namibia.
The Belarusian delegation welcomes the opportunity
provided by the adoption of the relevant resolution
(resolution 68/307) to draw Member States’ attention
to the procedure for selecting the Secretary-General, in
accordance with the rules of procedure of the General
Assembly. The Belarusian delegation considers it
important that, for the first time in over 40 years,
every State, large and small, will be able to express its
opinion regarding the next selection of the SecretaryGeneral by means of a genuinely secret ballot in the
General Assembly.
Our delegation also welcomes the request contained
in the resolution for an appropriate gender balance
in a number of the Organization’s duty posts. We
sincerely regret the fact that during the 70 years of the
Organization’s history, that principle has not affected

14-63492

18/11/2014

the main administrative post of the Organization. We
therefore believe it highly important, overdue and timely
to elect a woman to the post of Secretary-General.
The Belarusian delegation also welcomes the
implementation of a predictable mechanism for rotating
the chairmanships of the Main Committees, which will
be put into practice at this session. We look forward to
further productive work in that area, as called for in the
resolution.
Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): I have the honour to
deliver a joint statement on behalf of Namibia and
Croatia.
At the outset, allow me to thank the President of
the General Assembly for appointing my colleague, the
Ambassador of Namibia, and me as co-Chairs of the Ad
Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of the Work
of the General Assembly. We feel deeply honoured and
privileged to be given the opportunity to participate in
such a vital and far-reaching process.
We have taken careful note of today’s debate and
will take everything that has been said as guidelines

A/69/PV.55

in our future work. In our efforts, we are not starting
from scratch; on the contrary, significant work has
been done so far, including the adoption of resolution
68/307 on 10 September, and we take this opportunity
to highly commend our predecessors and dear friends,
Ambassadors Ružička of Slovakia and Sinhaseni of
Thailand, for their personal commitment and leadership
in that regard. We stand at the disposal of the Member
States for consultations, exchange of views and the
exploration new ideas in the months to come.
Let me conclude by saying that we are looking
forward to working with all Members and express our
thanks, once again, for the privilege and opportunity
of facilitating the General Assembly’s revitalization
process.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate on these agenda items.
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda items 117 and 118.
The meeting rose at 12.50 p.m.

14-6349225/25
