87

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Convention on Psychotro~ic Substances_10 and the 19~2
Protocol Amending the Smgle Convention on Narcotic
Drugs, 1961, 11
Expressing its satisfaction that d~ring 1975 ~veral
additional States have become parties to those instruments,
Mindful, however, that the 1971 Conve1:1tion on Psychotropic Substances has not yet entered mto force,
Convinced that the entry into force of that Convention would constitute an important step towards the
establishment of effective international control of the
licit trade and the prevention of illicit traffic in psychotropic substances,
Recognizing the need to mai~tain m?mentum in the
systematic strengthening of the mtemat1onal drug control system,
1. Expresses the hope that the 1971 ~onvention on
Psychotropic Substances will soon enter mto force;
2. Urges all States not yet parties to that Convention, in particular those which are directly concern~
in ,the manufacture and production of and trade m
psychotropic substances, to take urgent action to adhere to it;
3. Requests the Secretary,;,General to transmit the
present appeal to the Governments of those States.
2433rd plenary meeting
9 December 1975

3444 (XXX). 1972 Protocol Amending the
Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961
The General Assembly,
A ware that the 1972 Protocol Amending the Single
Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961, 11 has entered
into force,
Mindful that the Protocol in~reases the responsib~ties of the International Narcotics Control Board with
a view inter alia to ensuring, in collaboration with
Goven::ments world-wide availability of narcotic drugs
required for 'medical and scientific purposes, while_ at
the same time preventing illicit cultivation, production
and manufacture of and illicit trafficking in and use of
such drugs, .
Noting that all measures taken by the Board under
the Convention are to be those most consistent with the
intent to further Governments' co-operation with the
Board and to provide the mechanism for a co!ltinuing
dialogue between Governments and the Board m order
to assist and facilitate effective national action to attain
the aims of the Convention,
Noting also that the Protocol specifically empowers
the Board to recommend to the competent United
Nations organs and to the specialized agencies _that
technical or financial assistance, or both, be provtded
to Governments in support of their efforts to oarry out
their obligations under the Convention,
1. Invites Governments to co-operate fully with the
International Narcotics Control Board in its efforts to
carry out its increased responsibilities;
10 See Official Records of the United Nations Conference
for the adoption of a Protocol on Psychotropic S~b,tances,
vol. I (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.73.xl.3),
pert four.
11 See Official Records of. tlu United Nations Conference to
consider amendments to the Single Convention on Narcotic
Drugs, 1961, vol. I (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.73Xil.7), part three.

2. Invites the Secretary-General to continue to pr~
vide the support necessary to enable the _B~~d and its
secretariat to assume these new respons1b1hties;
3. Requests the competent United Nations organs,
especially the United Nations Fwd for _Drug ~buse
Control and the specialized agencies to give particular
attentio~ to recommendations made by the B?ard c<;>ncerning the provision of technical and financial assts!anceto -support Governments' efforts to carry out the!r
obligations under the Single Convention on Narcotic
Drugs, 1961. 12
2433rd plenary meeting
9 December 1975

3445 (XXX). Adequate priority for
narcotics control
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the increasing responsi~ilities entrusted to the United Nations through treaties for the
control of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances,
Mindful of the deep concern of a large number of
Governments over the growing threat caused by the
spread of drug abuse in certain parts of the world, ~s
confirmed by the overwhelming support accorded to its
resolutions and those adopted by the Economic and
Social Council during the past few years,
Recognizing that these developments hav~ led to a
considerable increase in the work to be earned out by
the competent United Nations bodies under their regular and statutory obligations,
Recalling its resolution 3279 (XXIX) of 10 December 1974 in which it noted with appreciation the activities of the International Narcotics Control Board
and of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs in the field
of the control of illicit traffic and the struggle against
the abuse of drugs,
Having regard to Economic and Social Council resolution 1910 (LVII) of 2 August 1974 relating to priorities in the economic, social and human rights fields.
Requests the Secretary-General, in preparing and
presenting the proposed_ )1.r~e budge~ and the
medium-term plan, to give particular attention to the
resources requested for th~ competent United Nations
bodies and their secretariats, in view of this increased
work in drug control, in order to ensure th~t,. ~ the
light of the importance attdbuted to these aetivities by
the General Assembly and •the Economic and Social
Council, adequate priority will be given and the necessary resources allocated.
2433rd plenary meeting
9 December 1975
3446 (XXX). United Nations Fund for
Drug Abuse Control
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3145 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973 concerning the urgent need for providing
adequate financial resources . to enable the United
Nations Fund for Drug Abuse Control to continue and
expand its activities to &Mist the developing countries
concerned in carrying out their respective narcotics
control programmes,
Aware that the financial resources of the Fund remain insufficient in the face of the continuing serious
menace of drug abuse,
1

12 United Nations, Treaty Seri~s, vol. 520, No. 7515, p.

151.
