A/66/PV.124

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-sixth session

124th plenary meeting

Friday, 3 August 2012, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Al-Nasser. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The meeting was called to order at 11.15 a.m.
Agenda item 34 (continued)
Prevention of armed conflict
Draft resolution (A/66/L.57*)
The President: Before we proceed, I would like
to remind members that the debate on agenda item 34
and its sub-item (a) will take place at a later date, to be
announced.
Members will recall that, under agenda item 34, the
Assembly adopted resolution 66/253, at its 97th plenary
meeting, held on 16 February, and heard a report by the
Secretary-General, in accordance with paragraph 12 of
that resolution, on the implementation of the resolution
at its 99th plenary meeting, on 2 March.
(spoke in Arabic)
We are meeting at a time of unprecedented
violence in the Syrian Arab Republic. Recently,
Syrian Government forces intensified their military
operations against areas presumed to be strongholds of
anti-Government armed groups, in particular the cities
of Damascus and Aleppo. Gross violations of human
rights are occurring on a daily basis, in the context
of increasingly militarized fighting. The League of
Arab States, the Human Rights Council and the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights have
repeatedly stated that those acts may amount to crimes
against humanity and other international crimes.
I am deeply concerned about this horrifying
escalation. I condemn the continued widespread

(Qatar)

atrocities and violations of international humanitarian
law by the Syrian authorities. There are horrifying
reports of mass killings, rape, extrajudicial executions,
torture and the deliberate targeting of civilians. All
parties to the conflict have responsibilities to adhere
to under international law. Those responsible must be
held accountable.
It is time to act. Words are not enough. The
international community has the responsibility to
act without further delay. I deeply regret that the
Security Council has again been unable to unite and
take collective action to put an immediate end to the
appalling crisis in Syria. The deadlock in the Council
sends the wrong signal to all parties in the Syrian
conflict.
In times of deadlock, the General Assembly has a
role to play in the maintenance of international peace
and security in accordance with the United Nations
Charter. Today, once again, the Assembly proves its
power and authority. We have to provide the necessary
assistance to the people of the Syrian Arab Republic
and find an all-inclusive and peaceful solution to the
crisis.
The General Assembly resolution adopted on
16 February (resolution 66/253) paved the way for the
appointment of Kofi Annan as the Joint Special Envoy
of the United Nations and the League of Arab States
and, subsequently, the adoption of his six-point plan.
His has not been an easy task. That is why I expressed
my regret as soon as I learned yesterday of Mr. Annan’s
intention not to renew his mandate when it expires at
the end of this month.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U‑506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

12-44939 (E)

*1244939*

A/66/PV.124

That announcement — which I can understand —
obliges us more than ever to resolutely persevere and to
take additional measures to protect the Syrian people
from the continuing atrocities to which they are being
subjected.
Today we build still further on resolution 66/253. The
six-point plan is not being implemented. The violence is
increasing. We gather today to face our responsibilities.
We have no choice but to take necessary action in a
credible way. The credibility of the United Nations is
at stake, as is regional stability in the Middle East. The
lives of thousands of innocent people depend upon our
response. I urge all Member States to fulfil our task by
voting in support of the draft resolution before us today.
(spoke in English)
I now give the floor to
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon.

His

Excellency

The Secretary-General: Eight days ago, I visited
Srebrenica, Bosnia and Herzegovina. Srebrenica
represents one of the darkest chapters in the
Organization’s history, a time when the international
community failed to protect civilians from slaughter.
Partly in reaction to genocide in Srebrenica and in
Rwanda, world leaders came together under the aegis
of the United Nations to support the concept of the
responsibility to protect. Governments renewed their
commitment to protect their populations, including
particularly vulnerable communities, and leaders agreed
to work collectively when faced with Governments
unable, or unwilling, to protect their citizens. Today,
we are all witnesses to the horrors of Syria being ripped
apart by violence. I thank the President of the General
Assembly for organizing this important meeting.
As we meet here, Aleppo, one of the most ancient
and storied cities in the world and a UNESCO World
Heritage Site, is the epicentre of a vicious battle
between the Syrian Government and those who wish to
replace it. The acts of brutality that are being reported
may constitute crimes against humanity or war crimes.
Such acts must be investigated and the perpetrators held
to account.
Many thousands of Syrians have been displaced
by, and are at risk from, the fighting. Many desperately
need humanitarian assistance. Despite repeated
verbal acceptances of the six-point plan endorsed by
the Security Council, both the Government and the
opposition continue to rely on weapons, not diplomacy,

2

in the belief that they will win through violence. But
there are no winners in Aleppo today — or anywhere
else in the country. The losers in the escalating battle
are the people of Syria.
What is especially tragic about Syria is that the
current catastrophe was avoidable. Nearly 18 months
ago, knowledgeable observers predicted that if the Syrian
Government responded to peaceful demonstrations with
brutal force, including mass roundups and torture — as
in fact it did — then demonstrations would increasingly
turn violent. They also predicted that the unchecked
spread of violence would lead to a rise in radicalization,
extremism and terrorism. We were also forewarned
about the next step: a proxy war, with regional and
international players arming one side or the other.
All of those dire predictions have come to pass.
Now we face the grim possibility of long-term civil
war, destroying Syria’s rich tapestry of interwoven
communities. That would have tragic implications for
Syria’s people and could affect stability across the
region. We must not let that prediction come true. All
of us have a responsibility to the people of Syria. We
must use all of the peaceful means provided for in the
United Nations Charter to help them unite around a
Syrian-led transition process that is based on dialogue
and compromise, not bullets and arrests.
I have said many times how much I regret the
divisions that have paralysed action in the Security
Council. On 30 June in Geneva, Foreign Ministers of
the Action Group on Syria, including the five permanent
members of the Council, agreed on an action plan.
Now, with the situation having worsened, they must
again find common ground. The immediate interests of
the Syrian people must be paramount over any larger
rivalries over influence.
Despite the difficulties, the United Nations is
active on the ground. Through the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and our country
team, we continue to deliver humanitarian assistance
to those whom we can reach. The United Nations
Supervision Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic,
despite the deteriorating security environment, plays
an essential role in monitoring developments. United
Nations human rights officials continue to work
towards documentation that can help with essential
accountability. And the Joint Special Envoy, Kofi
Annan, in accordance with the mandate provided by
the Assembly in resolution 66/253 and by the League

12-44939

A/66/PV.124

Arab States in February, has sought to engage with
Syrians across the political spectrum — and with those
who have influence inside Syria — in an attempt to use
diplomacy to end the bloodshed and move towards a
Syrian-led political transition.
Yesterday I announced with deep regret the
resignation of the Joint Special Envoy. Kofi Annan
deserves our deepest admiration for his efforts over
the past several months. He brought tremendous skill
and determination to the task, and I am indebted to him
and his team for all they have tried to achieve. Yet both
the Government and the opposition forces spurned the
hand offered to them and continue to demonstrate their
determination to rely on violence. The sharp differences
in the Security Council themselves made the Envoy’s
work more difficult.
I am consulting with League of Arab States
Secretary-General Nabil El Araby on the appointment
of a successor to carry on that crucial peacemaking
effort. But let me be clear: mediation can only succeed
when there is a commitment to solving conflict through
dialogue, and real leverage to back it up. I want to praise
the commitment and courage of all those in the United
Nations family who are working in Syria. I shudder
to think how much worse the situation would be if the
United Nations were absent. I urge Member States to
continue to provide support and the mandate for our
work.
The conflict in Syria is a test of everything that
the Organization stands for. I do not want today’s
United Nations to fail that test. I want us all to show
the people of Syria and the world that we have learned
the lessons of Srebrenica. United international pressure
can make a difference. The Syrian people need action.
Their aspirations have been denied. Their suffering
is profound, and the increasing militarization only
promises worse. The primary responsibility for stopping
the violence rests with those on the ground, particularly
the Government. But their refusal to lay down arms
does not absolve the rest of us of the need to act. I urge
all members of the Assembly to face up to the collective
responsibilities we shoulder.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Saudi Arabia to introduce draft
resolution A/66/L.57*.
Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in
Arabic): I should like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having convened this meeting to discuss the situation
in the Syrian Arab Republic. I am honoured to address

the General Assembly today in my capacity as Chair of
the Group of Arab States and on behalf of the nearly 60
States that have joined in sponsoring draft resolution
A/66/L.57*.
A few months ago, on 16 February, the General
Assembly adopted resolution 66/253, based on the
decisions of the Arab League. Pursuant to that,
Mr. Kofi Annan was appointed Joint Special Envoy on
behalf of both the United Nations and the Arab League.
Since then, Mr. Annan has sought a peaceful and
comprehensive solution to the Syrian crisis, starting
with, among other things, the six-point plan, which was
followed by the establishment of the United Nations
Supervision Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic
and, more recently, by the the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/523, annex). During that time, Mr. Annan
attempted to achieve the most basic of goals: stopping
the Government killing machine, which has been
slaughtering the courageous Syrian people, the use
of heavy weapons and attacks on, and bombings of,
residential neighbourhoods, and allowing humanitarian
assistance to be delivered to hundreds of thousands of
those affected.
What was the response to the six-point plan?
There were six massacres: in Bab Amr, Rastan, Houla,
Tremseh, Qubair and, today, Aleppo. Moreover, instead
of protecting the international observers and facilitating
their mission, the Syrian authorities left them in danger
and in fear for their lives, leading them to pull back
and take refuge in their residences. As for the political
solution, it was nowhere to be found. On 11 July
Mr. Annan delivered a report to the Security Council
in which he held the Syrian authorities primarily
responsible for the deterioration of the situation, the
continued violations of human rights and the intensified
military action, including the use of heavy weapons.
However, when Mr. Annan appealed to the Council
to demand unanimously that the Syrian Government
abide by its obligations and understand that a failure to
comply would have consequences, the Council’s efforts
were blocked by a double veto that implied that the
Council was turning a blind eye to the painful reality
of Syria’s situation. That reality that has become a
grave threat to peace and security at the regional and
international levels, in addition to the contribution that
these actions have made to the suffering of the Syrian
people.
With that in mind, the group of sponsoring States
felt obliged to bring the matter before the General
Assembly to demand that it uphold its responsibilities

12-449393

A/66/PV.124

in the face of the Security Council’s failure to deal
with the crisis and respond swiftly to the Joint Special
Envoy’s appeal. We are therefore introducing draft
resolution A/66/L.57* with the goal of reaffirming
that the international community will not tolerate what
is happening in Syria or accept the ongoing killings,
persecution and massacres, and that it is time to launch
a peaceful transfer of power in order to fulfil the
aspirations of the Syrian people and preserve the blood
of their children. Moreover, the draft resolution aims
to guarantee the security, safety, equality, rights and
duties of every sector of the Syrian people, whatever
their ethnic, religious or sectarian affiliations, as well
as to assert the joint responsibility of the international
community for protecting Syrian citizens and
maintaining international peace and security.
The most recent development in the Syrian crisis
is Mr. Annan’s abandonment of his mission as an
expression of his frustration and impotence in the
face of the Security Council’s failure to give him the
support, tools and means necessary for the success of
his mission. In addition, the violent air and artillery
attacks that Syrian troops continue to mount against
the city of Aleppo while branding it an enemy make
this action more important than ever. Meanwhile, the
States sponsoring the draft resolution responded to
the observations of various Member States during
the consultative meetings by making appropriate
amendments based on their suggestions and views.
We therefore introduce this draft resolution in full
confidence that the conscience of the world will not
ignore the distress and cries of the Syrian people, who
are facing the artillery and tanks head on. We urge the
Assembly, in the name of the children of Bab Amr, the
martyrs of Aleppo, the victims of Qubair and Houla,
and Syrian men and women everywhere, to uphold its
humanitarian, moral and historical responsibilities by
voting with us in favour of the draft resolution.

item 34, entitled “Prevention of armed conflict”; yet, by
providing weapons to the terrorist groups, those same
States have played a major role in weaponizing the
Syrian situation and thwarting the achievement of the
desired political solution. The members of the General
Assembly know all about those activities. The French
Minister for Foreign Affairs acknowledged as much
only three days ago, when he noted that the armed
groups,
“are being supplied with weapons. According to
the information we have, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and
probably others are supplying weapons.”
Various Western media sources have confirmed
the same, adding that American anti-aircraft Stinger
missiles had been delivered to the armed groups via
Turkey.
In addition, some sponsors of the draft resolution
have been leading a hysterical, politicized media and
intelligence campaign against my country. They have
provided all sorts of financial and logistical support
to the armed terrorist groups, while supplying nothing
of the sort to the honest, peaceful and legitimate
domestic opposition. Those States have also provided
the armed groups with political and media support and
enforced unilateral sanctions that not only conflict with
the six-point plan, but also constitute an unjust and
illegitimate siege against the Syrian nation, in violation
of relevant United Nations resolutions.

The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/66/L.57, entitled “The situation in
the Syrian Arab Republic”. Before giving the floor to
those who wish to speak in explanation of vote before
the voting, may I remind delegations that explanations
of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.

Those actions have exacerbated the same
humanitarian situation on the ground that certain parties
have lamented in their statements. If those same States
that have expressed concern over the humanitarian
situation in Syria were sincerely concerned, they would
have allocated the billions of dollars spent on financing
and arming terrorist groups and providing them with
communication systems and lethal equipment towards
humanitarian assistance instead. It should be noted that
all of the promises made by those States with respect to
providing humanitarian assistance were no more than
a distraction to make the Syrian Government appear
as the obstacle to such assistance. No one in Syria has
seen any evidence of such assistance so far, in spite of
an agreement made several months ago with the United
Nations concerning the humanitarian response plan.

Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): It is strangely paradoxical that the States
that sponsored the draft resolution contained in
document A/66/L.57* have submitted it under agenda

At the same time, the greatest fallacy is that certain
sponsors of the draft resolution — including Saudi
Arabia, Bahrain and Qatar — can in no way, shape
or form be considered as bastions of democracy and

4

12-44939

A/66/PV.124

respect for human rights. Those States are governed
by despotic oligarchies that have not hesitated in
oppressing their people and killing peaceful protesters
both within and outside their borders. The level of
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in
those countries is considered to be among the worst in
the world, according to well-documented reports issued
by international human rights and legal institutions, as
well as by members of the Saudi Arabian, Baharaini and
Qatari opposition both in those countries and among
the diasporas.
Moreover, other States sponsoring the draft
resolution include major contributors to the deliberate
deterioration of the situation in Syria. They lack any
credibility with respect to compliance with United
Nations resolutions, given previous experiences that
have confirmed that those States manipulated many
resolutions that they themselves crafted to suit their own
interests and to create excuses for military intervention
in other States. Such excuses have included eliminating
weapons of mass destruction and protecting civilians
and human rights, along with many other important
humanitarian principles. Those were in fact never truly
their objectives, but merely slogans used to intervene in
the affairs of other States, force change in systems of
Government, and push States into civil war, sectarian
conflict and general chaos.
In that respect, we draw the attention of Member
States to the danger of subjecting this international
Organization to media-generated financial and political
pressure. In that manner, those same States have
provided cover for the spread of religiously sanctioned
terrorism throughout the world and for underminig
stability and security. We also wish to highlight the
danger of having the Organization contribute to efforts
to convey some kind of legitimacy to agendas that have
resulted in eroding the confidence of Member States in
the rule of law at the international level, especially after
the invasions of Afghanistan, Iraq and Libya and the
manipulation of the fate of many developing countries,
especially in Africa.
Syria has experienced a series of suicide terrorist
attacks in the course of the current crisis. The relevant
Syrian authorities have succeeded in arresting and
killing a large number of Arab and non-Arab terrorists
belonging to Al-Qaida and other Salafi and Wahabi
extremist groups that are ideologically and intellectually
affiliated with Al-Qaida. The paradox there is that
some of the countries that have continuously denounced

terrorism and the activities of Al-Qaida and have
waged war under the same slogan are today, directly or
indirectly, supporting the increasing terrorist activities
of Al-Qaida and other extremist terrorist groups in
Syria, in an effort to create chaos. It is no longer a
secret that some States have facilitated, financed and
incited the sending of terrorists to Syria from all over
the world. From that perspective we can understand how
the sponsors of the draft resolution have deliberately
avoided any reference to those terrorists in the draft
resolution, for in so doing they would have had to
denounce themselves, before denouncing the terrorists.
Many Western countries that are combating
so-called terrorist sleeper cells in their territories are
at the same time awakening similar terrorist sleeper
cells in Syria. Some Arab, regional and internationally
well-known States have been carrying out public
organized campaigns to incite violence and terrorist
acts in Syria, despite it being well known that all of the
domestic criminal statutes of Member States stipulate
that the instigator of a crime shall receive a punishment
equal to that of the perpetrator. Also, resolutions of
the United Nations and international conventions,
especially those related to criminal justice and the fight
against terrorism, stipulate that States, groups and
individuals that incite violence and terrorism should
be criminalized as well. In addition, the Holy Koran
itself states that, when it comes to inciting murder and
discord,God says that discord and internal dissent are
worse than acts of murder.
The question that we all must address here today,
therefore, is whether the intention of the draft resolution
before the Assembly truly is to implement national and
international laws in order to hold accountable those
involved in inciting terrorism and violence and causing
the murder of Syrians and the destruction of property
and infrastructure in an attempt to sow discord and
provoke internal fighting among Syrians.
In line with the issues I have mentioned, it is no
surprise that today we find ourselves faced with a
draft resolution that, at best, can be described as
misleading and hysterical. The draft resolution violates
all principles of international law, first and foremost
the principles of respect for national sovereignty and
non-intervention in the internal affairs of States.
It is therefore clear that the adoption of the draft
resolution would send the wrong message to the
extremists and terrorists in Syria and beyond, in
particular that the terrorist acts that they are undertaking

12-449395

A/66/PV.124

instead of dialogue and the peaceful settlement of
disputes have the support and the encouragement of
Member States. That will escalate the violence and
foster terrorism both in Syria and throughout the
region. Terrorism will certainly extend to those areas
that have fostered terrorism, including some States that
are sponsors of the draft resolution.
We therefore request that the draft resolution
contained in document A/66/L.57* be put to the vote.
We call on all States not to be an indirect partner in
supporting chaos and terrorism, in intervening in the
internal affairs of States and in trying to legitimize
unilateral sanctions. We appeal to all participants to
vote against the draft resolution for all the reasons I
have mentioned, in support of the principles that we all
uphold, including the sovereign equality of all States and
the right of peoples to self-determination and to choose
their political systems free of any outside interference.
We had expected the representative of the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia to submit for consideration a draft
resolution on the its Red Sea islands of Sanafir and
Tiran, which are occupied by Israel, rather than one
intent on manipulating the status and fate of Palestinian
refugees in Syria and on shedding crocodile tears over
what he called the blood of the Syrian nation, which we
hold very dear to our hearts.
The incitement to murder has reached a level
whereby Saudi Arabian and Qatari media are no
longer satisfied with targeting my country but have
attacked me personally and members of my family in
an immoral, unethical and shameful way. I stand here
proud to defend the interests of my nation against
all conspiracies against my country, whatever they
may be. The same media have attacked me in special
programmes, lasting several hours, that have included
fabricated lies and false statements intended to destroy
the reputation of members of my family. They have
even used social media sites to incite the killing of
Syrians inside and outside Syria. Is that how we combat
terrorism? Is that how diplomatic work is carried out? Is
that what diplomacy is all about?
All participants are ambassadors defending the
interests of their countries. Diplomacy is one thing,
but having members of one’s family targeted on that
account is something else entirely. I leave that to the
consciences of all members. I should also like to say
that I and various other Syrian diplomats have received
murder threats emanating from websites in Saudi
Arabia, Qatar and the United States.
6

Allow me to conclude by saying that you,
Mr. President, have taken a predetermined position on
the draft resolution in form and content. We find that
to be a violation of rule 106 of the rules of procedure
of the General Assembly, which requires the President
of the General Assembly to be impartial and to
conduct the meeting without intervention on any draft
resolution. However, unfortunately, you, Mr. President,
have violated that provision for possibly the tenth time
during your presidency.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The draft resolution
before us (A/66/L.57*) is an intervention in the
internal affairs of a sovereign and independent State.
It proposes setting up protection mechanisms against a
sovereign country, namely, the Syrian Arab Republic.
The draft resolution lacks objectivity. It describes a
long list of acts abrogating human rights attributed to
the Government of Syria, but minimizes or conceals
the violations of human rights by terrorist groups and
the armed opposition.
The draft resolution ignores the political and
constitutional reforms promoted by the Syrian
Government towards an inclusive, democratic and
peaceful national agreement in order to meet the hopes
for change of the Syrian people and the Arab people in
general. Every sovereign State has the legitimate right
to defend its national security and to protect the public
and private property of its country. If the rule of law is
to be respsected at the national and international levels,
that right cannot be denied or violated.
The Syrian Government is not facing a democratic
opposition that uses peaceful and constitutional means
to achieve its goals. As we know, it is an opposition
that practices and supports terrorism and that survives
through foreign support. That armed opposition refuses
to participate in the democratic and pluralistic dialogue
that we, as peace-lovers, encourage in the world.
The only viable option to put an end to the armed
violence in Syria, in all its forms, is through a sincere
and inclusive political dialogue. In that regard, a
ceasefire that contributes to the goal of peace and
the reconciliation of that brotherly Arab people must
immediately be established. We support all initiatives
in pursuit of peace and the peaceful settlement of the
disputes in Syria.
Venezuela has supported the six-point plan
proposed by Joint Special Envoy Kofi Annan. That

12-44939

A/66/PV.124

plan retains all its validity. We regret the resignation
of Kofi Annan. Warmongers and those who favour
military intervention sabotaged his efforts for peace.
We reiterate the need to implement that plan without
delay, regardless of who is appointed to replace him.
We welcome the diplomatic efforts of the Russian
Federation that led to the holding of the meeting of the
Action Group for Syria on 30 June in Geneva. Venezuela
supports the positions taken by Russia, China and other
countries that defend the principles of sovereignty,
self-determination and territorial integrity enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations. We commend them
for opposing foreign intervention and for advocating
a Syrian-led solution to the issues of that sovereign
nation.
With regard to the attacks against Syria, on
1 August President Hugo Chávez Frías denounced those
Governments that have not abandoned their imperialist
attempts to impose their forms of Government on the
peoples of the South, and asserted that Venezuela
recognized President Bashar Al-Assad and his
Government and not the terrorists who are engaged in
bombings.
Venezuela is extremely concerned about
interventionist initiatives in the internal affairs of the
Syrian nation. It is deplorable to see the sponsoring of
international political events that bring together Syrian
political opponents who include representatives of
groups that support or engage in violence or terrorism.
The financing and arming of these opposition groups
from abroad should be condemned. Those practices
violate the most elementary principles of international
law and constitute a de facto diplomatic recognition
of political groups operating outside the law and defy
the legal institutions of the Syrian State. They are
a flagrant violation to the sovereignty of a country
and of the principles that govern international law, as
expressed in the Charter of the United Nations. If such
practices were to continue, they would promote the
establishment of the law of the jungle in international
relations. The Government of my country calls for an
in-depth reflection on the dire consequences that could
arise from such practices in future diplomatic relations
between sovereign countries.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela strongly
appeals for respect for the sovereignty, unity and
territorial integrity of a sovereign country, and
demands an end to foreign intervention in the Syrian

Arab Republic. We call for respect for the human rights
of all Syrians, regardless of their political position,
ethnicity or religious beliefs. We reject unilateral
and extraterritorial measures aimed at imposing new
sanctions and suffering on the Syrian people. History
has shown that sanctions and foreign intervention in the
internal affairs of States do not solve the problems that
affect such countries, but, on the contrary, compound
them. We urge the relevant agencies of the United
Nations to provide humanitarian assistance to those
affected by the violence in that brotherly Arab country.
Such assistance must be provided urgently, in respect
for its sovereignty and hence in coordination with the
authorities of that country.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, consistent
with its principled position of respect for the sovereignty,
unity and territorial integrity and non-interference in
the internal affairs of States, will vote against draft
resolution A/66/L.57*.
Mr. Núñez Mosquera (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba will vote against draft resolution A/66/L.57*
because we believe that it would not help in any way to
resolve the situation that is tearing the sisterly Syrian
Arab Republic apart but could, on the contrary, lead
to greater instability and violence. It is a biased draft
resolution that selectively addresses current events
in that country and that could even open the door to
foreign military intervention, of which we have had
unfortunate experience in the recent past.
Cuba believes that an end must be put to all acts
of violence, massacres and terrorist actions that
have taken innocent lives in Syria. However, for that
purpose, the transfer of weapons and money to and the
training of insurgency groups must end; such actions
have become the open, daily practice of the United
States Government and its European allies in order
to defeat sovereign Governments by force. That is the
clearest manifestation of the policy in favour of regime
change prevailing in Washington, D.C., and other
NATO capitals.
The media manipulation must also end. We view
with concern how the Western media empires are openly
interpreting the situation in Syria for political purposes,
thus inciting worse and more brutal bloodshed.
Let there be no mistake — Cuba condemns the
deaths of innocent persons wherever they may occur,
and condemns foreign interference in the internal
affairs of States. Cuba has always supported and

12-449397

A/66/PV.124

today reaffirms the right of the Syrian people to the
full enjoyment of self-determination and sovereignty
without foreign manipulation or intervention of any
kind.

should have been clearer in recognizing that there are
two or more sides to the Syrian crisis. An unbalanced
resolution of the Assembly may be viewed as supporting
one side over the other.

Mr. Laher (South Africa): South Africa deplores
the violence and the tremendous loss of life in Syria,
which are fast spiralling out of control. We are alarmed
by the latest developments on the ground. The increase
in the levels of violence being perpetrated by both sides,
including the use of heavy weapons, is shocking and
should be condemned. In that climate, the resignation
of the Joint Special Envoy of the United Nations and the
League of Arab States on Syria is regretted.

South Africa reiterates that there are obligations on
all parties to cease the violence and to comply with the
six-point plan. While bearing in mind that the Syrian
Government bears the primary responsibility to halt
violence, the draft resolution is not strong enough
in its call on the armed opposition groups to refrain
from violence and to comply with their requirements
under the six-point plan. Mediation efforts in conflict
situations are not served by pressuring only one side of
a conflict.

My delegation joins others in conveying our deepest
sympathy to the Syrian people for the significant loss of
life and the mass displacement of the population.
We appreciate the efforts of regional actors,
including the League of Arab States, and of the United
Nations agencies, the International Committee of
Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, in assisting to
alleviate the suffering of the civilian population. We
remind the Assembly that the International Committee
of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies recently
classified the situation in Syria as meeting the conditions
of an internal armed conflict. The United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights has also stated that
there are indications that the situation in Syria, at least
in certain areas, may amount to a non-international
armed conflict, thus entailing obligations on both sides
under international law. In such conditions all parties
have responsibilities and obligations under international
humanitarian law.
Furthermore, in a complex, divided society such as
Syria’s there can be no military solution. Ultimately, the
parties in Syria will have to negotiate a settlement. The
question is whether they do so now or after a bloody and
protracted war. We are therefore deeply disappointed
that the Security Council has not been able to apply
pressure to both sides to bring an end to the violence
and to comply with their respective obligations under
the six-point plan. The only way to achieve a solution
reflective of the will of the people of Syria is through an
all-inclusive political process.
We support the idea of the General Assembly
speaking with one voice through a resolution. However,
we maintain that draft resolution A/66/L.57* could
have been much more balanced, to accurately reflect
the actual situation on the ground. The draft resolution

8

Yesterday, the Secretary-General said that the
United Nations remained committed to diplomacy in
pursuing an end to violence and a Syrian-led solution
that meets the legitimate democratic aspirations of its
people. Additionally, a few weeks ago, the Joint Special
Envoy himself requested the Security Council to send
a strong message to all parties that there would be
consequences for non-compliance with the six-point
plan. South Africa supports stern action by the United
Nations in support of that process, in line with the
recommendations of the Joint Special Envoy, to ensure
that a message is sent to all sides that they should
engage with the Envoy’s mediation process.
Despite our misgivings about some aspects of the
text, and in the light of the urgency of resolving the
Syrian crisis, we believe that it is necessary for the
United Nations to speak with one voice in taking action.
Mr. Archondo (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): The delegation of the Plurinational
State of Bolivia would like to explain to the Assembly
the reasons behind its intention to vote against draft
resolution A/66/L.57*, which is before us today.
The Syrian people are living through a painful and
bloody period. No one in the Hall can remain indifferent
to the suffering of a people caught in the crossfire. It is
the duty of the United Nations to answer that people’s
call and to prevent a humanitarian catastrophe. Indeed,
we all agree that Syria is an open wound that must be
treated as soon as possible. The issue has ceased to be
a regional or local one; it has morphed into an issue the
gravity of which touches us all.
While the Organization must indeed take action, its
limits are obvious, as clearly defined in Article 2 of the

12-44939

A/66/PV.124

United Nations Charter, which forbids it to intervene in
matters essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of
States. Bolivia believes that the draft resolution before
us goes well beyond Article 2 of the Charter. That is
why we reject it.
Nevertheles, we are pleased to participate in this
debate on the situation in Syria, if only for a few
minutes. Our first question is how the United Nations
can meaningfully contribute to a solution to the political
crisis in Syria. We believe that today’s draft resolution
would make matters worse. With all respect to those
who support it, Bolivia believes that draft resolution
A/66/L.57* goes down the wrong path. If adopted, it will
not lead to solutions but, on the contrary, may exacerbate
problems. That is because the main concern behind the
draft resolution is not to end the violence but rather to
break the Damascus Government. Anyone who does not
agree with that has only to read. The draft resolution
accuses the Syrian Government 14 times of committing
the most serious crimes imaginable. It accuses the
Government of massacres, arbitrary executions,
murders, persecutions, detentions, disappearances,
impeding access to medical treatment, torture, rape and
preventing the burial of the dead. It paints a picture of
a Government that attacks the civilian population in an
indiscriminate, savage way.
The draft resolution 14 times accuses the Syrian
Government of multiple crimes, but makes only one
negative reference to the opposition in that country,
saying it has committed a few human rights abuses.
There is not one word about the terrorist attack that
ended the life of Syria’s Minster of Defence on 18 July.
There is not one word about the clandestine transport
of arms across borders with neighbouring States.
There is not one word about the so-called Free Syrian
Army, generously supported by Powers interested in
the overthrow of the Damascus Government. There is
not one word about the role of the Central Intelligence
Agency or of Al-Qaida. There is not one word about
the armed campaign to sow the seeds of a civil war,
richly fueled from outside and in. There is not one word
about the arrival in Syria of terrorist groups intent on
imposing an Islamic State in the region.
There is no State machinery in place in Syria to
liquidate the civilian population. What there is in Syria
is an armed confrontation between regular State forces
and non-State actors financed and armed from abroad.
The draft resolution does not mention that reality. It
does not say how peace might be achieved in Syria

once the so-called political transition is set in motion.
It does not tell us how the civil war it promotes can be
prevented from spinning out of control into a scenario of
indiscriminate sectarian violence, enflaming the entire
region. It does not explain how Syria can avoid falling
into the chaos that Iraq lived through and continues to
live under after Saddam Hussein’s fall. It says nothing
about the possibility that various armed factions may
take control of the territory, filling the power gap. Syria
is not on the path of the Arab Spring. On the contrary,
it seems to be on the road to chaos and civil war. The
United Nations should not contribute to that.
Let us not fool ourselves. The draft resolution is
aimed mainly at breaking the back of the Damascus
Government. Those who do not believe that should read
the text. Outrageously, the draft resolution mentions
eight times the need to drive forward a political
transition towards a new Government. Not only does
it tell the Syrian people what they must do, but it gives
them the exact recipe — a democratic, multi-party,
pluralistic political system. Even worse, it asks the
General Assembly to believe in the unity and cohesion
of the opposition forces.
Finally, the Bolivian delegation regrets the fact that
this issue has been brought before the General Assembly
in the way it has, that is, after the Security Council has
failed in its own consideration. This is not appropriate.
It is being done very hurriedly, without seeking due
consensus, in a mere three days, and without hearing all
points of view. Does this represent love of democracy
on the part of those who claim to be its main defenders?
Is it the way to teach the Syrian people what democracy
is and that it is something to be desired?
Because of the way in which it is being adopted, and
because we find its content not only unsatisfactory but
alarming, Bolivia rejects draft resolution A/66/L.57*. In
that spirit, we call on countries that are members of the
Southern Cone Common Market to follow the decision
taken on 29 July by our heads of State, who affirmed
that the principles governing the settlement of the
crisis in Syria should be dialogue, political negotation
and respect for human rights, territorial sovereignty,
non-intervention, the free self-determination of peoples
and territorial integrity.
Mr. Ri Tong Il (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea): Since the General Assembly’s adoption in
February of resolution 66/253 concerning Syria, we
now find ourselves facing a very critical situation
and great change. That change is not a positive one;

12-449399

A/66/PV.124

it is very negative. Its impact is particularly negative
on the entire region of the Middle East. It will lead to
eventual disaster. The delegation of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea would like to express its
deep concern about this and to once again clarify its
principled position, in order to address the Syrian issue
fairly and peacefully.
First, sovereignty should be respected and fully
observed. The Charter stipulates that sovereignty is
the fundamental key factor in United Nations affairs.
The Syrian Arab Republic is a full-fledged Member
State, and President Bashar Al-Assad’s Government is
a democratically elected Government.
Secondly, the principle of non-interference should
be respected. We have seen many instances in which
interference has had a disastrous impact; we do not
have to look far, but merely shift the focus slightly from
Syria to some of its neighbours. Military intervention
and military interference have unleashed sectarian
violence, terrorist conflicts, armed conflict and the
mass killing of innocent civilians. That has been the
case in Iraq and Afghanistan. The United States talks a
great deal about the so-called protection of civilians, but
what is it doing in Iraq and Afghanistan? It is essential
that we look at that important factor. All the United
States wants is regime change. Once regime change has
occurred, it does not care what happens; it does not care
whether civilians or terrorists are killing each other. It is
only about regime change. Draft resolution A/66/L.57*
is closely related to that. The Security Council vetoed
the draft resolution sponsored by the United States
(S/2012/538).
Thirdly, the only way to settle this issue is through
political dialogue and by peaceful means. The Syrian
people are the only people who know what is in their
best interests. Killing each other is not helping, and
outside interference cannot solve that problem. Outside
interference, as I indicated when referring to Iraq and
Afghanistan, only kills civilians. Beyond that example,
when the same country talks of protection of civilians it
is nothing but hypocrisy. The political dialogue should
be a Syrian-led process aimed at improving the future,
the happiness and the stability of the people.
Mr. Gonsalves (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines has been closely
following the developments in the war currently raging
in the Syrian Arab Republic. We have been alarmed
and revolted by the scenes and stories emanating from

10

that war. The small but vibrant Syrian and Lebanese
community within our country is also directly and
often personally affected by the spiraling violence and
atrocities in Syria, particularly as the war has moved to
the major cities of Damascus and Aleppo.
On 31 May, the Prime Minister of Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines made a statement to our national
Parliament condemning the massacre that took
place in the region of Houla in western Syria, and
calling unequivocally for the perpetrators to be held
accountable and brought to justice. It is in that spirit
of genuine outrage, alarm and revulsion that Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines views the current draft
resolution on the situation in the Syrian Arab Republic
(A/66/L.57*).
Today’s draft resolution has many positive elements
that Saint Vincent and the Grenadines enthusiastically
supports. We share its concern for the civilian victims of
this war, particularly the innocent women and children
who have been killed or victimized by the warring
parties. We are similarly concerned about the influx
of Syrian refugees to neighbouring States. Above all,
we echo the draft resolution’s expression of profound
regret at the thousands of deaths, and extend heartfelt
condolences to the families affected.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines also
wholeheartedly endorses the reaffirmation of support
for the six-point peace plan delineated by outgoing
Joint Special Envoy Kofi Annan and the commitment to
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of the Syrian Arab Republic. We likewise condemn any
and all human rights abuses being committed by any
party in Syria, and support efforts towards extending
humanitarian assistance to the affected populations.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines also strongly
reiterates the importance of the draft resolution’s call
for political dialogue and the peaceful settlement of
this spiraling conflict, which does not appear to have a
military solution.
However, other aspects of the draft resolution give
us pause, and lead us to question whether our laudable
desire to speak and act on this matter has caused us
to overlook many of the indisputable facts on the
ground of this conflict, and many of the principles
that undergird the Organization. Primarily, we are
concerned about the obvious omissions from the draft
resolution that create not only a lack of balance, but a
far more troubling implication that our silence amounts

12-44939

A/66/PV.124

to consent or endorsement of certain actions and actors.
It is a documented fact, for example, that elements of the
opposition forces have opted to assassinate members of
the Syrian Government, either individually or through
the use of crude bombs that also murder innocent
civilians. Surely the international community cannot
catalogue the violations of the Syrian authorities while
turning a blind eye to the type of despicable terrorism
that we have condemned in every other context and
every other nation.
We are also aware of the indisputable presence
and activity of Al-Qaida and other extremists in
Syria, and their role in some of the anti-Government
activity. We must unambiguously condemn this element
in the conflict, for history has taught us the danger
of ignoring Al-Qaida when its interests may align,
however fleetingly, with those of other, more civilized
actors. Instead of outright condemnation of the barbaric
elements, the draft resolution encourages cohesion
among all elements of the Syrian opposition, many
of whom the international community knows nothing
about. There are many principled and patriotic Syrians
who seek to staunchly oppose the Government through
peaceful and legitimate means. It is irresponsible for
us to ask those groups to find common cause with
those extremists and terrorists who may also clothe
themselves in the opposition banner.
Similarly, we note that the draft resolution has
been submitted under agenda item 34, “Prevention of
armed conflict”. As such, we feel it imperative that
the draft resolution to acknowledge the role played by
many States in exacerbating and intensifying the armed
conflict in Syria through the provision of arms and
ammunition to all sides in the war. The international
community cannot call for the prevention of armed
conflict without confronting the continuing role played
by those who persist in arming and supplying all of the
combatants. If we are honest about seeking an end to
hostilities, it is our collective responsibility to call on the
arms suppliers to cease their trade in the tools of death.
Our silence on that crucial point is tantamount to an
endorsement and encouragement of illicit arms traders,
and runs counter to the spirit of the recently-concluded
month-long effort to secure a global arms trade treaty.
We cannot simply pay lip service to the ideas of
sovereignty, territorial integrity and non-interference.
They are the principles upon which the Assembly
is founded. If it is that we seek to depart from those
principles, it must not be done with a nod and a wink or

benign neglect, but with a frank examination of their
applicability in our modern context.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is also concerned
about the failure to call for a simultaneous ceasefire
and pullback by Government and opposition forces
and militias alike. To call for the Administration
to withdraw its forces to its barracks in the face of
advancing opposition forces in Damascus and Aleppo
is to ask the authorities to cede control of those cities
as a prerequisite for political dialogue. Such a position
seems to reflect neither the military realities on the
ground nor a genuine desire to craft a workable solution
to the war.
There are other aspects of concern. For example,
the responsibility to protect is a concept whose contours
and full implications have neither been defined nor
agreed upon by the United Nations. Its inclusion in
the preamble of the draft resolution is unnecessarily
divisive at a time when unity should be our objective.
We note also the draft resolution’s call in paragraph
16 for the establishment of “a democratic, pluralistic
political system, in which all citizens are equal”. Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines proudly possesses such a
political system, which we work tirelessly to improve and
consolidate. As such, we have considerable sympathy
for the sentiment captured by such a call. However, we
are unclear as to whether the General Assembly has the
legal, moral or historical authority to externally impose
any political system upon the citizens of another State.
Given those concerns and despite our unambiguous
support for many of the key pillars of the draft
resolution, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines must
regrettably abstain in today’s voting. Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines agonized long and hard over the
decision to abstain, and we regret that an opportunity
has been missed today for the General Assembly to
speak with one voice on the conflict, which we all
deplore and which we all want to end as quickly and as
peacefully as possible. Even in the light of the welcome
recent changes made to the text, our failure to make the
extra effort to craft a draft resolution that could enjoy
near unanimous support is even more regrettable in the
wake of yesterday’s statements by the outgoing Joint
Special Envoy of the United Nations and the League of
Arab States on Syria, Kofi Annan, in which he cited the
disunity of the international community as one of the
factors contributing to the deepening crisis in Syria.
Special Envoy Annan made clear that the international

12-4493911

A/66/PV.124

community must be balanced in its pronouncements
and united in its approach if we are to save Syria
from further bloodshed. It is in those areas — balance
and unity — that we feel that more work could have
been done to capture our collective horror and desire
for change. Similarly, Mr. Annan’s other underlying
message — that authorities who show little concern
for the loss of their citizens’ lives will lose the moral
authority to govern — is also an essential point to which
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines readily subscribes.
Today, even while abstaining, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines adds its voice to the chorus of responsible
States calling for, first, the immediate cessation of all
violence between and among all parties to the conflict;
secondly, the commencement of an inclusive political
process geared towards a locally crafted and negotiated
solution to the conflict; and, thirdly, the avoidance of
any actions by other parties that will exacerbate the
violence, make a negotiated solution more difficult, or
serve as a pretext for military intervention or undue
external influence in the sovereign affairs of States.
Our abstention must be taken neither as support
for the Syrian authorities nor as an endorsement of the
opposition’s methods. Instead, it is a call for balance,
compromise and unity. As such, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines reiterates its support for a peaceful
solution to the war that is not motivated by geopolitical
or strategic interests, but instead driven by the honest
desire to end a catastrophic human tragedy and the
need to honour the memory of the tens of thousands of
Syrians who have needlessly and tragically died in the
conflict.
Mr. Morejón (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): Ecuador
views with concern the deterioration of the human
rights situation and the crisis in the sisterly Syrian Arab
Republic. On several occasions, we have expressed our
consternation at the serious human rights violations that
have taken place since the beginning of the crisis. We
have condemned them and insisted that they should not
enjoy impunity and that the perpetrators of the acts of
violence and those who provide arms and munitions to
the various actors, including organized terrorist groups,
be punished.
Today Ecuador reiterates its firm condemnation of
human rights violations, wheresoever they may arise.
We express our solidarity with the Syrian people, in
particular the victims of the widespread violence and
their families. We regret the resignation of the Joint

12

Special Envoy of the United Nations and the League
of Arab States on Syria, Mr. Kofi Annan, and hope
that the original six-point plan will endure and that
the parties will contribute to its implementation with
an immediate cessation of violence. We reject the
attempt through draft resolution A/66/L.57* to change
the mandate of Special Envoy Annan, focusing it on
a political objective that promotes the agenda of some
sectors and not the needed ceasefire.
Ecuador is concerned over the imbalance in
the language of the draft resolution, which does not
sufficiently take all the parties responsible for the
crisis into account, and tends to polarize the conflict
without contributing to a solution in which all Syrians
participate and peace is restored in the context of a
strict respect for the sovereignty and independence of
Syria.
My delegation insists that matters related to
the human rights situation should be addressed by
the Human Rights Council in Geneva, which is the
competent body. Submitting such a draft resolution to
the General Assembly in New York only contributes to
politicizing the issue and does not truly help the the
victims of armed violence in Syria.
I raise these considerations in order to indicate that
the delegation of Ecuador has instructions to abstain in
the voting.
Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): My
delegation has asked for the floor to explain its
position with regard to the draft resolution contained in
document A/66/L.57* before the voting.
In the view of my delegation, the draft resolution
is a deviation from all the efforts being pursued at
the international level for a peaceful resolution to the
Syrian crisis. The draft resolution is also a deviation
from the principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations and international law, which prohibit
interference in the internal affairs of sovereign
States. The draft resolution echoes the malicious
desire of certain countries to topple the Government
of Syria. That is an illegal action and condemnable
by international law. It is only the Syrian people who
should decide on their political fate.
The draft resolution fails to address the disastrous
consequences of the different forms of foreign
intervention. Such interventions, in terms of the arms
and the sophisticated equipment that are being sent

12-44939

A/66/PV.124

across the borders to the rebels, have exacerbated the
crisis in Syria. That has added fuel to the fire, leading
to the deepening of the political and security crisis, with
all its ramifications for the region. In recent months,
many terrorist attacks have occurred in Syria, the latest
of which took the lives of a number of senior officials
in Damascus.
The operations by armed groups in Aleppo in the
past couple of days have already left a heavy toll in
human lives and property. The draft resolution fails to
hold the armed groups and the terrorist groups led by
Al-Qaida accountable for their activities and falls short
of condemning foreign interference and the acts of
violence by terrorists. It is clear who is behind arming
and financing the armed and terrorist groups in Syria,
some of whom are, regrettably, among the sponsors of
the draft resolution.
The draft resolution encourages Member States
to impose sanctions on Syria at a time when people
in the affected areas are in dire need of basic living
necessities. The call for sanctions constitutes collective
punishment against the Syrian people. What is needed
instead is a call on States to freeze any arms, financial
and logistical support to the armed groups in Syria.
We very much regret that Mr. Kofi Annan has
decided to end his work by the end of this month. We
of course understand the reasons for his decision and
the arduous position that he faced in advancing his
mission. It is not a hidden fact that, after the recent
meeting of the Security Council (see S/PV.6810), some
permanent members rushed to pronounce the mission of
the Special Envoy as dead and indicated that they would
immediately pursue other means than the Security
Council to overthrow the Government in Syria.
That approach is a blatant interference in Syrian
internal affairs. We hope that, in the remaining days of
his tenure, Mr. Annan will rigorously continue to pursue
the goal of finding a peaceful political settlement to the
Syrian crisis. We also hope that his replacement will
work along the same lines and within the same mandate,
which is to find a non-violent solution to the crisis. It
is only through such a process that broader political
reconciliation, national unity, public order, stability and
prosperity are realizable for the Syrian people.
We are very concerned about the regional
consequences of the continuation of violence and about
any violation of Syrian sovereignty and territorial
integrity. We encourage the political parties to engage

in political dialogue with the Syrian Government in
order to find a peaceful political process. In that regard,
we reiterate our readiness to host talks between the
Syrian Government and the opposition parties.
As we have stated on other occasions, Syria has
historically played an important role in the Middle
East. Prolonged instability and unrest in Syria would
have adverse consequences for peace and stability in
the Middle East region. We should all work together
for a comprehensive, effective and practical way to help
find a peaceful resolution to the present crisis in Syria.
The draft resolution in its present wording, despite
some changes in the language, is still unbalanced and
one-sided and does not reflect the reality of the situation
in Syria. It conveys the wrong message on behalf of the
Assembly. We are therefore not in a position to support
the draft resolution, and we will vote against it.
Ms. Bethel (Bahamas): The Bahamas will support
draft resolution A/66/L.57* because we believe that
the welfare and safety of the people of Syria should be
the paramount concern of this body and, indeed, of all
bodies that make up the United Nations system.
The killings and bloodshed, as well as the
human rights abuses inflicted on the people of Syria,
particularly on the civilian population, must stop. The
forces on the ground, both Government and opposition,
in conjunction with civil society, must seek to carry
out a dialogue on instituting a political process from
which will evolve an agreed mechanism for moving
the country in the direction of peace, security and
development under the stewardship of a representative,
democratic and inclusive Government. It is my
delegation’s conviction that the implementation of the
Annan six-point plan remains the best starting point for
that process.
My delegation wishes to take this opportunity to
commend and express our sincere appreciation and
gratitude to the Joint Special Envoy, His Excellency
Mr. Kofi Annan, for his unstinting and tireless efforts
in trying to bring about a resolution to the crisis in
Syria. His recent resignation is indeed regrettable. The
Bahamas is of the view that, with the appropriate and
sustained support of the international community, his
could well have been a mission possible with concrete
results that would have spared the people of Syria
so much suffering. The Bahamas is convinced that
that should remain the objective of the international
community. We hope that the adoption of this draft
resolution will be step in that direction.

12-4493913

A/66/PV.124

It is unconscionable that the international
community should find itself stymied in the face of
such suffering and turmoil.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote before the voting.
The Assembly will now take action on draft
resolution A/66/L.57*, entitled “The situation in the
Syrian Arab Republic”.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution,
in addition to those delegations listed in document
A/66/L.57*, the following countries have also become
sponsors of the draft resolution: the Comoros, France,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Liechtenstein, Malta,
Mauritania, Micronesia, Montenegro, the Republic of
Korea, Romania, San Marino and Switzerland.
The President: A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan,
Albania,
Andorra,
Argentina,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African
Republic, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Comoros,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland,
France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iraq,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Latvia, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria,
Norway, Oman, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic
of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, San Marino, Sao Tome and
Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles,

14

Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, South
Africa, Spain, Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay, Vanuatu, Zambia
Against:
Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Myanmar, Nicaragua,
Russian Federation, Syrian Arab Republic,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Armenia,
Burundi, Ecuador, Eritrea, Fiji, Ghana, Guyana,
India, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic
Republic,
Lebanon,
Lesotho,
Madagascar, Mali, Namibia, Nepal, Pakistan,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, Sierra Leone, Solomon Islands, Sri Lanka,
Suriname, Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania,
Viet Nam
Draft resolution A/66/L.57* was adopted by 133
votes to 12, with 31 abstentions (resolution 66/253 B).
The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of vote following the voting, may I
remind delegations that explanations of vote are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Errázuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): The
delegation of Chile feels duty-bound to begin its
statement by expressing its profound regret over the
resignation of the Joint Special Envoy of the United
Nations and the League of Arab States on Syria,
Mr. Kofi Annan. Mr. Annan deserves recognition
and gratitude for the intelligence, determination and
courage with which he has carried out his delicate
and complex functions. His enormous effort has
been frustrated by the non-cooperation of the parties
to the conflict, primarily the Government of Syria.
Yesterday, the Government of Chile issued an official
communiqué regretting the decision of the Joint Special
Envoy, expressing hope for the speedy appointment
of his successor, and calling for compliance with the
six-point plan submitted by Mr. Annan, which has been
endorsed by the United Nations.

12-44939

A/66/PV.124

The delegation of Chile voted in favour of
resolution 66/253 B. Today, the General Assembly has
raised its voice to vehemently condemn the massive and
systematic violations of human rights in the Syrian Arab
Republic. The use of force against civilians, arbitrary
executions, forced disappearances, torture, murder,
persecutions of human rights activists, journalists and
protesters, and extreme violence, including sexual
violence against women and children, are unacceptable
violations of human rights.
The Assembly has reaffirmed its condemnation
following 17 months of political crisis. During that time,
the crisis has gone from brutally repressed peaceful
protests to a situation of virtual civil war, as denounced
by the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights and the International Committee of the Red
Cross. All parties to the conflict have the obligation
to end the violence and the responsibility to respect
civilians’ rights to life and physical integrity. We regret
the violence, the indiscriminate attacks and the use
of heavy weapons, which have increased, resulting in
many deaths, including those of women, children and
vulnerable persons. Chile condemns violence from any
source and demands an immediate cessation on the part
of all parties. The resolution we have just adopted is
precisely the appeal of the international community for
the situation to end.
The delegation of Chile reiterates its support for the
six-point plan, submitted by the Joint Special Envoy,
and the final communiqué of the Action Group for
Syria (S/2012/523, annex), of 30 June. Both documents
recognize the need for an inclusive political process, led
by the Syrian people and in conditions determined by
them. In that context, the international community, with
full respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Syria, has the duty to cooperate to ensure that the
Syrian people can find their way to political dialogue,
and ultimately achieve the stability and prosperity that
its noble people deserve.
The United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights and various social media outlets report atrocities
and crimes for which there must be no impunity. The rule
of law must prevail, and whoever may be responsible
for serious human rights violations, including those
that may constitute crimes against humanity, should be
brought to justice.
We feel a special concern for the population, which
needs humanitarian assistance. Chile calls for the
facilitation of the secure delivery of timely assistance to

the victims of the crisis. My delegation acknowledges
the humanitarian efforts of the neighbouring countries
of Syria, which have welcomed thousands of refugees.
We also acknowledge the work done by the International
Conference of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies,
United Nations agencies and various non-governmental
organizations in this vital matter.
Chile reiterates its support for the efforts of the
Arab League to find a peaceful solution to the crisis
in Syria. We see special value in the contribution of
regional organizations to conflict resolution.
Finally, as stated in the communiqué of the
Government of Chile of 2 August,
“Chile reaffirms its conviction that the Security
Council must fulfil its key and urgent role in
resolving the Syrian conflict under its mandate
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations”.
Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): Brazil voted in favor of
resolution 66/253 B, just adopted, because we fully
support the main message it conveys — the urgent
need for a ceasefire, the cessation of violence in all its
forms, and the full implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012). Our decision
also reflects our belief that the General Assembly could
not remain silent as violence escalates in Syria and the
ensuing human suffering increases.
The position we took today, which is coherent with
Brazil’s policy with regard to the Syrian crisis since
its beginning, should also be seen as a message to all
parties to renounce the use of force, since there is no
military solution to the conflict. This is the only way to
avoid a deeper descent into a spiral of destruction that,
as witnessed elsewhere before, will further punish first
and foremost the Syrian population.
The
primary
responsibility
for
ending
violence, upholding the law — both domestic and
international — and respecting human rights lies with
the Government of Syria, as we have stated time and
again. It must fully and immediately meet this grave
and urgent responsibility. At the same time, we also
insist that all parties fulfil their obligations to halt the
violence and respect international humanitarian law, as
well as actively engage in finding a peaceful solution
to the conflict.
For its part, the international community has a
key role to play in ensuring that the Annan plan and
the road map envisaged by the Action Group for Syria

12-4493915

A/66/PV.124

prevail. Our individual and collective support for those
diplomatic efforts, in particular the end of violence
and a consensual, Syrian-led political transition, must
be resolute both in words and in deeds. In that regard,
international stakeholders must refrain from any action
that might deepen or prolong the conflict. That is in the
interest not only of Syrians, but also of the international
community as a whole. No legitimate purpose will be
truly served by the further militarization of the conflict
and increased destabilization of Syria.
Consistent with previous United Nations resolutions,
the Annan plan and the communiqué of the Action
Group for Syria (S/2012/523, annex), Brazil remains of
the view that any political transition should be inclusive
and led by the Syrians themselves. What we can and
should do is to encourage the parties to find a mutually
acceptable solution that responds to the aspirations
of the Syrian people to peace, justice, democracy and

16

economic progress. Brazil hopes that the core message
from the Assembly today will effectively help the
parties in Syria to meet that challenge.
Finally, allow me to express Brazil’s deep regret
at Mr. Annan’s decision not to renew his mandate. We
have extended all possible support to his work, which
we consider of great value. The six-point plan should
continue to guide international efforts to help Syrians
overcome the current conflict. Just as important,
Mr. Annan’s exemplary efforts should further inspire
us in our determination to help the parties in urgently
finding a peaceful solution.
The President: We have heard the last speaker for
this meeting. We shall hear the remaining speakers here
in the Hall at 3 o’clock.
The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.

12-44939
