S/PRST/2004/19

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
7 June 2004
English
Original: English and French

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4985th meeting of the Security Council, held on 7 June 2004, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo”, the President of the Security
Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council condemns with the utmost firmness the seizure of
the town of Bukavu, on 2 June 2004, by dissident forces led by former
Congolese Rally for Democracy (RCD-Goma) commanders Major-General
Laurent Nkunda, Colonel Jules Mutebusi, and others. It also condemns
atrocities and human right violations which have occurred in this context. It
declares its profound concern regarding reports of military actions these forces
have undertaken in other parts of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It
considers all such actions to constitute a serious threat to the peace process and
to the transition, and demands that these cease immediately.
“The Security Council reaffirms its commitment to, and respect for the
national sovereignty, political independence, territorial integrity and unity of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It expresses its solidarity with the
Congolese people and its full support to the Government of National Unity and
Transition. It calls for the prompt and peaceful extension of State authority
throughout the Congolese territory, in particular in Bukavu.
“The Security Council urges all parties represented in the Government of
National Unity and Transition to remain fully committed to the peace process
and to abstain from any action that could endanger the unity of the transitional
Government.
“The Security Council warns solemnly the States neighbouring the
Democratic Republic of the Congo of the consequences of support to the
armed rebel groups. It urges the Government of Rwanda, taking into account
its previous relationship with RCD-Goma, and all other neighbouring states, to
do all in their power to support the peace process and help secure a peaceful
resolution to this crisis, while at the same time refraining from any action or
declaration that might impact negatively on the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. It recalls the terms of its resolutions 1493 (2003) and
1533 (2004), especially those elements relating to regional security across the
Great Lakes, and calls upon all member States, in particular those in the
region, to fulfil their responsibilities accordingly.

04-37863 (E) 070604

*0437863*

S/PRST/2004/19

“The Security Council welcomes the initiative of the Chairperson of the
Commission of the African Union aimed at overcoming the current crisis,
including in its human dimension, and at facilitating the successful conclusion
of the peace process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
“The Security Council reiterates its full support to the United Nations
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC). It condemns the
recent killing of three of its personnel. It calls on all Congolese parties to
support the work of MONUC and demands that they refrain from any hostile
action against the personnel or facilities of the United Nations.”

2
