A/55/PV.109

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-fifth session

109th plenary meeting
Wednesday, 25 July 2001, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Holkeri . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Finland)

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 8 (continued)
Adoption of the agenda of the fifty-fifth regular
session and organization of work: request for the
reopening of the consideration of agenda item 39
Draft resolution (A/55/L.90)
The President: As indicated in the footnote to
document A/55/L.90, in order for the General
Assembly to consider the draft resolution contained in
the document, it will be necessary to reopen
consideration of agenda item 39, entitled “Support by
the United Nations system of the efforts of
Governments to promote and consolidate new or
restored democracies”.
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to
reopen consideration of agenda item 39?
It was so decided.
The President: May I further take it that the
Assembly agrees to proceed immediately to the
consideration of agenda item 39?
It was so decided.

Agenda item 39 (continued)
Support by the United Nations system of the efforts
of Governments to promote and consolidate new or
restored democracies
Draft resolution (A/55/L.90)
The President: I give the floor to the
representative of Fiji to introduce draft resolution
A/55/L.90.
Mr. Naidu (Fiji): I have the honour to introduce
the draft resolution contained in document A/55/L.90,
under agenda item 39. The draft resolution is entitled
“United Nations Electoral Observation Mission for the
general elections in Fiji in August 2001” and is
sponsored by the following Member States: Argentina,
Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium,
Canada, Chile, Cyprus, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Indonesia, Italy,
Japan, Luxembourg, Malaysia, the Marshall Islands,
Mauritius, Mexico, the Federated States of Micronesia,
Nauru, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Papua
New Guinea, Portugal, Qatar, the Republic of Korea,
Saint Lucia, Samoa, the Solomon Islands, Spain,
Thailand, Tonga, Tuvalu, the United States of America
and Vanuatu.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

01-46742 (E)

*0146742*

A/55/PV.109

I should also like to announce that, since the
publication of the draft resolution, the following
countries have become co-sponsors: Barbados,
Bulgaria, Cambodia, Denmark, Guyana, Ireland, Malta,
the Philippines, the Russian Federation, Singapore,
Sweden, Trinidad and Tobago, the United Kingdom,
Uruguay and Nepal.
I should like to thank member States most
sincerely for their participation in the informal
consultations and for sponsoring the draft resolution.
Fourteen months ago, on 19 May 2000, a group
of armed rebels stormed into the Parliament House
while Parliament was in session and took hostage the
elected Government. Its members were held in
captivity for 56 days. Our country went through a very
trying and turbulent period at that time, resulting in
lawlessness, the loss of a few lives, a severe economic
downtown, the purported abrogation of the
Constitution, the imposition of martial law, the
dismissal of the elected Government while it was in
captivity, a change of the presidency and the
appointment of the civilian interim Government.
The interim Government made a commitment at
the outset to returning the country to democratically
elected government within a two-year time-frame. I am
pleased to state that elections are now scheduled for
25 August 2001, just 15 months since the incident,
which is well within the two-year time-frame. We have
thus come a long way in a short span of time, in the
historical perspective, on the path to returning the
country to an elected Government.
It is against this background that the Government
of Fiji has invited United Nations observers to monitor
the elections. Our electoral history has always yielded
free and fair elections. However, the interest taken in
and the support given by the international community
for the well-being of our country during these very
difficult days — instead of abandoning us — has led to
the Government's inviting the United Nations observers
to be present to oversee the elections in order to get
first-hand information as well as to experience the
transparency of the entire process.
Determined to regain the standards of democracy
and good governance it is accustomed to, Fiji now
takes this initiative to allow the United Nations to
witness its return to parliamentary democracy and, with
the good will and leverage of the Member States, it
wishes to restore its credibility and reputation among

2

its partners. Fiji is confident that the presence of the
United Nations observers will send a very positive
signal concerning the acceptance of the results and the
future stability of the nation.
My delegation, with the sponsoring member
States, commends the draft resolution to this Assembly
for adoption by consensus.
Mr. Clodumar (Nauru): It is my privilege to
speak on behalf of the Pacific Islands Forum countries
represented at the United Nations in New York:
Australia, Fiji, the Marshall Islands, the Federated
States of Micronesia, New Zealand, Papua New
Guinea, Tonga, Tuvalu, Samoa, the Solomon Islands,
Vanuatu and my country, Nauru, in connection with the
draft resolution contained in document A/55/L.90,
under agenda item 39, entitled “United Nations
Electoral Observation Mission for the general elections
in Fiji in August 2001”, which is before this Assembly.
The history of the events that have brought about
the general elections were well covered in the
statement by the Ambassador of Fiji and therefore I
will not dwell on them here. It is sufficient to say that
the Pacific Islands Forum countries were deeply
concerned at the events that led ultimately to the
removal of a democratically elected Government in
May 2000. Members of the Forum joined together in
expressing these concerns during the most recent
meeting of the Forum at Tarawa in October 2000 and
the Forum leaders in their communiqué recognized and
endorsed the need to address the fundamental causes of
political instability in the region.
We, as co-sponsors of the draft resolution,
welcome the action of the caretaker administration of
the Republic of Fiji to call fresh elections under the
1997 Constitution and to open the upcoming general
elections, scheduled for 25 August 2001, to
international scrutiny. The latter act is unprecedented
in the history of Pacific politics and is testimony to the
desire of the people of Fiji for good governance
through the application of parliamentary democracy.
Furthermore, we see the call for United Nations
observers to monitor the elections as Fiji's way of
showing the international community its commitment
to returning to constitutional democracy.
By providing observers, the United Nations will
enhance confidence in the voting process and also in its
outcome. It is important to the future stability of Fiji
that, through the United Nations observers, the people

A/55/PV.109

of Fiji accept the outcome of the elections as a fair
reflection of the desire of the majority of the voters.
In conclusion, member States within the Pacific
subregion are pleased by the broad support for the
present draft resolution and we welcome the
considerable number and wide range of sponsors. We
hope that the draft resolution before us will find
general support within the membership of this
Organization.
Mr. De Ruyt (Belgium) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union,
which welcomes the general elections in the Republic
of the Fiji Islands to be held in late August 2001. The
European Union is deeply committed to the return of
constitutional democracy to Fiji. As elsewhere in the
world, the peace and well-being of that region are
closely linked to the existence of stable democracies.
The holding of periodic free elections is a first step and
a new beginning.
We all understand that democratization always
requires the cooperation and involvement of all
citizens, along with vigilance and sustained attention to
ensure respect for democratic values. Those elements
guarantee the proper functioning and the health of a
democracy. Here, we are convinced that the
deployment of the United Nations Electoral Observer
Mission will help create a climate of confidence and
peace.
The international community and the United
Nations system have an important role to play in
support of Governments’ efforts to promote and
consolidate the democratic process. Accordingly, the
European Union firmly supports draft resolution
A/55/L.90 and has joined in sponsoring it.
Mr. Satoh (Japan): First of all, I would like to
commend the caretaker Government of the Republic of
the Fiji Islands for its decision to hold general elections
at this early stage. We trust that the elections to be held
from 25 August to 1 September will lead to the
fulfilment of the caretaker Government’s mandate to
return Fiji to constitutional democracy.
We strongly welcome Fiji’s request that the
United Nations observe the upcoming elections. The
draft resolution before us in document A/55/L.90 will
respond to that request and will give the SecretaryGeneral a mandate to establish the United Nations
Electoral Observer Mission, which will be instrumental

not only in monitoring the general elections but also in
ensuring the smooth acceptance of the election results
by the people. We fully support that draft resolution
and are proud to be among its sponsors.
In line with our support for the draft resolution,
Japan has decided to provide grant assistance totalling
$370,000 to the United Nations Development
Programme in support of its technical assistance
package for the upcoming elections. As a part of that
assistance, 10 Japanese nationals will participate in the
United Nations Electoral Observer Mission.
The Republic of the Fiji Islands has experience as
a constitutional democracy, with a record of free and
fair elections. It is our sincere hope that the draft
resolution before us will help restore constitutional
democracy on the islands.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate on this item. We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/55/L.90. I call on the
representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Mustafa: Before the Assembly takes action
on draft resolution A/55/L.90, I should like to inform
members that the adoption of the draft resolution
would not entail additional appropriations for the
biennium 2000-2001. The required resources would be
accommodated under section 3, “Political affairs,” of
the programme budget for the biennium 2000-2001.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/55/L.90, entitled “United
Nations Electoral Observation Mission for the general
elections in Fiji in August 2001”. I should like to
announce that, since the introduction of draft resolution
A/55/L.90, Kazakhstan and Monaco have become
sponsors of the draft resolution.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/55/L.90?
Draft resolution A/55/L.90
(resolution 55/280).

was

adopted

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 39?
It was so decided.

3

A/55/PV.109

successful Rio+10. Without adequate mobilization of
financial resources, it will not be possible to achieve
the goals of sustainable development at the global
level.

Agenda item 101 (continued)
High-level international intergovernmental
consideration of financing for development
Draft resolution (A/55/L.82)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/55/1019)
The President: Members will recall that, at its
97th plenary meeting, held on 21 March 2001, the
Assembly decided to consider agenda item 101 directly
in plenary meeting.
In connection with this item, the General
Assembly has before it a draft resolution recommended
by the Preparatory Committee for the International
Conference
on
Financing
for
Development
(A/55/L.82). The report of the Fifth Committee on the
programme budget implications of draft resolution
A/55/L.82 is contained in document A/55/1019.
We shall now proceed to take action on draft
resolution A/55/L.82. May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/55/L.82?
Draft resolution A/55/L.82
(resolution 55/245 B).
The President: I
representative of Mexico.

give

the

was

adopted

floor

to

the

Mr. Navarrete (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): The
delegation of Mexico welcomes the Assembly’s
adoption by consensus of draft resolution A/55/L.82
relating to continuing the substantive preparatory
process for the International Conference on Financing
for Development.
That conference, which the Assembly has decided
will take place at Monterrey, Mexico, from 18 to
22 March 2002 and which will include a segment at the
level of heads of State or Government, will provide an
extraordinary opportunity to formulate an appropriate
international response to the challenges of global
economic interdependence. Such a response must be
inclusive and participatory and must be based on the
complete convergence of the efforts of all relevant
actors: Governments, multilateral and regional
institutions, the private sector and civil society.
Without a doubt, the success of the Monterrey
summit will determine to a large extent the fulfilment
of the commitments contained in the Millennium
Summit Declaration and the likelihood of a truly

4

In order to fulfil our commitment, we must
redouble our efforts to ensure that the preparatory
process continues to be carried out in a constructive
and progressive manner with the goal of achieving
significant results. It should fully incorporate the
important substantive inputs made during the
preparatory process, including those that were recently
included in the report of the Group of Eminent Persons
established by the Secretary-General. Finally, it should
benefit from other related efforts, including the fresh
determination in the area of cooperation for
development expressed at Genoa by the Group of 8.
My delegation wishes to take this opportunity to
urge all Members of the Organization to reaffirm their
commitment to the process of financing for
development with full resolve and determination, as
shown by the adoption by consensus of the relevant
draft resolution.
The President: The Assembly has thus
concluded its consideration of this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 101.
Agenda item 122 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee
(A/55/521/Add.4)
The President: If there is no proposal under rule
66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it that the
General Assembly decides not to discuss the report of
the Fifth Committee that is before the Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The President: Statements will therefore be
limited to explanations of vote.
The positions of delegations regarding the
recommendation of the Fifth Committee have been
made clear in the Committee and are reflected in the
relevant official records.
May I remind members that under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that

A/55/PV.109

“When the same draft resolution is
considered in a Main Committee and in plenary
meeting, a delegation should, as far as possible,
explain its vote only once, i.e., either in the
Committee or in plenary meeting, unless that
delegation's vote in plenary meeting is different
from its vote in the Committee.”
May I remind delegations that, also in accordance
with General Assembly decision 34/401, explanations
of vote are limited to 10 minutes.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the report of the Fifth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take a decision in the same
manner as was done in the Committee.

The Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft decision recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 6 of its report.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft decision
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President: We have thus concluded this
stage of our consideration of agenda item 122.
The meeting rose at 10.35 a.m.

5
