General Assembly-Twenty-eighth Session

78

of the General Assembly, and to submit, if possible, a
single draft Declaration to the Assembly at its twentyninth session through the Economic and Social Council;
2. Invites Governments to transmit to the SecretaryGeneral their additional comments and suggestions on
the said articles and amendments in time for their consideration by the Commission on Human Rights at its
thirtieth session;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit all
the documentation on the subject that was before the
General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session to the
Commission on Human Rights;
4. Decides to include in the agenda of the twentyninth session the item entitled "Elimination of all forms
of religious intolerance" with a view to considering,
completing and adopting, if possible, a Declaration on
the Elimination of All Forms of Religious Intolerance.

2185th plerwry meeting
30 November 1973
3070 (XXVIII). Importance of the universal realization of the right of peoples to self-determination and of the speedy granting of
independence to colonial countries and peoples for the effective guarantee and observance of human rights

The General Assembly,
Faithful to its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Mindful of the importance of the t:niversal realization of the right of peoples to self-determination and
of the speedy granting of independence to colonial
countries and peoples,
Bearing in mind the Political Declaration adopted
by the Fourth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Algiers from
5 to 9 September 1973, 20
Recalling its resolutions 2588 B (XXIV) of 15 December 1969, 2787 (XXVI) of 6 December 1971,
2955 (XXVII) of 12 December 1972 and 2963 E
(XXVII) of 13 December 1972, as well as resolution
VIII adopted by the International Conference on
Human Rights held at Teheran in 1968, 21
Noting with satisfaction the Secretary-General's report of 21 September 1973 22 ,and the assistance being
given to dependent Territories by certain Governments,
specialized agencies, intergovernmental organizations
and non-governmental organi21ations,
Disturbed at the continued repression and inhuman
treatment inflicted on peoples still under colonial and
foreign domination and alien subjugation, including
inhuman treatment of people imprisoned because of
their struggle for self-determination,
Recognizing the imperative need to put an early end
to colonial rule, foreign domination and alien subjugation,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of all people
under colonial and foreign domination and alien subjugation to self-determination, freedom and indepen20 A/9330 and Corr.I, p. 3.
21 Final Act of the International

Conference on Human
Rights (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.68.XIV.2),
p. 9.
12 A/9154.

dence in -accordance with General Assembly resolutions
1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, 2649 (XXV) of
30 November 1970 and 2787 (XXVI) of 6 December
1971;
2. Also reaffirms the legitimacy of the peoples'
struggle for liberation from colonial and foreign domination and alien subjugation by all available means,
including armed struggle;
3. Calls upon all States, in conformity with the
Charter of the United Nations and with relevant resolutions of the United Nations, to recognize the right
of all peoples to self-determination and independence
and to offer moral, material and any other assistance
to all peoples struggling for the full exercise of their
inalienable right to self-determination and independence;
4. Strongly condemns the Governments of Portugal
and South Africa, as well as all others which continue
to disregard United Nations resolutions bearing on the
right of all peoples to self-determination and independence;
5. Further condemns the policies of those members
of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and other
countries which assist Portugal and other racist regimes
in Africa and elsewhere in their suppression of peoples'
aspirations for, and enjoyment of, human rights;
6. Condemns all Governments which do not recognize the right to self-determination and independence
of peoples, notably the peoples of Africa still under
colonial domination and the Palestinian people;
7. Expresses its appreciation for the efforts of Governments, United Nations agencies and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations associated
with the United Nations which have extended various
forms of assistance to dependent Territories and appeals to them to increase fuirther such assistance;
8. Welcomes the initiative taken by the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection
of Minorities in appointing a Special Rapporteur2:1 at
its twenty-seventh session to prepare a detailed study
on the historical and current development of the right
of peoples to self-determination, on the basis of the
Charter of the United Nations and other instruments
adopted by United Nations organs, with particular
reference to the promotion and protection of human
rights and fundamental freedoms;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
assist the specialized agencies and other organizations
within the United Nations system in working out
measures for the provision of increased international
assistance to the peoples _of colonial Territories;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a
report on the implementation of the present resolution
to the General Assembly at its twenty-ninth session.

2185th plenary meeting
30 November 1973
3074 (XXVIII). Princip1es of international co•
operation in the detection, arrest, extradition and punishment of persons guilty of
war crimes and crimes against humanity

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2583 (XXIV) of 15 December 1969, 2712 (XXV) of 15 December 1970,
23 See E/CN.4/1128, part B,

resolution 5 (XXVI).
