VI.

35/190.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Voluntary fund of the United Nations for victims of gross and flagrant violations of human
rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 33 / 174 of 20 December 1978,
by which it established a United Nations Trust Fund for
Chile as a voluntary fund to receive contributions and
distribute humanitarian, legal and financial aid to persons whose human rights have been violated in Chile,
Recalling also its resolution 34 / 176 of 17 December
1979,
Noting that all Governments have an obligation to
respect and promote human rights, in accordance with
the responsibilities they have undertaken under various
international instruments,
Noting with concern that gross and flagrant violations
of human rights take place in various countries,
Considering the plight of victims of gross and flagrant
human rights violations wherever they take place,
I. Decides to request the Commission on Human
Rights to study, at its thirty-seventh session, the possibility of extending the mandate of the United Nations
Trust Fund for Chile to receive voluntary contributions
and further to study criteria for their distribution,
through established channels of assistance. as humanitarian, legal and financial aid to persons, not covered by
the mandate of other existing United Nations trust
funds, whose human rights have been grossly and
flagrantly violated, to those who have been forced to
leave their countries as a result of gross and flagrant violations of their human rights and to relatives of persons in the above-mentioned categories, and to report
thereon to the Economic and Social Council at its first
regular session of 1981;
2. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
submit to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session recommendations concerning the extension of the
mandate of the existing United Nations Trust Fund for
Chile to become a United Nations Trust Fund for Victims of Gross and Flagrant Violations of Human
Rights.
96th plenary meeting
15 December ! 980

35 / 191.

The right to education

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 34 / I70 of 17 December 1979
on the right to education,
Recalling the International Covenant on Economic
Social and Cultun,tl Rights, adopted by its resolutio~
2200 A (XXI) of 16 December 1966, which recognizes
the right of everyone to education,
Bearing in mind the importance of the Convention
against Discrimination in Education,' ix adopted on
14 December 1960 by the General Conference of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization,
Reaffirming the paramount importance of the implementation of the right to education for the full development of human personality and for the enjoyment of
other fundamental human rights and freedoms,
118

United Nations, Treaty Series. vol. 429, 1\/o. 6193. p. 93.

205

Convinced that the educational process could bring a
substantial contribution to social progress, national development, mutual understanding and co-operation
among peoples and to strengthening peace and international security.
Recalling that the establishment of the new international economic order requires effective support for
the improvement and expansion of educational systems
and for the training of specialized personnel and qualified cadres for the economic development of the developing countries,
Convinced of the topicality and urgency of provisions
on education contained in the International Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade,' 14
Bearing in mind the valuable work of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
in the education and training of national personnel, as
well as the importance of its contribution to the implementation of the International Development Strategy
for the Third United Nations Development Decade,
Welcoming the recommendations adopted by the
World Conference of the United Nations Decade for
Women on the importance of the non-discriminatory
implementation of the right to education for the improvement of the status of women in general and of
young women in particular,'"'
Taking note with satisfaction of the interest shown by
the Executive Board of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization for the implementation of General Assembly resolution 34 / 170,
I. Invites all States to consider the adoption of appropriate legislative, administrative and other measures,
including material guarantees, in order to ensure the full
implementation of the right to universal education
through, inter alia, free and compulsory primary education. universal and gradually free-of-charge secondary
education, equal access to all educational facilities and
the access of the young generation to science and culture;
2. Appeals to States which have not yet done so to
accelerate the procedure of ratification of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights and of the Convention against Discrimination in
Education, and to States parties to those instruments
and to other instruments in this field to put into effect
systematically their provisions;
3. Invites all States to give all necessary attention to
defining and determining in a more precise manner the
means for implementing the provisions concerning the
role of education in the International Development
Strategy for the Third United Nations Development
Decade;
4. Invites all specialized agencies to co-operate with
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to ensure education a high priority in
the implementation of various programmes and projects, in the framework of the International Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade;
5. Appeals again to all States, in particular the
developed countries, to support actively through fellowships and other means, including the general in,,,, See sect. V, resolution 35/56, annex, sect. 0.
'-'" See Report of the World Conference of the United Nations Decade
fi1r Women: Equality. Development and Peace, Copenhagen, 14-30 July
191!0 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.80.lV.3 and corrigendum), chap. 1.

206

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

creasing of resources for education and training, the efforts of the developing countries in the education and
training of national personnel needed in industry. agriculture and· other economic and social sectors;
6. Expresses its thanks to the Director-General of
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization for the report on the right to education
prepared pursuant to General Assembly resolution
34/170; 121
7. Invites the Director-General of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
to include in the consultation he will be holding with
Member States and specialized agencies prior to the establishment of the draft medium-term plan for 19841989 such points as wiJI enable him to meet the desires
expressed by the General Assembly in paragraph 3 (b)
and (c) of its resolution 34/170;
8. Invites the Director-General of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, in the light of resolution 34/ 170, and of the experience of that organization in this field, to submit to
the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session a report
on the most appropriate measures to be taken by Member States, at the national and international levels, for
the effective implementation of the right to education in
the application of the International Development
Strategy for the Third United Nations Development
Decade.
96th plenary meeting
15 December J980

35/192.

Situation of human rights and fundamental
freedoms in EI Salvador

The General Assembly,
Guided by the principles embodied in the Charter of
the United Nations and the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, 122
Conscious of its responsibility to promote and encourage respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all,
Noting that all Governments have an obligation to
respect and promote human rights in accordance with
the responsibilities they have undertaken under various
international instruments,
Bearing in mind resolution 19 adopted on 30 July I 980
by the World Conference of the United Nations Decade
for Women, 123
Dismayed by reports of human rights violations in El
Salvador and especially by the death of thousands of
persons and the climate of repression and insecurity prevailing in the country, which favours terrorism by paramilitary groups and enables it to be engaged in with impunity,
Deeply shocked by the vile assassination of Archbishop Oscar Arnulfo Romero, a prestigious personality, outstanding for his defence of the human rights of
the Salvadorian people, and by the persecution of Salvadorian figures such as Monsignor Arturo Rivera
Damas, Apostolic Administrator of the Archdiocese of
San Salvador,
111

A/35/148, annex.
Resolution 217 A (Ill).
See Report of the World Conference of the United Nations Decade
for Women: Equality, Development and Peace, Copenhagen, 14-30 July
1980 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.80.IV.3 and corrigendum), chap. I, sect. B.
122

123

Gravely concerned about the unknown fate of many
persons detained by the authorities,
Profoundly indignant at the assassination of Mr. Enrique
Alvarez Cordova, President of the Revolutionary
Democratic Front of El Salvador, as well as of five other
members of the Executive Committee of that Front, perpetrated on 27 November 1980 in San Salvador,
Considering that the supply of arms and other military
assistance will serve to aggravate the situation in that
country,
I. Expresses its deep concern at the grave violations
of human rights and fundamental freedoms in El Salvador;
2. Deplores the murders, disappearances and other
violations of human rights reported in El Salvador and
requests the Salvadorian authorities to take prompt action to curb the reprehensible activities of paramilitary
groups;
3. Urges the Government of El Salvador to take the
necessary steps to ensure full respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms in that countr)' and to guarantee the safety of Monsignor Arturo Rivera Damas,
Apostolic Administrator of the Archdiocese of San Salvador, whose life is in danger;
4. Appeals for a cessation of violence and for the establishment of full respect for human rights in El Salvador;
5. Calls upon Governments to refrain from the supply of arms and other military assistance in the current
circumstances;
6. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
examine, at its thirty-seventh session, the situation of
human rights in El Salvador.
96th plenary meeting
J5 December J980
35/193.

Question of involuntary or enforced disappearances

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolution 33/ 173 of 20 December I 978,
entitled "Disappeared persons",
Bearing in mind Commission on Human Rights
resolution 20 (XXXVI) of 29 February 1980, 1i. Economic and Social Council resolution 1979 /38 of I O May
1979 and resolution 23 adopted on 30 July 1980 by the
World Co"nference of the United Nations Decade for
Women,' 2 ·'
Convinced of the need to take appropriate action, in
consultation with the Governments concerned, to. promote the implementation of the provisions of General
Assembly resolution 33 / 173 and other United Nations
resolutions relevant to the plight of missing or disappeared persons,
Expressing again its emotion at the anguish and
sorrow of the families of victims of involuntary or enforced disappearances,
I. Welcomes the establishment by the Commission
on Human Rights of the working group which has been
asked to examine questions relevant to involuntary or
enforced disappearances of persons and to submit to the
Commission at its thirty-seventh session a report on its
1
"
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council. 1980,
Supplement No. 3 (E/1980/13 and Corr. I), chap. XXVI, sect. A.
