L

UNITED

NATIONS

THIRTY-SEVENTH

YEAR
th
MEETING:

15 JUNE

1982

NEW YORK

CONTENTS

.. .,. .... ,.,. ..... .... ., .... .,.. .. ., .

I

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . , . . . . . . , , , , . . . . . , , . . . . . . . . , . , , . . . . . . . . . . ,

I

The situation in Cyprus:
Report by the Secretary-General on the United Nations Operation in Cyprus
(S/15149and Add.l)...........,.........,.....,,......,...........

I

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2378)

SlPV.2378

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security CounciI (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records qf the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement
in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Courzcii. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date,

2378th MEETING
Weld in New York on Tuesday,
Mr. Luc de La BARRE
(France).

President:

de NANTEUIL

The representatives of the following States:
China.
France, Guyana. Ireland, Japan, Jordan,
Panama,
Poland. Spain, Togo, Uganda. Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics. United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America. Zaire.
Pw.rrnt:

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2378)
1.

Adoption

3-.

The situation in Cyprus:
Report by the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Operation in Cyprus (S/l5 149 and
Add. 1)

of the agenda

Adoption

i5 June 1982, at 10.30 a.m.

of the agenda

The situation in Cyprus:
Report by the Secretary-General on the United
Nations operation in Cyprus (S/15149 and Add.1)
I. The PRESIDENT
finterpwtcrtion S,orn Frcwh):
1 should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received letters from the representatives of
Cyprus, Greece and Turkey in which they request to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the provisional rules of procedure,

2. The PRESIDENT
(intoprettrtion fwm Fwnrh):
I should like to recall that in the course of the Council’s consultations members of the Council agreed that
an invitation
should be extended to Mr. Nail Atalay
in accordance with rule 39 of the provisional rules of
procedure. If I hear no objection, 1 shall take it that
the Council decides to invite Mr. Atalay in accordance
with rule 39.

3. The PRESIDENT:
Members
of the Council
have before them the report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations operation in Cyprus for the
period 1 December 1981 to 31 May 1982 [S//5/&
trud Add./ 1. Members also have before them the text
of a draft resolution which has been prepared in the
course of consultations by the Council [S/1.52/61.
4. It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution which is
before it. If I hear no objection, 1 shall put the draft
resolution to the vote.

5. The PRESIDENT
fintwprctrrtion fmn Frcnrh):
The first speaker is the representative of Cyprus, on
whom I now call.
6. Mr. MOUSHOUTAS
(Cyprus): I should like.
Sir, at the outset, to congratulate you warmly on your
assumption of the presidency of this body and to
express our appreciation for the efficient manner in
which you conducted the consultations on the draft
resolution for the renewal of the mandate of the United
Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP).
My congratulations
also go to the representative of
China. Mr. Ling Qing, who presided over the work
of this body in May in the most exemplary manner.
7. In paying tribute to your experience and skill.
Mr. President, I should like to thank you and all the
members of the Council for giving me the opportunity
to address this body and for the renewal of the mandate of UNFICYP
for another six months. which was
made necessary as a result of the circumstances
brought about by the non-implementation
by Turkey
of the United Nations resolutions on Cyprus.
8. It is a very pleasant duty for me to express again
on behalf of my Government and our people our deep
appreciation and warm feelings of gratitude to the
Secretary-General for his untiring and devoted efforts
in promoting the lofty objectives of the United Nations
in the cause of peace and justice. His high moral
standing, wisdom, diplomatic
skills and in-depth
knowledge of the problem of Cyprus qualify him as the
man in whom the hopes and aspirations of our people

have justifiably been placed in regard to assisting in
bringing peace and justice to Cypl-us. Cyprus is a
small country. but its problem involves principles and
lofty ideals.

15. The mandate of UNFICYP
having ju:st been
renewed, I believe it would be useful to underline Ehc
imperative and basic need for the implement;ation
of
United Nations resolutions on Cyprus and ‘to state
the main issues and salient aspects involved in the
question under consideration. In a world as turbulent
as the one in which we live today, routine renewal of
a peace-keeping mandate without some reference to
the reasons dictating it and to the causes which perpetuate it may be regarded as a disservice to United
Nations involvement in Cyprus and as a light approzlch
to a very serious matter,

9. Tackling the problems of Cyprus effectively in
a just, principled and farsighted manner will provide
the impetus the United Nations so badly needs in order
to solve other outstanding world problems.
10. I should also like to commend the significant
contribution
made by the Under-Secretary-General
for Special Political
Affairs, Mr. Brian Urquhart,
and by his collaborators and colleagues of the Secretariat, Mr. Sherry and Mr. Picco, and to register
our deep and sincere appreciation
to the Special
Representative
of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Hugo
Gobbi, and his assistants. for pursuing their difficult
and delicate task in Cyprus with dedication and
devotion.

16. Allow me to state at the outset that thle problem of Cyprus is not one of a difference between Greek
Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots or a religious difference.
as Turkey, for reasons of its own, often represents it:
rather, it is a problem of the invasion and occupation
of a small non-aligned country, Member of the: United
Nations, by a big and powerful neighbour. ‘Turkey.
which is a hundred times the size of Cyprus.

11. I also wish to express appreciation
to and
dommend the efforts of Major-General
G. G. Greindl
of UNFXCYP and the officers and men serving under
his command for the exemplary manner in which they
have carried out the duties entrusted to them by the
Council.

17. The ferocity of the attack, as seen purely in
terms of the size of the aggressor and of the victim.
was of unprecedented dimensions. As a result of this
bloody and ruthless invasion, thousands of ou:r people
perished, 200.000 defenceless people have been
rendered desolate refugees in their own country and
2.000 men. women and children are missing. About
40 per cent of our territory is at present under foreign
occupation and over 75 per cent of our national
IVsources have fallen under the control of the Turkish
invader.

12. At the same time, we should like to express our
profound gratitude to the friendly Governments which.
through voluntary
contributions
of personnel and
funds, enable the peace-keeping force to continue
carrying out its important mission of advancing the
cause of peace in Cyprus and, by projection, in the
world. Their contribution over the years to the peacekeeping mission of UNFICYP
in response to the call
by the United Nations demonstrates in action theit
adherence to the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations.
13. The hall of the General Assembly and the hall
of the Council still echo with the statements of disappointment made by representatives of a number of
States Members of the United Nations concerning the
inability of the Organization to implement its resolutions. The debates on the questions of Palestine, the
Falklands (Malvinas) and Lebanon brought to the foreground once again, and demonstrated
in times of
tragedy, the impotence of the world Organization to
fulfil its paramount
responsibility
of maintaining
international peace and security.

18. The problem of Cyprus is therefore a C:~US~ d
regaining occupied homes and lands. It is the C~LISL‘ of
a small State striving to protect its precious independence against the expansionist policy of a neighbouring
country. It is an international problem which directly
affects the peace and security of the area and of the
world in general. The fact that Cyprus is strartegicully
situated at the crossroads of three continents and in
the Middle East, which is at present in a state of WitI”.
makes the problem of Cyprus even more ac:ute rind
makes the need for an appropriate and just solution
to the problem a matter of paramount importance
to
the United Nations. The problem has been descritwd
by the previous Secretary-General as one ofthe world’~
three major problems, the other two being the Middle
East and southern Africa.

14. This main weakness of the United Nations was
long ago pre-eminently
demonstrated
in the case of
Cyprus, where resolution 3212 (XXIX),
which was
unanimously adopted by the General Assembly and
w,aslater unanimously endorsed by the Security Council in its resolution 365 (1974), thus making its implementation mandatory, remained and still is, regrettably, unimplemented.
Subsequent resolutions of the
General Assembly and of the Council on the question
of Cyprus in confirmation
of the aformentioned
resolutions, also remain unheeded.

19. That the problem of Cyprus is international
in
nature is evident from the above and from the fact thiit
it has for years been inscribed on the agenda of the
two main organs of the United Nations. If it were not
an international problem, the Security Council and the
General Assembly, as well as the Movement of NonAligned Countries and the Commonwealth
Heads of
Government,
would not have repeatedly consider4
the issue and would not have adopted resolutions and
declarations of support for the people and the Government of the Republic of Cyprus.
2

20. These resolutions call for respect for the sovereignty, independence,
territorial
integrity,
unity
and non-alignment
of the Republic of Cyprus. They
demand the speedy withdrawal of all foreign troops and
foreign military forces and personnel from the Republic
of Cyprus and the cessatior of all foreign interference
in its internal affairs. They further call for the return
of all refugees to their homes in safety.

matters of substance because of Turkish intransigence
in pursuing separatist positions. That no substantive
progress was made is also borne out by the SecretaryGeneral’s report.
27. Even on matters such as human rights and
fundamental freedoms, in the field of which we have
a plethora of international instruments setting uniform
internationally
binding standards, we are faced with a
total refusal to comply with these standards and
rights.

21. In spite of the provisions of these resolutions
there has been no respect for the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and unity of Cyprus, no
withdrawal of the Turkish troops, and not a single
refugee has been permitted to return to his home and
land. Turkey has absolutely and contemptuously
disregarded all General Assembly and Security Council resolutions, and by its aggressive actions it continues to challenge the world Organization and especially the Council.

28, Despite these serious obstacles and difficulties,
it is my Government’s
intention to proceed in good
faith with the now speeded-up intercommunal
talks
and to exhaust all avenues within a reasonable span
of time in search of a solution to the internal aspect of
the problem of Cyprus in accordance with the United
Nations resolutions.

22. The right to return to one’s home and land is an
inalienable human right, and no passage of time can
affect it. The dc j&to situation brought about by the
invasion and occupation cannot create acceptable
realities. At no time will the Government of the Republic relinquish the right of the refugees to return to their
ancestral lands.

29. The problem of Cyprus has an external aspect,
the invasion and occupation of our territory, and an
internal aspect, constitutional
matters, which it is
for the two communities
to solve. We feel that any
progress in the external aspect will no doubt have a
beneficial effect on the dialogue. Therefore, the withdrawal of the Turkish occupation troops from Cyprus
should be of paramount concern to this body, for it
constitutes the basis for the solution of the problem.
The Council and countries not members of the Council should bring pressure to bear on Turkey to end its
aggression and withdraw its troops from Cyprus.

23. In the case of the missing and disappeared persons, Turkish intransigence
and outright hostility
concerning
any effective investigation
to establish
their fate has so far frustrated the basic human desire
of families to be informed about missing relatives.
As a result, not a single case of a missing person has
been investigated. Eight years have passed since the
invasion and occupation, years of pain and agony, and
the families of the missing still do not know whether
their loved ones are dead or alive.

30. As far as the Government
of Cyprus is concerned, the President of the Republic of Cyprus,
Mr. Spyros Kyprianou,
speaking last week at the
twelfth special session of the General Assembly, the
second session devoted to disarmament,
reiterated
his proposal for the total disarmament and demilitarization of Cyprus and the creation of a mixed police
force composed of Greek Cypriots and Turkish
Cypriots under the control of an international United
Nations police force.’ We believe that this proposal
provides a rational way out of the Cyprus problem.

24, On the other hand, Famagusta, which continues
to be a priority issue, still awaits resettlement by its
lawful residents as a matter of urgency.
25. The freedom of movement of the Greek Cypriots
enclaved in the occupied areas has been further
restricted,
This is substantiated in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, specifically in paragraph 27. This
restriction is of special importance because it shows
the bad faith and the reneging on the Turkish side on
a solemn agreement reached in August 1975 at Vienna
[set Sf I 1789, anizrx].

3 1. Furthermore,
the President described as “most
commendable
and generous” the proposal of the
Prime Minister of Greece, Mr. Andreas Papandreou,
who offered to withdraw the Greek contingent stationed in Cyprus under the 1960 agreements provided
that the Turkish troops were also withdrawn and
a United Nations police force, as strong as necessary,
were stationed in Cyprus. Greece would be prepared
to undertake the additional expenses of such a United
Nations police force.?

26, The intercommunal
talks to which the United
Nations resolutions also refer have been proceeding
since May 1980 at an accelerated pace, using the Secretary-General’s
evaluation as a method or vehicle
of discussion.
These talks, which are carried out
under the auspices of the Secretary-General
and on
the basis of the United Nations resolutions and the
high-level agreements [S/12323, pam. 5 md S/1-3369,
pnra. 511 for the solution of the internal aspect of the
problem, have not made any progress whatsoever on

32. The presence of the Turkish troops in Cyprus
contrary to the United Nations
resolutions,
the
bitterness felt by the refugees who are forcibly kept
away from their ancestral homes and lands, the occupation and usurpation of their properties, the unending
suffering of the relatives of the missing persons, the
3

outright denial of the basic human rights of the
enclaved people of Cyprus. the bringing into Cyprus
of settlers from the Turkish mainland and the actions
taken by Turkey to change the demographic character
of Cyprus make up today’s grim picture of tragedy and
despair.

country or continent
his own freedom.

he comes from, loses a part of

37. Today, as they have for the past eight ycarc.
the bells toll for Cyprus. If the world community.
through the United Nations, does not act effectively.
decisively and fully to implement its resolutions, the
bells will continue to toll again and again for other
invasions, occupations and violations
of human
rights. The choice before us is as clear as the blue
skies of Cyprus: whether to give the Organization thrr
means to carry out its task or to allow it to belcomc u
helpless debating society, where General Assembly
and Security Council resolutions which have been
unanimously adopted, even voted for by the pnrtict
directly involved, remain ironically and tragically
unimplemented.

33. The Greek and Turkish Cypriots, who lived
and worked together amicably for centuries. are now
divided by foreign force of arms by an artificial barrier
that runs from.east to west. The historic links that were
forged between the two communities
have been
interrupted by tanks and the Attila Line. Cyprus, the
island of love. destined to be a bridge of brotherhood
and co-operation
for the three continents. which
surround it. is today a centre of conflict and strife.
34. The question remains: will Cyprus again be an
island of peace’? Will its people. all its people irrespective of ethnic background, be they Greeks, Turks.
Armenians. Maronites or Latins, be allowed to live
together as they have done before for many centuries,
in peace and harmony? The answer depends on the
will of the United Nations, and especially on the
Council. The answer is simple and positive, if the
Organization will take it upon itself to ensure compliance with the decisions of the Council so that it may
be the Organization not only of peace-keeping but also
of the maintenance of peace and security in the world,
the paramount purpose for which it was created. So
long as the United Nations lacks the means to enforce
its decisions through an effective system of collective
international security as provided for in the Charter,
there will always be acts of aggression. whether in
Cyprus. the Middle East or elsewhere. As long as the
peace-maintaining
process of the United Nations
remains incomplete, there can be no end to the aggressive use of force. Peace will continue to elude us.
Peace-keeping such as that in Cyprus, no matter how
constructive, is not enough. We need peace-making
and peace-maintaining,

38. Speaking on behalf of a country half-free und
half-occupied and on behalf of a people separatccl
against its will by force of arms-one third of whom
are refugees in their own land-1
pledge our support
for the strengthening of the Organization, because HC
believe that Cyprus’s future is directly tied to the
world’s future and that Cyprus’s continued tragedy
will without doubt be mankind’s tragedy.
(interpretcltion
39. The PRESIDENT
The next speaker is the representative
whom I now call.

jkcirn Fw~~~lt~:
of Greece, cm

40. Mr.

DOUNTAS
(Greece):
Mr. President.
I thank you and the members of the Council for
acceding to my request to participate in this debate.
41. I should like at the outset to extend to you, Sir.
my warmest congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of June. The
traditional ties of friendship which unite our two pcoples and Governments are well known. Hence., in the
performance of your tasks you can be assured of the
co-operation and assistance of my delegation. Thi*l
co-operation will for me be all the more agreeable
because of your many and distinguished personal and
professional qualities.

35. The credibility
of the United Nations depends
on whether it lives up to its declarations. Lip-service
is not enough. The United Nations must speak out
with a firm voice and couple that with effective action
when the situation warrants.

42. I should like also to pay a special tribute to the
representative of China, Mr. Ling Qing, whose skill.
ability, zeal and competence were proved dur-ing
the month of May, which was so critical for world
peace.

36. The apparent calm and tranquillity
which at
present prevail in Cyprus are the result of the suppression of the victim by the occupation and armaments
of the invader. The situation in Cyprus may appear
mercifully dormant, but it remains as explosive as the
high principles and lofty ideals which are put to a
severe test there. If mankind upholds these principles the world can look forward to a brighter and a
peaceful future. If the principles are allowed to be
trampled upon, however, the repercussions from this
injustice will be felt all over the world, because freedom
is one and indi<isible. When people in Cyprus or anywhere else in the world are deprived of their freedom,
each man, no matter where he lives, no matter which

43. Before stating some basic positions of my
Government concerning the Cyprus crisis, I wish to
express my Government’s highest esteem for the SCCretary-General, a man of rare character and inltellecl,
who is most distinguished for his humanity allid professional skills. I also take this opportunity to express
our sincere thanks to the Governments which are contributing to UNFICYP.
and in particular to those
participating with contingents.

4

44. As an interested party, my Government agrees
that the mandate of UNFICYP
in the Republic of
Cyprus should be renewed for another six months,
since the Government of the Republic has given its
consent.

own security. Similarly,
the Greek Cypriots are
deeply concerned over their own security because of
the permanent threat arising from the superior military might of Turkey, a threat which materialized in a
dramatic manner through the Turkish invasion. Moreover, we cannot overlook the determining factor of the
Cyprus problem, namely, that 80 per cent of the population of the Republic of Cyprus are Greek Cypriots,
whereas only I8 per cent are Turkish Cypriots.

45. As far as the report contained in documents
S/l5149 and Add.1 is concerned, I believe that it
constitutes an improvement compared to the previous
ones as to the description and the assessment of facts.
Our
attention has been caught, in particular, by the
first part of paragraph 57, which reads as follows:
“This does not mean that the well-known major substantive elements of the Cyprus problem are about
to be resolved.” Although this assessment does not
fully reflect our own, it is close to it, since we believe
that &here has been no progress at all as far as the very
substance of the problem is concerned and that some
mobility
on issues peripheral to the crucial ones
might only create a misleading impression of progress.

49. Faced with this situation. my Government feels
that perhaps the best way out with regard to these
realities in Cyprus might be found through the following
proposals. The Turkish troops should withdraw from
the Republic of Cyprus in accordance with the norms
of international law in general and, more particularly,
with General Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX), as
endorsed by Security Council resolution 365 (1974).
That would not only restore legality in Cyprus but also
alleviate the concern of the Government
of Cyprus
about the security of the Republic. The Greek contingent should also withdraw. An enlarged United
Nations peace-keeping force should be established to
meet the security concern of the Turkish Cypriot
minority. My Government
is willing to assume all
additional expenses which this increase of the Force
would entail, Immediately
after this step, intercommunal talks should start with a view to drafting a
constitution which would be based on internationally
accepted democratic principles and would comprise
all the internationally
recognized safeguards for the
protection of minorities.
A demilitarization
of the
Republic of Cyprus, coupled with international guarantees, should complement this settlement in order
to meet further security demands of the parties concerned.

46. In the eight years that have elapsed since
Turkish troops invaded the territory of the Republic
of Cyprus, in total disregard of the fundamental principles of international
law and of the Charter of the
United Nations, the Government of the Republic of
Cyprus has undertaken many efforts in good faith and
in a spirit of compromise with a view to achieving a
just solution and to restoring normalcy in the island.
It is most regrettable that the tremendous amount of
energy that has been consumed so far has been spent in
vain because of the intransigence of the other side in
maintaining
extreme positions. Unfortunately,
this
attitude on the Turkish side does not allow much hope
for a breakthrough.
The situation becomes more
complicated
because the Government of Cyprus is
forced to act under duress, namely, under the pressure
exerted by the Turkish military presence in the territory of the Republic of Cyprus.

50. The long road we have followed for eight consecutive years has led us nowhere as far as a solution
is concerned. It is therefore worth trying another
course. In so doing, we would be guided by international law and widely accepted principles, while
taking due account of the legitimate interests of all
parties concerned.

47. It is for this reason that my Government., in
reviewing the priorities of this highly complex international problem, has reached the conclusion that it is
inconceivable
to have free and meaningful negotiations between the Greek Cypriots and the Turkish
Cypriots as long as the aggression started with the
invasion of 1974 continues in the form of military
occupation of a substantial part of the territory of the
Republic of Cyprus.

51. I should like to assure the Council that in submitting this set of proposals my Government is inspired
by the most genuine desire for a soiution of this problem, one which, we hope, might also affect in a positive way the relations between Turkey and Greece
-a goal for the attainment of which our two countries should spare no effort.

48. My Government,
in its earnest desire to contribute positively to the search for a way out of the
present impasse, after reassessing the situation has
reached the following conclusions as to its fundamental components.
More than 36 per cent of the
territory of the Republic of Cyprus is occupied by
Turkish troops. The Government of the Republic of
Cyprus is unable to exercise its sovereign rights over
the whole area of the Republic. Thousands of Greek
Cypriots have been displaced and live as refugees in
their own country. On the other hand, the Turkish
Cypriot minority
expresses deep concern over its

52. Greece is a small country and, believe me,
cannot afford the luxury of polemics, of military
preparations and of wars. We only want peace, so that,
free from external threat, we may be able to dedicate
all our limited natural resources and all our intellectual
potential to the prosperity and progress of our people.
53. The distinguished
statesman and former Minister for Foreign Affairs of Turkey, Mr, Ihsan Sabri
5

Caglauangil. once said to a Greek colleague of his
that. according to a Turkish proverb. “A nation can
live without bread but not without dignity”.
We in
Greccc could not agree more. We whole-heartedly
share this sensitivity
and wisdom of the Turkish
nation. Our whole history is witness to it. We therefore firmly believe that long-lasting co-operation between Turkey and Greece can be made possible if the
two Governments are inspired by mutual respect fol
the dignity of both nations. Such co-operation would
serve the manifold
interests of our neighbouring
peoples.
While not intending
even remotely
to
cndnnpcr
either the sovereignty and security or the
legitimate rights of the Hellenic nation, my Governmcnt is prepared to work to this noble end most sincerely and in a spirit of understanding.

60. The Council has just adopted resolution 510
t 1982) to extend the mandate of the Force until 15 December 1982.
61. Despite
OUI
well-founded
and irrefutable
ob.jections. in the third paragraph of the resolution
reference continues to be made to the so-called “Government of Cyprus”. which, as members of the Council are well aware, is a title unjustifiably
“owned”
by the Greek Cypriot wing of the bicommunal Government of Cyprus: hence. our legally and politically
valid proposition that, since the disruption of the
bicommunal partnership Government in 1963. there
has not been a government legitimately representing
Cyprus as a whole. This terminology
thlerefore
reflects neither the dc ,j~ln~ nor the de ~~IL’IO reality in
the island and is misleading from all points of view.
The two national communities in Cyprus are and have
been the two constituent elements of the Cyprus dispute since December 1963, a dispute which arose us
a result of the Greek Cypriot armed attempt to destroy
the communal partnership and unite the island with
Greece. Moreover, this unwarranted reference to the
Greek Cypriot wing of the bicommunal Government
of Cyprus as “the Government of Cyprus” is incompatible with the state of affairs established by the
Basic Articles of the 1960 Constitution and is totally
unacceptable to the Turkish Cypriot partners of the
Republic, as it tends to give to the Greek Cypriot side.
at the expense of the Turkish Cypriot people:, what
the Greek Cypriots failed to achieve through force
from 1963 to 1974.

54. The PRESIDENT
(infl~rp/.l’trrfio/z
,/i.o/~~
Fwnd7):
The noxt speaker is Mr. Nail Atalay. to whom the
Council has extended an invitation in accordance with
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement,
5s. Mr. ATALAY:
Mr. President. before I begin
to make my statement. I should like to express our
appreciation. on my own behalf and on behalf of my
Government. to you and all the other members of the
Council for having invited me to participate in this
debate.
S6. I have requested to be allowed to participate
in the deliberations of the Council on the question of
the extension of the mandate of UNFICYP
for another
six months in order to express the views of the Turkish
Cypriot community.
which is solely represented by
the Turkish Fedcrated State of Kibris.

62. Nevertheless, I have been authorized to consent. on behalf of the Government
of the Turkish
Cypriot community-the
Turkish Cypriot wing of the
partnership government to be re-established--to
the
extension of the mandate of UNFICYP
until I5 December 1982. We shall continue to co-operate wirh
UNFICYP
as hitherto to help to make its operation
a success.

57. Allow me also. on behalf of my Government
and on my own behalf. to express our gratitude to the
Secretary-General
for the outstanding efforts he has
been making with devotion to resolve the Cyprus
conflict, which has been on the Council’s agenda since
the Greek Cypriot onslaught in December 1963.

63. We continue to hope, as I emphasized
on
numerous occasions at meetings of the Council in the
past, that UNFICYP’s
modus oprrandi and mandate
will be revised in accordance with the realities in
Cyprus.

33. I wish also to express our thanks and appreciation to the staff in the Secretariat and in the field,
especially Mr. Urquhart.
Mr. Gobbi. Mr. Sherry,
Mr. Schlittler-Silva
and Mr. Picco, and to the military and civilian personnel for the exemplary. impartial and efficient manner in which they have discharged
their important duties.

64. In paragraph 3 of resolution 510 (19812). the
Council “requests the Secretary-General
to continue his mission of good offices”. My Government
welcomes and supports that request. We shall give
our full co-operation to the dedicated SecretaryGeneral in his mission. The intercommunal
talks are
continuing on the basis of the Secretary-General’s
opening statement of 9 August 1979, contained1 in the
annex to document S/14100, which refers to the highlevel agreements of 1977 and 1979 [ihid.] and the bilateral agreements between the two communities.
and
also on the basis of the “evaluation”
paper of the
Secretary-General.
On this issue, in paragraph 55 of
the report, the Secretary-General states that:

59. I should like to take this opportunity to express
our gratitude to those countries that have contributed
men and f~mds to the Force in Cyprus, and especially
to Turkey for its unreserved contribution
to the maintenance of intercommunal
peace in the island and its
efforts to maintain our security while helping in the
economic development
of the Turkish community
which continues to be subjected to the Greek Cypriot
embargo.
6

“During the period under review, the search fool
a negotiated.just
and lasting settlement of the Cyprus
problem, as envisioned by the Security Council in
1975 when it entrusted the mission of good offices
to the Secretary-General,
entered a new phase. At
the intercommunal
talks in Nicosia, the two interlocutor-s, under the auspices of my Special Representative, embarked on 7 January on a systematic
review of the main elements of the constitutional
aspect. They have been following the ‘evaluation’
paper as a method of discussion and a framework
for the talks. As stated in my last report, the intercommunal talks continue to represent the best available method For pursuing a concrete and effective
negotiating
process, and the ‘evaluation’
papel
represents a determined effort to lend structure and
substance to that process.”
I am sure. therefore. that members of the Council will
agree with me that the fifth paragraph and paragraph 2
of the resolution do not accurately reflect the actual
basis on which the talks are continuing.

JXII’CI. 5). Let us hope that with the help of the Secretary-General and his staff further progress will be
made towards that end.
68. As members of the Council know weI1, nearly a
year ago a Committee on Missing Persons in Cyprus,
sanctioned by both the Turkish Cypriot side and the
Greek Cypriot side, was established to deal with the
issue of missing persons from both sides.
69. From the outset, the Turkish Cypriot side has,
in goodwill and in good faith, discharged its responsibilities towards the Committee on Missing Persons,
with the aim of resolving this humanitarian issue and
bringing relief to the afflicted families. In a genuine
effort to help the Committee, the Turkish Cypriot side
accepted in full the proposals put forward on 2 September 1981 by the impartial third member of the
Committee
on the method of investigating individual
cases, the remaining issue that was preventing the
Committee from functioning.
70. But the Greek Cypriot side has created a pseudodifficulty for the Committee on Missing Persons by
insisting on the attendance at its meetings of the
Greek Cypriot observers. In fact, the presence of
those observers at the meetings of the Committee has
no relevance at all to the substantive work of the
Committee
on Missing Persons, Moreover, the very
people whom the Greek Cypriot side has proposed as
observers have flouted the Committee
on Missing
Persons by grossly violating the confidentiality
principle of the terms of reference of that Committee, as
well as by publicly insulting two of its members: as a
result of that, the presence of the observers in the
Committee
will unavoidably
place its work in jeopardy. Even today, at this very moment, the same
persons who so grossly violated the confidentiality
of
the Committee have embarked on a new propaganda
campaign by patronizing an exhibition in New York,
later to be shown in London and Bonn, of pictures
of the Greek Cypriot missing persons.

65. Be that as it may, the fact remains that progress has started to be made at the talks, as is reported
by the Secretary-General in paragraph 56 of the report:
“The interlocutors
have succeeded in arriving
at common formulations of the ‘points of coincidence’ in a number of cases. In addition, there has
been a significant narrowing of differences as regards
many of the general provisions of the Constitution
as well as of the articles concerning fundamental
rights and liberties and certain organs of the federal
government.
The atmosphere has been co-operative
and constructive throughout, as acknowledged by
both interlocutors.
The process is continuing at
a deliberate but reasonable pace, which moreover
has now been accelerated to two meetings a week.”
66. It is pertinent to point out here that, in spite
ofthat fact, which should give us all cause for optimism,
the Greek Cypriot leaders have chosen recently to
take the Cyprus problem to different international
forums and to present a picture of events which is
diametrically
opposite to the findings of the SecretaryGeneral. We hope that the Secretary-General’s report
to the Council will be duly taken into account and
will result in an objective evaluation of the situation
in Cyprus by all concerned. Only with a more balanced
appreciation
of the problem of Cyprus can those
interested make a positive contribution to its solution.

the meetings of the Com71. Having boycotted
mittee on Missing Persons, first from I September to
26 November 1981, then as of 25 February 1982, the
Greek Cypriot side has deliberately inactivated the
Committee and is now exploiting the inactivity imposed
on the Committee on Missing Persons as a pretext to
continue its internatjonalization
of the issue of missing
persons in Cyprus for political propaganda purposes.
It is with such a purpose that the Greek Cypriot Side
is again attempting actively to internationalize
this
humanitarian
issue, despite the fact that the Committee is ready to embark on its actual task of investigating the cases as soon as the Greek Cypriot side
agrees to do this.

67. The very fact that the two sides in Cyprus have
been negotiating continuously since 1980 is an achievement and constitutes progress in itself, and the
Secretary-General
should be commended.
The
Turkish Cypriot side believes in the continuation of
the talks. The problem is a complex one. The talks
provide a realistic basis and an avenue for arriving
at a just result, which was formulated as early as
1977 in the Denktas-Makarios
guidelines [s/32323,

72. It is clear from the failure of the Greek Cypriots
to turn up at the Committee’s first meeting, its refusal
to consider individual cases, its breach of confidence,
and even its violent public criticism of, and unjustified
7

’

which had pinned all its hopes for a solution of the
Cyprus problem on the talks. as a result of the uncclnstructive and irresponsible statements made by th<
new Greek Prime Minister. Mr. Pnpandreou. Apart
from having made unconstructive and harmful statements during his election campaign, Mr. Paipandrectu
has unfortunately continued to make similar stalements even after he assumed the responsible officl:
of Prime Minister, For example, in his Independenss
Day message of 28 October 1981, Mr. Papandrcou
went so far as to say that “Cyprus is a p:art of the
territory of Greece.” On the following day, he publicI)
stated that “part of our national territory”--which
means Cyprus-still
remains under foreign occupation” . Such irresponsible statements hy Mr. Papandreou have been criticized in the Greek Cypriot pry’\\.
if only because such statements give the lie to the
false Greek and Greek Cypriot propaganda that trir’s
to portray south Cyprus as an independent State
which is trying to protect its independence in rL”giIrd
to Turkey.

accusations against. the independent member of the
Committee. Mr. Claude Pilloud of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, that the Greek Cypriot
side has shown no inclination to get down to the human
question of missing persons, I must point out the fact
that the Turkish side has had missing persons since
1963: they were taken by the Greek Cypriots from
their homes and roads and were not seen again. Had
the Greek Cypriot side not approached the problem
mcrcly for propaganda purposes. this matter, which
affects both sides. would have been closed long ago.
73. WC earnestly hope that the Greek Cypriot side
will end its boycotting of the Committee so that the
Committee
can embark on its humanitarian
task
without further delay.
74. I should like to direct the Council’s attention
to the continuation of the inhuman economic blockade
imposed on the Turkish community of Cyprus by the
Greek Cypriot administration,
which, under the selfassumed title of “Government
of Cyprus” and despite
ongoing intercommunal
talks, is still pursuing a relentless war of economic attrition and political isolation
against us. in gross violation of the Charter of the
United Nations and of point 6 of the 1979 summit
agreement between my President and the Greek
Cypriot leader [S//.?.?6[2. plrm. 51 I.

78. In order more fully to appreciate the vc’r)
serious harm which the unconstructive and obstructive
conduct and attitude of the new Greek Prime hlinister. Mr. Papandreou. is doing. not only to the pnlcpects for a successful outcome to the intercommunal
talks but also the very continuation of the tatks. it ik
useful to recapitulate briefly the present position t&tin
by the Greek Prime Minister.

75, Within the past four months, two Danish captains. ;I West German pensioner and a Syrian captain
hove been imprisoned by the Greek Cypriot courts
for sailing to Turkish Cypriot ports. The matter is all
the more serious when viewed in the light ofthe excuse
advanced by the Greek Cypriot negotiator. Mr. Mavrommatis. to the effect that the Greek Cypriot administration has to prosecute these people as proof of its
legitimacy
l*i.v-d-\+.s the international
community.
This excuse aggravates the offence committed
by
the Greek Cypriot administration
against shipmasters
all over the world. The Greek Cypriot administration’s pretence to be the legitimate Government of
Cyprus and its illegal prosecution of innocent shipmasters for allegedly calling at illegal ports are the
main obstacles in the way of I-e-establishing intercommunal accord. This excuse proves beyond any
doubt that the Greek Cypriot side is determined to
continue its aggressive policy against the Turkish
people of Cyprus under various pretexts,

79. This is what Prime Minister Papandreou c;;&i
on 23 March 1964. on the eve of his departure from
Cyprus to Athens: “The union of Cyprus with Grccil:
will be the union of two Greeces. Now WC slhnll mabx
them one.”
80. The unconstructive
and unhelpful
victci
expressed by Mr. Papandreou
about the Cyprt15
problem before his election, such as the allegation that
the Cyprus problem **is merely a question of the
occupation of an independent United Nations Member
State”. are only too well known. Some had harped
that such statements were merely irresponsible clcctioneering
gimmicks.
howevL’r.
Unfortunately,
Mr. Papandreou made a statement, after meeting
with Mr. Kyprianou
on 26 October 1981, to the
effect that “we shall remain faithful to our pre-elmstion pledges”. I am sure that all of those present ;~rr’
we]] informed about and well acquainted with the
aspirations of the Greek dream. That dream is ICI
unite the island with Greece. The father of Mr. Papltndreou having failed to fulfil that dream in the enrIb
1960s. his son-the
present Prime Minister
of
Greece-has now taken it up in turn. He is dreaming
of the Hellenization of Cyprus. I should like to invite
him to see and accept the realities. Cyprus has never
been and will never be a Greek island. Turks have
always existed and will continue to exist on Cyprus.

76. At a time when accelerated intercommuna]
talks are going on. this negative and unconstructive
attitude on the part of the Greek Cypriot side, in conjunction with the crusade launched against us by
Mr. Papandreou of Greece and his determination to
end the talks, are indicative of the serious problems
facing us at those talks.
77. Considerable concern and anxiety as to the
future of the intercommunal
talks have recently been
felt on the Turkish Cypriot side and, no doubt, on the
part of the vast majority of world public opinion.

81. Turning now to the problem of the invasion of
the island about which my colleague spoke, I shotlId
8

. . . . . The colrp of the Greek junta is an invasion, and from its consequences the whole people
of Cyprus suffers, both Greeks and Turks.”
[ihid.. pctrii. 32.1

like to state the following. Turkey did not invade the
island in 1974. Following the July 1974 coup by Greece
on the one hand and Nicos Sampson. his followers
and the Greek Cypriot National Guard on the other,
Turkey merely upheld its right and fulfilled its obligation under the Treaty of Guarantee.
The Turkish
intervention had the object of re-establishing the state
of affairs instituted by the 1960 treaties that brought
the Republic of Cyprus into existence.

87. Viewed within the framework of these compelling circumstances, the necessity and inevitability of
the Turkish intervention will be much better understood and appreciated.

82. So real was the danger of annihilation that had
Turkey failed to perform its legal and moral duty, there
would have been no Turkish Cypriot community today,
nor would there be an independent Cyprus. The island
would have been annexed to Greece.

88. Before concluding my statement I should like
to express the deep sorrow felt by the Turkish Cypriots
at the sudden death of Major-General
Quinn, former
Commander
of UNFICYP.
He was regarded as a
good, upright, impartial
soldier who unreservedly
did his best to keep the reputation of UNFICYP
at
the highest level. He had served in Cyprus prior to
taking over the command of UNFICYP
and was quite
aware of the facts of Cyprus. We pay a tribute to his
memory and, in so doing to the principles for which he
stood in the island.

83. Indeed, judgement No. 2658/79 of the Athens
Court of Cassation 21 March 1979, reads:
“Turkey’s
intervention in Cyprus as a guarantor
power within the framework of the Zurich and
London agreements is legal. Actually, the Greek
officers against whom court cases have been brought
are responsible for the intervention.”

89. The PRESIDENT
finterpwtrrfion J%MI Fwnch):
The next speaker is the representative
of Turkey.
I call upon him.

84. The Greek Government, under the premiership
of Mr. Karamanlis,
forbade announcement of that
decision on the grounds that it would endanger the
national interest.

90. Mr. KIRCA
(Turkey)
fintcrpwtcrtion
jkom
Fwrzch): I should like at the outset to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for the month of June. I wish you every
success in your work, and I assure you of the cooperation of my Government.
I must thank you in
particular for the very able and impartial manner in
which you conducted the consultations
with the
parties concerned before this meeting.

85. Furthermore,
it is worth noting that on 19 July
1974 Archbishop
Makarios stated before Security
Council [/780tl7 meeting] that the c’o~rp was aimed at
destroying the independence of Cyprus and that both
Greek and Turkish Cypriots were suffering because
of it. Xt is also worth noting that in this statement,
lvhich was made a day before the inevitable Turkish
intervention
of 20 July 1974, Archbishop Makarios
had openly accused Greece of invading Cyprus.

9 1. I should also like to pay a tribute to your predecessor, Mr. Linq Qing, representative of China,
who demonstrated his great ability as a diplomat in the
deliberations of the Council during the month of May
and presided over its meetings with wisdom and
efficiency.

86. The following excerpt from the official records
of the Council should suffice to prove that it was
Greece; not Turkey, that actually invaded Cyprus and
that Turkey was left with no alternative but to intervene in exercise of its rights and obligations under the
Treaty of Guarantee of 1960 in order to save the
Turkish people of Cyprus from annihilation at the hands
of the Greeks and to safeguard the independence and
sovereignty of the binational Republic of Cyprus.
This is what Archbishop Makarios said in July 1974
in this chamber:

92. I should like to take this opportunity to express
the condolences of the Government
and people of
Turkey to the family of Major-General
Quinn, former
Commander of UNFICYP,
who has just died. I should
like to address our appreciation
and thanks to the
people and Government of Ireland for the services and
contributions of one of its sons to the cause of conciliation and peace.
93. In the light of the positive developments that
have taken place in Cyprus following the resumption of
the intercommunal
talks in September 1980, the position of the Turkish Government on the renewals of the
mandate of UNFICYP
was that a debate which would
inevitably involve more or less acrimonious exchanges
should be avoided. Indeed, we find it quite incomprehensible that the Council should be obliged to carry
out this basically unproductive
exercise every six
months at a time when talks between the Turkish

“What has been happening in Cyprus since last
Monday morning is a real tragedy. The military
rCgime of Greece has callously violated the independence of Cyprus, Without a trace of respect for
the democratic rights of the Cypriot people, without
a trace of respect for the independence and SOVreignty of the Republic of Cyprus, the Greek junta
has extended its dictatorship
to Cyprus [Ihid.,
pnrrr. 9.3
9

I

and Greek communities
are under way in a remar-kably constructive atmosphere. The present exercise
in the Council seems to us all the more ironic in that
in other parts of the world parties to conflicts are not
even abie to meet together to resolve those disputes
in a peaceful manner, whereas the search for a solution in Cyprus continues steadily between the two
parties. And yet, despite this, the parties are obliged
to enter into polemics over a formality which this body
has to discharge.

rights and liberties and certain organs of the federal
government. The atmosphere has been co-operutivc
and constructive throughout, as acknowlledged by
both interlocutors. The process is continuing at a
deliberate but reasonable pace, which lmorewcr
has now been accelerated to two meetings a week.”
96. On instructions from my Government, I should
like to inform the Council that my Government fully
shares that evaluation of the Secretary-General of the
progress made during the intercommunal tallks.

94. The Turkish Government is of the view that the
best way to arrive at a solution in Cyprus is to encourage the intercommunal
talks under the auspices of
the Secretary-General.
Accordingly. we firmly believe
that everyone should refrain from actions or initiatives that could directly or indirectly jeopardize this
process of intercommunal
talks or encourage any of
those who desire to internationalize
the problem, for
the result would inevitably be a breakdown of the talks
between the two communities.

97. I would also take this opportunity to reiterate
the full support of my Government for the mission of
good offices of the Secretary-General and th’e process
of the intercommunal talks which, in our view, are the
best and only way of arriving at an overall *just solution of the question of Cyprus. We are grateful to the
Secretary-General for acting as an enlightened guide
and to Mr. Hugo Gobbi, his Special Repre!sentativr’
in Cyprus, for the statemanship he has demonstrated
during the intercommunal
talks. It is thank,s to their
determination and their patience and the effolrts of the
Turkish Cypriot side that progress has been made.

My Government
has noted with satisfaction
that on the initiative of the Secretary-General
the two
communities decided to accelerate the talks in Nicosia
and that following that decision the two parties are
now holding two meetings a week instead of one.
This decision provides further proof of the encouraging
potential of these talks, and the constructive atmosphere that prevails in those talks justifies our hopes
for the future. At a time when there is not the slightest reason for rejoicing at what is happening in other
parts of the world, the following lines, in paragraph 55
of the Secretary-General’s
report, offer us some
comfort. I shall now quote from that report:
95.

98. It is true that this question of Cyprus is very
complex and that the search for a successful outcome
requires quite a lot of time and difficult negotiations.
However, this fact should not make us’ h-get
the
progress that has been made or be used to bypass the
process of the intercommunal
talks. That is why my
Government is particularly glad to see that the %cretary-General, who is best placed to evaluate
the
situation at the negotiating table, shares the view that
the intercommunal
talks are the best way of finding
an overall settlement and states that in fact progress
has been made in the talks.

“During the period under review, the search fat
a negotiated. just and lasting settlement
of the
Cyprus problem. as envisioned by the Security
Council in 1975 when it entrusted the mission of
good offices to the Secretary-General,
entered a
new phase. At the intercommunal
talks in Nicosia,
the two interlocutors.
under the auspices of my
Special Representative, embarked on 7 January on a
systematic review of the main elements of the
constitutional
aspect. They have been following
the ‘evaluation’
paper as a method of discussion
and a framework for the talks. As stated in my last
report,
the intercommunal
talks continue to represent the best available method for pursuing a concrete and effective negotiating
process, and the
‘evaluation’
paper represents
a determined
effort
to lend structure and substance to that process.
In paragraph 56. the Secretary-General

99. I must also note that world public opi:nion now
understands the true nature of the question of Cyprus
and supports the process of intercommunal
talks itnd
the efforts made by the Secretary-General in exercise
of his mission of good offices.
100. We trust that these realities will become even
more persuasive during the months to come and that
this perception will facilitate the continuation of neg~tiations.
101. It is not by invoking unrealistic resolutions.
which the Turkish Cypriot community and Turkey
have rejected in part or in full, that this complex problem will be solved: rather, it is by serious negotiations.
carried out in good faith at the table of the intercommunal talks. That is the only method in which
any
hopes can be placed.

continues:

“The interlocutors
have succeeded in arriving
at common formulations
of the ‘points of coincidence’ in a number of cases. In addition, there has
been a significant narrowing of differences as regards
many of the general provisions of the Constitution
as well as of the articles concerning fundamental

102. For its part, the Turkish Government
Gll
continue actively to support the intercommunal
talks
and to give encouragement to the Turkish Cypriot
community on the path to the establishment of an independent, sovereign, bicommunal,
federal and bizonal
-and, if it desires, non-aligned-Republic
of Cyprus.
10

103. It is now time for me to make comments on
some passages in the report of the Secretary-General.
It is regrettable that the principle of the equality of
the communities,
a constituent element of the Republic
of Cyprus, is not respected in the titles used to designate individual
officials of the two communities.
Moreover. in the report the administration
of the
Greek Cypriot community is called the “Government
of Cyprus”, a status which that administration cannot
claim,

not recognize that they have that status-and
that is
what matters. And, incidentally.
it does not in any
way correspond to the actual situation. in which two
distinct community administrations
govern their own
communities
in their own respective zones. as was
recognized in the Geneva Statement of 30 July 1974
[wr S/l I.WS].
109. In this respect. I should like to quote the description of the situation given by the late Archbishop
Makarios to the Security Council on I9 July 1974. after
the tragic events that had begun on IS July. He said:

104. My first comment on the resolution that has
just been adopted by the Council relates to the reference in the third paragraph to the so-called Government of Cyprus. The Republic of Cyprus is an entity
that was established by international
treaty. The
“state of affairs” which was created by the Basic
Articles of the 1960 Constitution of Cyprus is guaranteed by an international
treaty, and the State of
Cyprus has committed itself to not amending them
or violating them unilaterally.
But the leaders of the
Greek Cypriot community have been responsible, since
December 1963, for the complete reversal-for
theil
sole benefit-of
the Basic Articles of that Constitution. That is the true nature and sole origin of the
Cypriot conflict.

“The cnlcp did not come about under such circumstances as to be considered an internal matter of the
Greek Cypriots. It is clearly an invasion from
outside. in flagrant violation of the independence
and sovereignty of the Republic of Cyprus . . .
And the invasion is continuing so long as there
are Greek officers in Cyprus”. [178Oth nzwtin~~,
ptrrm. I8 und 23.1
And they are still there. I quote again from Archbishop Makarios’ statement:
. . . * . the events in Cyprus do not constitute an
internal matter of the Greeks in Cyprus. The Turks
of Cyprus are also affected. The UXV~ . . . is an
invasion, and from its consequences the whole
people of Cyprus suffers, both Greeks and Turks.
The United Nations has a peace-keeping force
stationed in Cyprus. It is not possible for the role
of that peace-keeping force to be effective under
conditions of a military r~~rp”, [1hid., ptr,rr. 32.1

IDS. Those who now complain about Turkey’s intervention should learn henceforth to keep their word.
Unfortunately,
we see today that they persist in being
unable to learn the lessons of past events: indeed, the
representative
of Greece has just used the word
“minority”
in referring to the Turkish Cypriot community, thereby demonstrating complete ignorance of
those Basic Articles of the Constitution.

I IO. The Republic of Cyprus will not have a legal
and legitimate government until the state of affairs is
guaranteed by international treaty. as a result of intercommunal talks; in other words, until the essential
bicommunal
nature of the Republic is restored and.
this time, is reflected in institutions and arrangements
able to make any infringement of the principle of the
equality of the two communities
absolutely impossible. That can be done only in a Cypriot Republic
based. not on the notion of minorities. but on the
equality of the two communities-Turkish
and Greekeach with its federated State, within a bizonal and
federative framework. In this respect. I would once
again emphasize the contents of my letter circulated
in document S/l4445 of I5 April 1981.

106. Just a few days ago I was informed by my
Minister that during the Atlantic Summit the Prime
Ministers of Turkey and Greece had reached an agreement to try to improve the atmosphere between the
two countries.
We have just seen what Greece’s
understanding of that agreement is.
107. If the provisions of the Constitution and the
relevant treaties were respected, if the Turkish Cypriot
community had not been prevented from exercising
its constitutional
rights, if it had not been besieged,
if it had not been constantly harassed, there would
be no Turkish troops on the island today. It is ridiculous to see these cynical aggressors against the
Turkish Cypriot community
talking today about
aggression by Turkey. Turkish troops are on the island
at the request of the Turkish Cypriot community and
in accordance with the Treaty of Guarantee.’ They
will remain there until a final solution is reached in the
intercommunal talks,

reasons why the
Ii 1. Those are the imperative
third paragraph of resolution 5 IO ( 1982). which has
just been adopted, is unacceptable to Turkey.
112. I should also like to inform the Council that
the various reservations made and positions taken
by Turkey on the texts cited in the resolution and in
the report of the Secretary-General
have not changed
and remain valid both for the resolutions adopted
today and for the report of the Secretary-General which
we have befor< us.

108. By constant CYU/,YScl’drrt against the Constitution and its Basic Articles-which
are also rules of
international law-the leaders of the Greek community have placed themselves in the position ofusurpers
of the title “Government
of Cyprus”. Turkey does
II

113. You will no doubt recall, Mr. President, that
during the consultations on this matter that you were
good enough to hold, my Government supported the
view of the Turkish Federated State of Cyprus that the
important events that have taken place since the conclusion of the high-level agreements of 1979 [S//3.+‘69,
par’rr. 511 should be reflected in the text of the resolution.

competent for the purpose, to supply it with information or to give other assistance in examining matters
within its competence.”
I2 I. It is up to the Council to decide whether he has
been of any assistance. We feel that he took a.dvantage
of the opportunity accorded to him as an individual to
be “his master’s voice”. He supported the Turkish
aggression, the invasion, the occupation and1 the rape
of a small non-aligned sovereign State, a member of
the United Nations and the Commonwealth.
He supported the usurpation of the homes and lands of OUT
people-whether
Greeks. Turks, Armenians. Maronites or Ladns.

114. First, it was possible to resume the intercommunal talks because of the opening statement of
the Secretary-General
on 9 August 1980 [..?/14/0U,
(I/?/X>.\.]. That statement contains additional elements
of capital importance which now constitute one of the
bases of those talks. The Turkish Government does
not understand the reason for avoiding reference to
that statement. However, my Government reiterates
its view that that statement is also one of the bases
of the talks.

122. The Turkish representative
and Mr. Atalay
rejected the existence of the Government of Cyprus.
It is probably the only case in the history of the United
Nations in which the aggressor, having dealt a massive
and inhuman military blow against its victim, a small
State. having burned its people and its forests with
napalm bombs and having dissected part of its territory. declares triumphantly
before the body entrusted
with the maintenance of international peace and security that the victim had died and that the State and the
Government
of Cyprus do not exist. This is not
merely a case of adding insult to injury: it goes beyond
that,

115. Secondly. the presentation of the SecretaryGeneral’s “evaluation”
paper is in itself an event of
primary importance, and account should have been
taken of it in the resolution.
116. It is even more disconcerting
not to find in
the resolution any encouragement to the two communities to continue along the lines of the Secretat-yGeneral’s report.

123. Cyprus was invited to address this blody under
rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure of the
Council. as a sovereign Member State of the United
Nations. and you, Mr. President, were kind enough to
call on me, referring to me as the representative
of
Cyprus. This is sufficient answer to the representative
of Turkey.

117. The resolution extends the stationing in Cyprus
of UNFICYP
for a further period of six months.
Since Mr. Nail At&y,
the representative
of the
Turkish Federated State of Cyprus, has just informed
the Council of the consent of his authorities,
the
Turkish Government for its part gives its agreement
to this extension of the mandate. However, I should
like to draw the Council’s
attention to the request
made by the representative of the Turkish Federated
State of Cyprus. which he has already made several
times on similar occasions in the Council, that the
mandate of the Force, drafted in 1964, should be
revised to make it more in keeping with existing conditions in Cyprus. The Turkish Government
fully
supports that request.

124. On the other hand, Mr. Atalay was invited
under rule 39, as an individual and not as a representative of the so-called Turkish Federated State of
Cyprus, which is recognized by no one. The members
of the Council are aware that the so-called Turkish
Federated State of Cyprus is an illegal, fictitious
and
non-existent entity representing no one. Its selfdeclaration was regretted by the Council [~~lsolrrtion 367 f/975)] and condemned at the Conference
of
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the Non-Aligned
Countries held at Lima from 25 to 30 August 197ZKd
The so-called Turkish Federated State of Cyprus has
no territory of its own, since the sovereignty of the
Government of Cyprus extends over the whole of the
territory of Cyprus, including the occupied part of the
island. The General Assembly, in paragraph 3 of iu
resolution 34/30 of 20 November 1979, not only affirm5
the right of the Republic of Cyprus and its people tc
full and effective sovereignty and control over tht
whole of its territory but also calls on all States tr
support and help the Government of Cyprus to exer
cise the above-mentioned rights.

118. Lastly, I must not fail to express here once
again the gratitude of my Government to those States
that contribute to LJNFICYP and also to the gallant
officers, non-commissioned
officers and men of that
Force, not forgetting civilian personnel attached to it.
119. The PRESIDENT
(intclp~etntionfr.om Frcrzch):
I shall now call on those representatives
who have
asked to speak in exercise of th> right of reply.
120. Mr. MOUSHOUTAS
(CypruS); Mr. Atalay
was invited by the Council to speak as ‘an individual
under rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure,
which states:

125, The so-called Turkish
Federated
State
Cyprus was set up by the Turkish military forces
occupation in order to serve their own purpose.

“The Security Council may invite members of
the Secretariat or other persons, whom it considers
12

o
a

126. With regard to the allegation of economic
embargo, if the usurpation of our homes and lands
were not so tragic, it would be ironic indeed for anyone
to assert that the sovereign State of Cyprus and its
people cannot exercise their inalienable right to protect by all legal means what by their sweat and tears
they have created and what is rightfully theirs. It is
not an economic embargo to refuse to accept the do
ftrt*k, situation of usurpation of our properties and lands
where we have lived, built and prospered for centuries.
127. The Government of Cyprus. far from imposing
an economic blockade on the Turkish Cypriot community, has an obligation to all its citizens, be they
Greeks, Turks, Armenians, Maronites, or Latins.
to protect their property rights. On this legal basis,
the Government has declared illegal all ports of entry
in those areas that have fallen under the occupation
of the Turkish troops and warned that arrivals of ships
at those ports would constitute a violation of the
Republic’s laws. Besides the Government, the legitimate owners of properties in the occupied territories
which have been usurped by the invaders have the duty
and the legal and moral right to take measures, by
recourse to courts of law or to international organizations, to stop the exploitation
of their properties
by those who illegally hold them.

claim that the two main communities
of Cyprus
cannot live peacefully together in the island without
some sort of geographical separation.”
[S’/57oC (!f
1.5 .Irrnc 1064, prrru. I/.7].
And
. . . . . the hardships suffered by the Turkish
Cypriot population are the direct result of the leadership’s self-isolation policy, imposed by force on the
rank and file” [S/6426 of 10 JUIW 1065. prrrtr. 1061.
133. The representative of Turkey and Mr. Atalay
asserted that Turkey acted in accordance with the
Treaty of Guarantee. That assertion is unjustified and
is a baseless distortion of reality. Article IV of the
Treaty of Guarantee provides that
“In the event of a breach of the provisions of the
present Treaty, [the guaranteeing Powers] undertake to consult together with respect to the representations or measures necessary to ensure observance
of those provisions.
“In so far as common or concerted action may not
prove possible, each of the three guaranteeing
Powers reserves the right to take action with the sole
aim of re-establishing the state of affairs created by
the present Treaty”.’
Turkey has never complied with those provisions
because. first. it invaded Cyprus on 20 July 1974, three
days before an agreed meeting of the three guaranteeing Powers was to take place in London, and,
secondly, as the facts show, it did not invade with the
sole aim of re-establishing the constitutional
order in
the island but rather with the sole aim of destroying
that constitutional
order-and
Cyprus itself. Even
today they do not accept the constitutional order which
prevailed at the time the invasion and occupation took
place.

128. The allegation of “onslaught”
on the Turkish
Cypriot community is pure political propaganda being
used by Turkey and its organs to justify the brutal
invasion and continued military occupation of the
territory of the Republic of Cyprus under the pretext
of protecting the Turkish Cypriot community.
129. For centuries all Cypriots, whether Greek,
Turkish, Armenian,
Maronite or Latin, lived and
worked side by side in peace and harmony in mixed
villages, proof of their peaceful coexistence and the
historical links forged between them.

134. But most important,
even if we assume that
article IV of the Treaty of Guarantee gives Turkey the
right to use force- which it does not, and which it
could not possibly do-then
that article would be null
and void, because it would be contrary to Article 2,
paragraph 4 of the Charter of the United Nations.

130. It was Ankara’s policies of segregation and
partition implemented by the extremist eIements of t.he
Turkish Cypriot leadership that brought about the
artificial barriers between the Greek and Turkish
communities.

135. The Turkish invasion was an absolute act of
aggression, as defined in article 3 of the General
Assembly’s Definition
of Aggression, which states
that aggression is, inter ah, the

131, Ample evidence of this is provided by the
regular six-monthly
reports of Secretary-General
U Thant, which demolish the allegation and show
irrefutably the falseness of the accusation of mistreatment of the Turkish-Cypriot
community by the GOVernment of Cyprus.

“invasion or attack by the armed forces of a
occupation,
howevet
State . . . or any military
temporary, resulting from such invasion or attack.
or any annexation by the use of force of the territory of another State or part thereof’.’

132. It will suffice to quote two excerpts from
reports of the Secretary-General,
the highest independent authority:

Moreover,
states:

Lb. . .
the lack of movement of Turkish Cypriots
outside of their areas is also believed to be dictated
by a political purpose, namely, to reinforce the

article

1 of the Definition

of Agression

“Agression is the use of armed force by a State
against the sovereignty. territorial integrity of polit13

30,000 troops enter a foreign State, illegally and ~&piIW
the will of 80 per cent of the population of that Stittc.
against the will of its Government, what is that action
if not an invasion? In our very humble view, it is indeed
an invasion, but perhaps there are some other views.
I reply completely on the knowledge and experience
of the members of the Council, and I am confident
that they will draw the proper conclusions from
Turkey’s actions in Cyprus.

ical independence of another State. or in any other
manner inconsistent with the Charter of the United
Nations, as set out in this Definition”.
136. The Turkish invasion of Cyprus constitutes
an act of aggression: the use of the term “peace
operation”
or the notion of entering Cyprus in order
to protect the s~ofr~s c/lro are ways of hiding Turkish
guilt.
137. A reference was made to equality. We too
believe that-as the Preamble to a certain Constitution
has it-all men are created equal. We also believe that
they must have equality of opportunity,
and that they
should be treated with equality. But what the Turkish
representative
is referring to is not equality among
individuals,
but numerical
equality.
We cannot
accept the notion that 80 per cent equals 18 per cent.
We cannot accept that because it strikes at the roots
of democracy, and when that happens an imbalance
is caused. That imbalance cannot bring about federation, which is supposed to be based on balance.

143. As to what constitutes a minority or a majority. I think that things are equally simple: if in a State
80 per cent of the population is of a certaiin ethnic
group, and 18 per cent of the population belongs LO
another ethnic group, then we would conventionally
call the community of 80 per cent the majorit:y ilnd the
community of 18 per cent the minority.
144. As I said before, it is far from being my intention to comment further on what has been stjlid. 1 will
completely avoid commenting on what was snid about
my Government by the gentleman who spoke in an
individual capacity. He is an individual and Ihe is free
to state his views.

138. A complaint was made about “internationalization”. As we have had occasion to state before. the
problem or Cyprus is an international
problem. It is
a problem of invasion and occupation, and the competent international
bodies, including
the United
Nations, the Movement
of Non-Aligned
Countries
and the Commonwealth
Heads of Government. cannot
but be seized of that problem.

145. I think that with these brief remarks I have
completed the comments I wanted to make. I should
simply like to invite the members of the Council
to
direct their attention to the very constructive propos;lls
I have just made with regard to the future of thle Cyprus
question.

139. The PRESIDENT
(intrrprctntiot? ftwn Frcnc~lz):
The representative of Greece has asked to be allowed
to speak in exercise of the right of reply. and I call on
him.

146. As British lawyers say, I have made my C;LSI:
and I rest my case.

140. Mr. DOUNTAS
(Greece):
Mr. President.
I should like to assure you and the other members
of the Council that I am not going to embark upon
polemics or to take a great deal of the Council’s time.
My only motive for speaking in this debate was to
present the Council with a set of proposals by my
Government
concerning the solution of the Cyprus
problem. In doing so, I had to describe certain facts
of the Cyprus scene as we see them.

148. Mr. KIRCA
(Turkey)
(intrr;prcr~rtir,tl $*rtttl
Fwtzch): I shall be very brief. First of all, I should
like to say that it is an affront to the Secretary-General
to try to put words in his mouth to the effect that he
considers the aim of the federalist thesis of the Turkish.
Cypriot community to be the partition of the Republic
of Cyprus. This is a falsification.

147. The PRESIDENT
(intrr.pr.c~tcrtic,nf,-onl Frr~rrc.hl:
I call on the representative of Turkey.

149. From a desire to safeguard the intercommunn’
talks and in deference to the Council, I refuse LO bi
the instrument of provocations
on the Greek ant
Greek Cypriot sides. I shall therefore not respont
to them. I shall not deign to reply to falsification
bl
further falsification, or to discourtesy by further dis

141. I think that the proposals I submitted were
constructive ones. Perhaps I was naive, but I was
expecting some sort of comment from my Turkish
colleague. Instead, the Council heard blatant and
cynical assurances that the Turkish troops will remain
in Cyprus. I leave it to the members of the Council
to draw their own conclusions from that most sincere
statement of Turkish intentions.

courtesy.

NOTES

142. On a second point, the representative of Cyprus
has dealt in detail with the question of invasion and
its legal aspects. I shall not try to be as comprehensive
and thorough as he was in his presentation: indeed, he
has exhausted the subject. I should like simply to ask
the members of the Council a question: If about

1 Ojjjdd

R~wrd.~

of t/w Gcnml

Asscmhly.

T~w/fi/l

!Tpccftrl

.yct-

sion, P/~n~ry h4ccfing.s. 9th meeting, para. 34.
2 Ibid., para. 36.
3 United Nations, Twuty Series. vol. 382, No. 5475.
4 A/l0217 and Corr.1, annex, Political Declaration. para. 63.
s General Assembly resolution 3314 (XXIX), annex.
--_c

-

Litho in United Nations, New York

00300

88-609X9--October IYX9-?.#50
