S/PV.9202

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9202nd meeting

Wednesday, 23 November 2022, 4 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Agyeman. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ghana)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Spasse
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. De Rivière
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Mrs. Kamboj
Ms. Moran
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Mr. Kariuki
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-70986 (E)
*2270986*

S/PV.9202

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Zaporizhzhya, Odesa and Chernihiv were reportedly
completely disconnected from electricity. In Kyiv, the
Darnytskyi thermal power plant was hit. All of Kyiv
region was reportedly deprived of electricity, and the
approximately 3 million people of the capital were left
without running water.

The meeting was called to order at 4.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of the Republic of Moldova, Romania
and Ukraine to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Volodymyr Zelenskyy, President of Ukraine, who
is joining this meeting via video-teleconference.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.
Ms. DiCarlo: Relentless, widespread attacks
against civilians and critical infrastructure are
continuing across Ukraine, with devastating
consequences. Overnight, a new wave of missile and
drone strikes terrorized the people of Kyiv, Odesa, Lviv,
Mykolayiv, Kharkiv and Zaporizhzhya. As Ukrainians
desperately sought shelter from the bombing, they also
had to contend with freezing temperatures. Indeed,
these latest attacks renew fears that this winter will be
catastrophic for millions of Ukrainians, who face the
prospect of months of frigid weather with no heating,
electricity, water or other basic utilities.
According to initial media reports quoting local
authorities, the strikes today killed or injured over 30
civilians as residential buildings were hit in Kyiv and
the towns of Chabany and Vyshhorod, on the outskirts
of the capital. We have also seen reports of an overnight
strike on a maternity hospital in the town of Vilnyansk,
in the Zaporizhzhya region. A 2-day-old baby was
reportedly killed in that attack.
Even before the latest strikes, Ukrainian officials
state that there were practically no large thermal or
hydroelectric power plants left intact in Ukraine.
Today’s barrage is likely to make the situation even
worse. Emergency shutdowns were introduced today
in all regions of Ukraine, and regions such Lviv,
2/16

23/11/2022

The Ladyzhyn power plant, in the Vinnytsia region,
was also hit. Russian strikes also damaged energy
infrastructure in Kremenchuk, Lviv and Odesa. Reports
note that Odesa has no electricity or running water.
Three nuclear power plants still operating — Rivne,
South Ukraine and Khmelnytskyi — were reportedly
disconnected from Ukraine’s energy grid as a result of
today’s attacks.
People in the neighbouring Republic of Moldova
are also likely to suffer consequences. Today’s strikes
reportedly resulted in a blackout across the Republic of
Moldova, a country that is already suffering an energy
shortage due to the war.
The World Health Organization warned this week
of a life-threatening winter in Ukraine. We must ensure
that the country’s most vulnerable people are adequately
protected and able to cope in the months ahead.
Humanitarian actors in Ukraine are working to support
people facing the challenges imposed by the energy
shortage. In the past few weeks more than 430,000 people
have received some sort of direct winter assistance, and
nearly 400 generators have been distributed to ensure
energy supplies to hospitals, schools and other critical
facilities. I will say it once again. Attacks targeting
civilians and civilian infrastructure are prohibited
under international humanitarian law. So are attacks
on military objectives that may be expected to cause
harm to civilians that would be excessive in relation to
the concrete and direct military advantage anticipated.
The United Nations strongly condemns those attacks
and demands that the Russian Federation immediately
cease those actions. There must be accountability for
any violations of the laws of war.
We also remain deeply concerned about the
situation at the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant,
the largest in Europe. The reported shelling at the
plant over the weekend is reckless and deplorable. The
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) confirmed on Monday that despite
the severity of the shelling, key equipment remained
intact and there were no immediate nuclear safety or
security concerns. That is a result of sheer luck, and
22-70986

23/11/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

we do not know how long that luck will last. The world
cannot afford a nuclear catastrophe. Underscoring
the risks of those attacks, just a couple of hours ago
the IAEA reported that the plant had lost external
electricity access and is relying on diesel generators to
power cooling and essential nuclear safety functions.
All military activities at and around the plant must
cease immediately.
Amid today’s dark news, I want to mention a
positive development. The parties today reported yet
another prisoner exchange. Thirty-five Russian and
36 Ukrainian prisoners were released. We strongly
encourage the parties to continue those releases
and ensure that they fulfil their obligations under
international humanitarian law, in particular the third
Geneva Convention.
The temperature in Kyiv right now is said to be
-1°C, with snow forecast. The weather we have been
both preparing for and dreading is now upon the people
of Ukraine. We must all work together to prevent a
man-made humanitarian catastrophe this winter. The
resulting shocks would exact a heavy price not only on
Ukrainians but on us all. Immediate de-escalation is
needed. We reiterate our call to all Member States and
international organizations to support efforts to that end,
with respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Ukraine within its internationally recognized
borders. The United Nations will continue to do its part
on the ground and remains ready to support all efforts
towards peace, in line with the Charter of the United
Nations and international law.
The President: I thank Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Volodymyr
Zelenskyy, President of Ukraine.
President Zelenskyy (spoke in Ukrainian; English
interpretation provided by the delegation): We are
awaiting a very firm reaction from the world to today’s
Russian terror — from our responsible partners and
friends, and not just observers — a reaction from all
who genuinely acknowledge the Charter of the United
Nations. We are doing everything we can. Ukraine has
presented a peace formula, and the world has heard it.
It has 10 points on how to restore the full force of the
Charter, which Russia has violated, in order to guarantee
the security of Ukraine, Europe and all the peoples of
the planet who are suffering from the consequences of
Russia’s aggression.

S/PV.9202

In response to our peace formula, Russia is
following up with the items that make up its formula
of terror. The very next day after I presented Ukraine’s
peace formula in Indonesia at the summit of the Group
of 20 — or rather the Group of 19 — we received 10
Russian missiles for every item in the peace formula,
and that reaction has continued to go even further. We
liberated Kherson, and as soon as the Russian army fled
the city it began to methodically devastate it on a daily
basis. Last night more missiles fell in the Zaporizhzhya
region. This time, a hospital’s maternity ward was hit.
The Russian Federation took the life of a two-day-old
child, killed by a Russian missile. People have died and
scores are injured. Today a residential building was hit
in Vyshhorod, leaving 35 people injured and killing
four. Today, in just one day, we have been the target of
70 missiles. That is Russia’s formula of terror.
All of that is harming our energy infrastructure.
Besides the residential buildings that have been
hit, hospitals, schools and transport have been
damaged — everything has been affected. Russia’s
terror has led to a complete blackout, not just in Ukraine
but in our neighbour Moldova as well. As power
supplies are cut off, it is important to understand what
Russia wants to achieve with this impact. Energy terror
is a weapon of mass destruction. When the temperature
is below 0°C and millions of people are left without
electricity, heat and water, that is an obvious crime
against humanity.
Among the members of the Security Council today
sit representatives of a State that offers the world
nothing but terror, destabilization and disinformation.
Russia’s formulas offer nothing but that. That is why
I would like to re-emphasize that it is time to support
Ukraine’s peace formula. We must leave terror no
opportunity to make its mark in the world. That is why
we are turning to our partners for support to protect
our skies. We need modern and effective air-defence
and missile-defence systems, and I would like to thank
those who are offering and supplying them. What can
the representative of the terrorist State tell the Council
now? We can obviously see that peaceful people are
suffering. I therefore urge him to take concrete steps to
protect humankind and life. For a long time Russia has
been trying to turn the Security Council into a platform
for rhetoric, but the Council was created as the world’s
most powerful platform for decisions and actions, and
we can demonstrate that together now. The Council
should provide a clear assessment of the actions of

22-709863/16

S/PV.9202

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

the terrorist State in accordance with Chapter VII of
the Charter. In that regard, Ukraine proposes that the
Council consider a draft resolution condemning any
form of energy terror. Let us see if anyone in the world,
including Russia, is willing to say that using terror
against civilians is a good thing.
I would like to confirm Ukraine’s invitation for the
United Nations to send a team of experts to examine
the critical infrastructure of our country. It will be
necessary in order to carry out a proper assessment of
the damage to the infrastructure that supports the lives
of tens of millions of people.
Finally, justice must be restored within the United
Nations itself. A terrorist State should not participate
in any voting concerning its own aggression and terror.
When the instigator of a war, the party responsible for
terror, can block any attempt by the Security Council to
fulfil its mandate, the result is a dead end. It is absurd
that the right of veto is granted to a party waging a
criminal war. We can and must lead the world out of this
impasse. We cannot be held hostage by one international
terrorist. Russia is doing everything to make electricity
generators a more powerful tool than the Charter of the
United Nations, but we can restore the Charter’s real
meaning. We need the Council’s decisive action.
Glory to Ukraine.
The President: I shall now give the floor to those
members of the Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I would like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo for her briefing and President
Zelenskyy for joining us today. His powerful words
laid out the devastating consequences of Russian
attacks on Ukraine’s critical infrastructure and their
unconscionable impact on civilians.
It seems that Putin is determined to reduce
Ukraine’s energy facilities to rubble. His purpose
could not be more clear or cold-blooded — he is clearly
weaponizing winter to inflict immense suffering
on the Ukrainian people. He has decided that if he
cannot seize Ukraine by force, he will try to freeze the
country into submission. If he gets his way, millions
of Ukrainians will be left without power, water or heat
during the cold winter months. Even more families will
be forced to flee their homes, hospitals will be unable
to treat patients, and more children and elderly people,
4/16

23/11/2022

especially the sick and those with disabilities, will die.
The most vulnerable will pay the heaviest price.
Having struggled on the battlefield, Moscow is
now adopting a cowardly and inhumane strategy that
punishes Ukrainian men, women and children. Let
us be clear — these attacks on critical infrastructure
are a shameful escalation in Russia’s already brutal
and unjustifiable war. They are so extensive that they
have cut off external power transmissions to Ukraine’s
nuclear power plants. Reliable off-site power is essential
to the safe operation of Ukraine’s nuclear facilities, and
the loss of outside power increases the risk of a nuclear
reactor accident, potentially including a radioactive
release. Russia’s attacks on infrastructure supporting
the safety of Ukraine’s nuclear power plants cast doubt
on the seriousness with which it is engaging on the
prospects of a protection zone around the Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant.
As we know, the impact of the war is being felt
beyond Ukraine’s borders. After the latest barrage of
missile attacks, many Moldovans have been left without
power, and Russia’s war of aggression is making it
harder for Ukraine to harvest, store and transport
the grain products that so many Middle Eastern and
African countries rely on. We cannot overstate the
catastrophic scale and cruelty of those attacks, which
are part of a sick pattern of abuse against the people
of Ukraine. The Council has seen video images of the
horrors of Russia’s war. Just today, we have seen media
reports and heard from the Under-Secretary-General
that a Russian missile killed a two-day-old baby in a
maternity hospital in southern Ukraine.
We must clearly and unequivocally condemn
violations of international law, including international
humanitarian law. There must be a mechanism for
accountability, and we must do everything in our
power to support the Ukrainian people. That is why the
United States has contributed more than $250 million
in winterization-specific humanitarian assistance to
help provide heating supplies, blankets, shelter, repair
materials, generators, centres for internally displaced
persons and other critical infrastructure sites. Yesterday
we pledged an additional $4.5 billion to help Ukraine
keep its schools, hospitals, utilities and emergency
services running. Today we announced an additional
$400 million to help Ukraine’s military resist Russian
attacks. This perilous moment demands a concerted
international response. We call on more nations to lend
support to Ukraine in the form of the equipment and
22-70986

23/11/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

financial assistance necessary to repair and rebuild the
energy grid, as well as air-defence capabilities to help
Ukraine protect itself from Russia’s air strikes.
Putin seems to think his campaign of brutality
will weaken the Ukrainian people’s resolve, but he is
once again gravely mistaken. The Ukrainian people
will not be deterred. I saw that first-hand when I
visited Kyiv earlier this month. I was there partly to
announce additional humanitarian assistance to help
Ukrainians during the cold winter ahead, and I made
the announcement in front of a group of displaced
women and children in a civilian building that had been
hit by Russian munitions. What I saw that day was what
we continue to see now — the strength and resolve of
the Ukrainian people. No matter the cold and dark that
Putin tries to inflict, Ukraine will continue to defend
its freedom, sovereignty and democracy, and the United
States and our allies will continue to stand with Ukraine
in its time of need for as long as it takes.
Mr. Spasse (Albania): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo for her briefing.
An overnight rocket attack struck a hospital
maternity ward in southern Ukraine, killing a newborn
baby. Fortunately, the baby’s mother and the doctor were
pulled alive from the rubble. That happened during heavy
attacks by Russian forces on civilian infrastructure.
It has happened before, and it is happening again. It
has now become a pattern. Whenever Russia feels it is
losing ground on the battlefield, it resorts to targeting
civilians and civilian infrastructure, bombing schools
and hospitals and destroying houses, bridges, and
above all electricity infrastructure, a vital component
of Ukraine’s life and economy.
Russia may continue to use whatever camouflaged
language it has employed in the past, but when it
deliberately targets civilians and civilian infrastructure,
there is only one way to describe such despicable
behaviour. Russia is committing war crimes and crimes
against humanity in Ukraine. That is precisely what the
European Parliament confirmed today. Its landmark
resolution highlights that the deliberate attacks and
atrocities committed by Russian forces and their
proxies against civilians in Ukraine, the destruction of
civilian infrastructure and other serious violations of
international and humanitarian law amount to acts of
terror and constitute war crimes. In the light of that,
the European Parliament has recognized Russia as a
State sponsor of terrorism and a State that uses means

S/PV.9202

of terrorism. Here we face a terrible reality, whereby a
permanent member of the Security Council, entrusted
with preserving peace and security, has descended so
low in its rogue behaviour in Ukraine that the world’s
most prominent house of democracy — the European
Parliament — now designates it a sponsor of terrorism.
This unjust and unjustified war continues, and
the risk of its potentially catastrophic spillover is
real. Russian missile strikes on Ukraine’s energy
infrastructure have also caused blackouts across
half of neighbouring Moldova. The more Ukraine
proves successful in its counter-offensives aimed at
recovering its temporarily occupied territory, the
angrier the punishing response by a frustrated Russian
army. That includes the artillery assault in Donbas,
the targeting of civilians and residential areas, threats
of the use of nuclear weapons and the massive recent
attacks on Ukraine’s energy infrastructure in an effort
to subdue Ukraine by freezing its population to death.
It is estimated that approximately 4 million people are
facing an extreme winter in Ukraine. Many are living
in damaged homes that will not protect them from the
cold. Those numbers will only increase.
It is no wonder that the international community
has made a clear choice to condemn the Russian
aggression and continue to strongly support Ukraine
politically, militarily and economically in defending
its country and its people. That show of solidarity is
aimed at supporting not just the territorial integrity
and sovereignty of Ukraine but the rules-based order
of the entire world. In the context of the worsening
humanitarian situation in Ukraine, we commend the
efforts of the United Nations agencies helping people in
need. It is important that United Nations convoys have
access to the country’s various regions. We also fully
support the substantive engagement of the International
Atomic Energy Agency in creating a security zone
around the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant in
southern Ukraine. All sides should remain committed
to substantive cooperation in that regard.
In conclusion, I want to reiterate that the cause and
the root of the crisis, including its humanitarian aspects
and food insecurity, lie solely in Russia’s unprovoked
and unjustified military aggression against Ukraine.
We reiterate our call on Russia to stop its aggression,
withdraw unconditionally from the entire territory of
Ukraine and engage in diplomacy.

22-709865/16

S/PV.9202

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo for her briefing. We welcome the
participation of President Zelenskyy in this meeting
and thank him for his strong message to us, which we
heard loud and clear.
Norway will continue to stand with Ukraine and
the Ukrainian people. Our support is unwavering. We
are appalled by Russia’s continued war of aggression,
which is a gross violation of international law and the
Charter of the United Nations. The recent new wave of
attacks against Ukraine once again clearly demonstrates
Russia’s complete disregard for the horrible suffering
it is causing millions of people. We are alarmed by
the escalation and brutality of the massive attacks on
civilians and civilian infrastructure, which have killed
many people and hit a large number of power facilities
across Ukraine. Damage to energy infrastructure
brings great humanitarian harm and will certainly
cause illness and death during the cold winter. The
attacks serve no military purpose, and the aim seems
to be to terrorize the population. Such acts are illegal
and may constitute war crimes, and those responsible
must be held to account. There is also reason for grave
concern regarding the situation in and around the
Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant. We support the
efforts by the International Atomic Energy Agency to
establish a nuclear safety and security protection zone.
Russia must immediately withdraw its military forces.
The war against Ukraine is a tragedy for individuals
and for Ukrainian society and its people for generations
to come. It also has serious global ramifications. We
welcome the renewed Black Sea Grain Initiative, which
is essential to easing global food insecurity. Once
again, Norway urges Russia to immediately cease its
unlawful and senseless aggression. It must immediately
end its military operation on Ukrainian territory and
withdraw. We call for safe, rapid and unimpeded access
for humanitarian organizations to people in need and
reiterate our demand that all civilians be protected.
International humanitarian law and human rights law
must be fully respected and implemented. Russia must
end its horrible war.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I
thank Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing and welcome the
participation of President Zelenskyy in this meeting.
Russia is continuing its strategy of systematically
targeting Ukrainian civilian infrastructure. After
the strikes on 15 and 17 November, which were on a
6/16

23/11/2022

scale unprecedented since the conflict began, today’s
bombing has led to a disruption of the water supply in
Kyiv and massive power cuts all over the country. The
damage to power generation facilities is extensive. The
neighbouring Republic of Moldova is also a victim of
those bombings and has seen its own energy supply
severely disrupted. France condemns these continuing
strikes in the strongest terms. We reaffirm our
solidarity and support for Ukraine while expressing our
condolences to the families and friends of the victims,
as well as our solidarity with the Republic of Moldova.
This war of aggression is creating a situation in which
the risk of unintended escalation is extremely high.
Russia bears full responsibility for the deteriorating
safety and security of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power
plant, as the presence of its troops at the nuclear site and
the illegal annexation of the plant have considerably
increased the risk of accidents.
Russia’s continued deliberate strikes on civilian
infrastructure are a clear violation of international
humanitarian law. With every Ukrainian victory,
including the recapture of the Kharkiv region and of
Kherson, Russia responds with further bombings of
Ukraine’s critical infrastructure. The objective is
clear — to spread terror in the face of military defeat.
The continuation of such reprisals is intolerable. We
reiterate that Russia will not be able to overcome the
resistance of the Ukrainian people, who are fighting
for their freedom. And Ukraine is not alone in its
struggle — we stand by it and will continue to do so.
France will continue its support for Ukraine’s civil
resilience by organizing an international conference
on 13 December, the aim of which is to respond to
the population’s urgent needs as winter approaches
and to set up a mechanism to coordinate the provision
of international aid. France will also continue to
support the Republic of Moldova. As soon as the war
began we launched an initiative with Germany and
Romania to help the Republic of Moldova cope with
the consequences of the aggression. We held the third
meeting of the Moldova Support Platform in Paris last
Monday, where we were able to mobilize €100 million.
France reiterates its unwavering support for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine in the
face of Russia’s aggression. We commend the courage
and determination of the Ukrainian people.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): At the outset, our
thanks go to Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for the
22-70986

23/11/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

updated information she has presented to the Council
this afternoon.
Brazil reaffirms that attacks on civilian targets,
including energy and transport infrastructure, are
unjustifiable and constitute violations of international
law and international humanitarian law. We urge the
parties to suspend hostilities immediately in order
to avoid further deterioration of the humanitarian
situation in the areas affected. The recent bombings
have once again highlighted the risks that the conflict
poses to regional stability. We note with concern the
deployment of air-defence systems announced on
Polish territory close to the border with Ukraine. In
the light of the incidents on 15 November, the moment
calls for prudence. It is essential to act responsibly and
at all costs prevent the conflict from taking on even
greater proportions.
No topic has received as much attention from the
Council since February as the conflict in Ukraine.
Nevertheless, despite the frequency of our meetings,
we are no closer to peace. The recurring finger-pointing
and blame-shifting in our meetings have not brought
the situation any closer to a peaceful solution. As
important as it is to condemn the violations committed
during the course of the crisis, we must always
remember that such narratives are secondary to the
civilian population. Peace is the main aspiration on both
sides of the front line. We encourage Council members
to explore avenues for opening dialogue between the
parties, based on respect for Ukraine`s sovereignty and
recognition of the legitimate security concerns of all
the parties involved.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I thank UnderSecretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing, and
we welcome President Zelenskyy’s participation in
today’s meeting.
We discussed the situation in Ukraine last week
(see S/PV.9195), and the Council’s message at that
meeting was clear. Russia’s systematic attacks on
Ukrainian civilians and civilian infrastructure are
unacceptable and must end. Over the past week, Russia
has continued its campaign of terror, killing more
civilians, attacking more civilian targets and causing
colossal damage to Ukraine’s energy infrastructure.
Russia is deliberately bombing hospitals and other
medical facilities, and the World Health Organization
has recorded 703 such attacks since February. As we
heard today, a newborn baby was murdered in a strike

S/PV.9202

on a maternity unit in Zaporizhzhya last night. Russia
is destroying lives in Ukraine that have barely started.
As President Zelenskyy said, Russia is trying to achieve
with terror and murder what it could not achieve in nine
months on the battlefield — the complete subjugation
or destruction of Ukraine.
Russia must observe its obligations under
international humanitarian law, but that is no substitute
for peace. President Zelenskyy has presented a
comprehensive plan for a negotiated end to the war. The
first crucial steps are for Russia to end its unilateral
aggression and restore Ukraine’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity in line with its obligations under
the Charter of the United Nations. Russia has spoken
of wanting negotiations, but actions speak louder
than words.
As my Prime Minister said in Kyiv last week, the
United Kingdom will be providing new air-defence
equipment and stepping up humanitarian support for
the cold hard winter ahead. We continue to stand with
Ukraine as it fights to end the barbarous war and deliver
a just peace.
Ms. Moran (Ireland): I welcome the participation
of President Zelenskyy in this meeting and thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing.
Ireland is deeply concerned about the harrowing
reports of the Russian Federation’s new barrage
of missile strikes on Ukraine’s cities and critical
infrastructure. Across Ukraine there have been massive
power outages, causing further misery for millions of
Ukrainians as a cold, harsh winter begins to set in.
Rolling blackouts have become the new normal in
Ukraine, and today much of neighbouring Moldova
is also without power. Ireland condemns Russia’s use
of energy as a weapon of war. Horrific reports have
emerged overnight of a Russian rocket attack on a
maternity ward in a southern Ukrainian hospital near
the city of Zaporizhzhya, killing a newborn baby whose
mother and doctor were pulled from the rubble. In
the city of Kyiv, three people, among them a 17-yearold girl, were killed as a result of Russian shelling,
and there were further casualties in the wider region.
We have also heard reports in recent days of torture
chambers uncovered in Kherson, adding to the list of
potential atrocities in areas previously occupied by the
Russian Federation.
Those heinous attacks have achieved absolutely
nothing beyond terrorizing and punishing the civilian

22-709867/16

S/PV.9202

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

population, and we condemn them in the strongest terms.
We reiterate that attacks targeting civilians and civilian
objects are war crimes, and that those responsible
for ordering and committing those attacks must be
held to account. Russia’s use of explosive weapons in
populated areas is grossly disturbing. Last week in
Dublin, 83 countries adopted a political declaration
on strengthening the protection of civilians from the
humanitarian consequences arising from the use of
explosive weapons in populated areas. We reiterate that
parties to the conflict must comply with international
humanitarian law. That includes obligations to refrain
from intentional attacks on civilians, attacks that do not
distinguish between military and civilian targets, and
indiscriminate and disproportionate attacks, along with
the obligation to take all feasible precautions in attack.
That is all the more urgent as millions of people across
Ukraine are entering a dark and freezing winter at the
hands of the Russian Federation. Russia’s continued
attacks have caused massive disruptions to energy
infrastructure and basic services, including water,
heat, electricity and health care. As always, the most
vulnerable in Ukrainian society — internally displaced
persons, women, children and the elderly — face a
particularly precarious future.
Time and time again, the Russian Federation has
defied the calls of the international community to end
its aggression against Ukraine. It has continued along
its path of escalation, death and destruction. But as we
have made clear time and time again, there is another
way. Once again, Ireland calls on the Russian Federation
to cease all hostilities, withdraw its troops and return to
a path of dialogue and diplomacy.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I thank
President Zelenskyy for addressing us today and UnderSecretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing.
Since our last meeting on Ukraine (see S/PV.9195),
temperatures have indeed started to drop as the first
snow falls across the country. We have repeatedly
shared our grave concern about the fact that the onset of
winter, amid damaged critical infrastructure, portends
further humanitarian suffering with failures in power
and heating systems. Today, with reported missile
strikes across Ukraine, there has been an increase in
rolling blackouts, cuts to water supplies and significant
power outages, to the extent that they have affected
neighbouring Moldova. Additionally, we are deeply
concerned about reports that the Zaporizhzhya nuclear
power plant was subject to renewed shelling over the
8/16

23/11/2022

weekend. We echo the urgent calls of the International
Atomic Energy Agency’s Director General, Mr. Rafael
Grossi, for a concerted effort by the parties to avert a
nuclear disaster. It is completely unacceptable that the
people of the region — and, indeed, the world — should
live under that threat or survive catastrophe because of
sheer luck. The shelling should stop.
Today’s reports tell a story of damage and
destruction that extend beyond Ukraine’s power plants
and electricity grid. Distressingly, residential buildings
and even a maternity ward were reportedly hit. We take
special note of the need to ensure the safety of mothers
and their newborn babies. We remind the parties
of their obligations under international law, set out
clearly in the Geneva Conventions, to protect civilians
and civilian objects. We must also urge restraint, as
those particular developments risk an escalation with
transnational consequences.
The current situation is yet another reminder of the
urgent need for a cessation of hostilities and a peaceful
resolution of the war or a peace formula agreed
between both sides. We must seize on rare positive
developments, like last week’s extension of the Black
Sea Grain Initiative, to create the necessary momentum
towards broader talks on a cessation of hostilities. We
strongly believe the Council must rise to the occasion
by showing unity around the path forward to resolving
the conflict. For its part, the United Arab Emirates is
ready and willing to deploy its good offices to support
any effort that mitigates the war’s impact on civilians
in and outside Ukraine, and to help both Russia and
Ukraine arrive at a lasting peace.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): We thank Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing and welcome
President Zelenskyy’s participation in today’s Security
Council meeting.
The attacks over the past few days, which have
destroyed part of Ukraine’s electricity infrastructure
just as winter is about to begin, are unacceptable and
must stop immediately. As mentioned previously,
power-supply problems compromise other basic
services, such as delivery of water and heating, as well
as the safe operation of nuclear facilities in Ukraine.
It is clear that, as the fighting intensifies, the risks
of a nuclear accident increase. Such an accident would
have catastrophic humanitarian and environmental
consequences for the entire region and beyond. We
22-70986

23/11/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

therefore reiterate, as a matter of urgency, the need to
establish a security perimeter around the Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant. There is still time to prevent a
major tragedy, but if we do not do something the risk of
one actually happening increases. That is why Mexico
is once again making an unequivocal call today to put a
stop to attacks on civilian infrastructure. We insist on
the importance of respecting international humanitarian
law. The Geneva Conventions and their Additional
Protocols are clear and unambiguous: civilian objects
cannot be the target of attacks.
It is clear that the consequences of this war have
been widespread. Last week, two people were killed in
Poland as a result of the conflict and, as we have heard,
last night, a new attack on a hospital caused the death
of a newborn. Now, the power supply of the Republic of
Moldova has also been affected.
Further, the war has had a great impact on food
prices, which affects the food security of many countries.
In this regard, we welcome the renewal of the Black Sea
Grain Initiative for the export of grain from Ukraine,
as well as the Memorandum of Understanding between
Russia and the United Nations Secretariat to facilitate
access of Russian food and fertilizers to world markets.
We hope that, in the same spirit in which the renewal
of these two important agreements was achieved, new
avenues for dialogue that privilege diplomacy can be
found, as well as new mechanisms for mediation.
It is urgent to put an end to the war and the grave
suffering of the civilian population. It is also urgent to
put a halt to the ever-increasing costs that the world is
being asked to pay.
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong (Gabon) (spoke in French):
I thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing and
welcome the participation of President Zelenskyy
and the representatives of Romania and Moldova in
today’s meeting.
Once again, the war in Ukraine has brought death
and destruction. Yesterday’s attacks caused casualties
among the population and destruction of civilian
infrastructure, especially in the sensitive region of
Zaporizhzhya. It is time to stop this war.
Gabon continues to call on the parties to come to
the table to find a political solution in order to get out
of the logic of belligerence, which only produces death,
desolation and terror. There will be no other way — no
other possible outcome — than dialogue. Prolonging

S/PV.9202

the war means gambling on the lives of thousands of
civilians exposed to the fighting and subjecting them to
indiscriminate attacks by weapons of mass destruction.
It also means increasing the already heavy toll of
destruction on civilian infrastructure.
Stopping the supply of electricity to millions of
Ukrainians will certainly worsen the humanitarian
situation as winter approaches, thereby exacerbating the
distress of populations already badly affected by nine
months of war. Gabon once again calls on the Security
Council to engage in the search for a concerted solution
and activate diplomatic channels.
In conclusion, we emphasize the need for the parties
to respect international humanitarian law and call on
the warring parties to engage in good faith negotiations
to end the war and the suffering of innocent victims.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing and
welcome the participation of President Zelenskyy.
We meet again after just about a week because the
situation in Ukraine continues to worsen. We deplore
the surge in attacks that are exposing thousands more
innocent civilians to devastating harm and destitution
in the winter season. Indeed, we are gravely concerned
that civilians and objects indispensable to their survival,
including residential homes and hospitals, as well as
power and water infrastructure, are being targeted for
destruction in violation of international humanitarian
law. The ongoing power outages in Ukraine as a result
of targeted airstrikes against energy infrastructure in
these winter months is adding misery to an already dire
humanitarian situation.
We convey our condolences to all the families
and communities that have lost loved ones in this war.
We cannot overstress the need to spare civilians and
civilian infrastructure from attacks.
It is common knowledge that war has only zerosum outcomes, and military action may at best offer
temporary relief. In this regard, Kenya continues to
call for an immediate cessation of hostilities and for
a chance to be given to dialogue towards diplomatic
engagements in line with the United Nations Charter.
Such engagements should lead to a political solution
that sustainably secures the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Ukraine while being sensitive to the
security concerns of all stakeholders.

22-709869/16

S/PV.9202

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Amid the gloom and pain of war, Kenya welcomes
the agreement to roll over the Black Sea Grain Initiative
as well as the agreement to ensure unimpeded exports
of Russian food and fertilizer to world markets. The
preservation and implementation of these instruments
is vital in addressing the spiralling food prices,
particularly in food-insecure regions, including
countries in conflict and fragile settings.
We urge again that political assurances be given
to guarantee unimpeded exports of food and fertilizer
from Ukraine and Russia to the countries that need
them, especially in Africa. We also reiterate that
the Secretary-General and his good offices, which
have been instrumental in facilitating this important
initiative, be leveraged further in efforts to bring an
end to this war.
We must collectively, and in the interest of
international peace and security, explore all options
that can lead to a cessation of this war. This should be
followed by a dialogue in favour of a political solution
that guarantees the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Ukraine, addresses the underlying grievances
behind the war and secures a stable European security
order. I reaffirm Kenya’s respect for the sovereignty,
territorial integrity of Ukraine within its internationally
recognized borders.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At present, the ongoing conflict in Ukraine has led to
constant attacks on civilian facilities and the steady
rise of civilian casualties and displaced persons. This
is a very worrying development. There is no winner in
this conflict and war, and dialogue and negotiation are
the only way forward.
The parties concerned should start direct
engagement as soon as possible and resume diplomatic
negotiations at an early date. The international
community should work together to support all efforts
to reach a peaceful resolution of the crisis in Ukraine
so as to avoid the escalation of the conflict and prevent
a nuclear crisis. It should also engage in joint efforts
to ensure the stability of the global industrial supply
chain and improve the humanitarian situation in the
crisis area. We once again call on the parties concerned
to exercise restraint, avoid actions that exacerbate
conflict and prevent the confrontation from spiralling
out of control, in particular by strictly abiding by
international humanitarian law, making every effort to
10/16

23/11/2022

protect civilian facilities and reducing the impact of the
conflict on peoples’ lives.
The humanitarian situation in Ukraine in the
conflict is dire. Severe cold weather will significantly
aggravate the plight of the people. The international
community should help Ukraine to promptly repair
damage to the energy infrastructure, provide winter
supplies to the affected population, meet the basic
needs of refugees and displaced persons and ensure
that all those in need are properly resettled and made to
safely survive this winter, with a view to preventing a
larger humanitarian crisis.
Last weekend, the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power
plant was hit by the heaviest shelling in months, causing
serious damage at the plant site and raising, once
again, international concern about a nuclear disaster.
The issue of nuclear safety and security is of great
importance and cannot be compromised. China calls
on all parties concerned to act with prudence, make
every effort to ensure the safety of nuclear facilities and
avoid human-made nuclear accidents. China supports
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in
its continued mandated consultations with Russia and
Ukraine on the safety and security of the Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant, in order to reach a mutually
acceptable arrangement.
Managing the spillover effects of the crisis should
be the focus of international cooperation on Ukraine.
China welcomes the agreement reached by the parties
concerned on the extension of the Black Sea Grain
Initiative and the continued efforts of the United
Nations Secretariat to address the obstacles to the
export of Russian grain and fertilizer. We hope that
these positive developments will demonstrate beyond
the Security Council the achievements and potential
of diplomatic efforts in conflict situations. We also
hope that, on this basis, the parties concerned will stay
engaged and strive for more diplomatic breakthroughs.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate that China’s
position on Ukraine is consistent and clear. We will
continue to work with the international community to
play a constructive and responsible role in the resolution
of the Ukraine crisis.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): First of all, we would like to repeat once again
our position with regard to the Ukrainian President’s
participation in this meeting in a virtual format. We
have stressed more than once that we are not against
22-70986

23/11/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

his participation, but we believe that that participation
should be in person, which is required by the rules that
have guided the work of the Security Council for more
than 75 years, especially as Mr. Zelenskyy is not even
participating in the meeting now. It seems that we simply
heard another pre-recorded video statement. There has
not been a single meeting in which Mr. Zelenskyy
addressed the Council where he stayed until the end.
It is probable that he was not present in the meeting in
the first place.
I want to say to the representative of Norway that
she heard President Zelenskyy loud and clear, but I can
assure her that President Zelenskyy did not hear her.
He is not interested in the views of the members of the
Council. For him, this is simply a tribune from which
to speak.
In the course of the special military operation, we
are having to deal not only with units of the Kyiv regime,
but also with the countries of NATO that are providing
various types of military support to that regime. They
are conducting a proxy war with Russia. To weaken
and destroy the military potential of our opponents, we
are conducting strikes with precision weapons against
power and other infrastructure that is being used to
supply Ukrainian armed formations with weapons, first
of all Western ones, or to provide logistical support and
communication with those Ukrainian military units.
Today many Council members have expressed
outrage that citizens of the Ukraine might find
themselves without power or water. We do not recall
that anyone in the West expressed any concern when,
during the same period in 2015, owing to activities
by Ukraine, inhabitants of Crimea found themselves
without power or water, not to mention what was
suffered by inhabitants of the Donbas, whose economic
lifeline was snuffed out for eight years.
We will not repeat the cunning logic of the
representatives of the Zelenskyy regime, which
shelled the Zaporizhzhya power plant and then, with
the complete connivance of its Western sponsors,
now blames it on Russia. And neither will we say, as
those representatives do, that Ukraine is carrying out
strikes against its own infrastructure. As Western and
Ukrainian media have claimed, we ran out of missiles
first in March, then in July and then in September. But
the damage to residential housing and the victimization
of the peaceful population have in fact been caused by
the Ukrainian air-defence systems, which are located

S/PV.9202

not on the outskirts of cities, but at the very centre
of them.
As a result, debris from missiles, as well as
Ukrainian missiles that go astray, hit places that Russia
has never targeted. For example, Ukrainian users
today posted on the Internet photos of missiles that hit
residential homes in Kyiv and Vyshhorod, in the Kyiv
region. It turns out that these are American air-defence
missiles that were supplied to Kyiv. I want in particular
to point this out to our Western colleagues, whose
reckless flow of weapons to Ukraine has already led
to the deaths of peaceful inhabitants, not only of the
Donbas region but also in Ukrainian cities. It is clear
that the Kyiv propaganda is carefully concealing such
incidents, trying to reduce everything to being the fault
of
Council members can now judge the degree of trust
they can have in the narrative or evidence offered by
the Kyiv regime by examining the way the Ukrainian
leadership reacted to the incident involving the
Ukrainian air-defence missile hitting the Polish town
of Przewodów. Its hysterical and openly mendacious
statements were meant to trigger a full-fledged
war in Europe. However, Kyiv’s Western partners,
embarrassed and stumbling over themselves, are still
trying to blame Russia for what happened. I am curious
as to what the results of the so-called transparent and
objective investigation of this incident will be.
I would like to believe that our Western colleagues
will not be afraid to call things by their proper name
and will not lie their own citizens, as the Zelenskyy
regime is doing. Unfortunately, many officials and even
international civil servants are gladly taking up fake
stories disseminated by Ukraine without verifying the
sources or fact-checking. A clear example of this is the
absurd accusation made by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Pramila Patten in October
that Russian soldiers were allegedly being given Viagra
to enable them to rape Ukrainian women. Recently a
recording of a conversation with Ms. Patten was posted
on the Internet. Thinking that she was speaking with a
representative of Verkhovna Rada, she acknowledged
that she lacked any reliable evidence of that allegation.
Furthermore, she said: “[c]onducting investigations is
not my job; I do not have a mandate for that”.
How convenient it is for senior officials of the
Secretariat to be able, in some cases, to cover things
up by citing the limits of their mandates, and then, in

22-7098611/16

S/PV.9202

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

others, easily overstep them. We are carefully keeping
track of all such cases, and we call on United Nations
officials in their activities to strictly follow the guidance
of the United Nations Charter and the norms of conduct
for international civil servants.
We are also carefully recording all real evidence
of crimes committed by Ukrainian military units,
including on the territories of the Russian regions that are
temporarily under their control. Ukrainian nationalists
who have reached the right bank of the Dnipro have
already begun mass purges of and repression against
the local population. A representative of the Ukrainian
authorities, Ms. Lugovaya, has warned in advance
that the Ukrainian armed forces will “shoot traitors
like dogs”.
As cover, a curfew has been instituted. Even though
the Kyiv authorities are trying to support an information
blockade in the Kherson region, there is chilling
photographic evidence filtering through that shows
how those who cooperated with the Russian military
are being tied to telegraph poles. That is precisely how
fascists tortured the citizens of the Soviet Union during
the Great Patriotic War. Now, even those who are
found merely to possess a Soviet military certificate
find themselves subject to torture. The goal is clear: to
intimidate those who do not support the Kyiv regime.
Those fearing reprisals are forced to yell Nazi slogans
and raise their hands in a fascist salute, which is the
practice of Ukrainian fighters. Footage of this kind was
broadcast by CNN, which led Kyiv to strip the news
network of its accreditation. The same thing happened
with Sky News. So what is official Kyiv trying to cover
up? Where is the outrage of Western delegations with
respect to the restrictions on freedom of expression and
access to information?
At the same time, the European Union (EU), which
is promoting those goals, has once and for all abandoned
its peace-loving ideals and is openly becoming an
aggressive military bloc and getting increasingly closer
to direct involvement in the Ukrainian conflict. On
14 Novembers, in Brussels, the EU declared the launch
of an EU mission to train personnel of the Ukrainian
military. The training will take place at training ranges
in EU States — Germany and Poland — and no less
than 15,000 soldiers will undergo that training.
Just last weekend, the world saw shocking images
of an execution of unarmed Russian prisoners of war
by the Ukrainian military. In an open letter, we called
12/16

23/11/2022

on the Secretary-General and members of the Security
Council to demand that Kyiv stop these gross violations
of international humanitarian law. There is an increasing
amount of documentary evidence of the Ukrainian
side’s use of torture and other atrocities committed
in violation of the 1949 Geneva Convention. Released
prisoners of war from the Donetsk People’s Republic
have confirmed that fighters from the ultranationalist
Right Sector execute prisoners by hanging, and
forensic experts from the Luhansk People’s Republic
have concluded that prisoners who died had the tops
of their ears cut off and their legs shot through while
they were still alive. Some Russian military prisoners
of war had to lie in holes dug in the ground for five
hours. Members of the Investigative Committee of
Russia are examining all these cases, but we expect the
international community and international human rights
organizations to condemn Kyiv for non-compliance
with international humanitarian law.
At the same time, the Kyiv regime continues its
provocations to create the threat of technological
disaster at the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant. On
19 November, the Ukrainian armed forces fired 12
large-calibre shells into the industrial zone of the power
plant, and eight more on 21 November. According to
Director General Grossi of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA), these were the most serious
barrages over the past few months. Experts from the
IAEA who were present on the site examined where the
shells fell saw the explosions with their own eyes. They
noted the extensive destruction around the nuclear
power plant, in particular, the damage caused by the
shelling of reservoirs that store condensate, which led
to a leak of non-radioactive materials. For the time
being, the radioactivity situation remains normal.
However, given the reckless and insistent attempts by
Kyiv to violate the integrity of critical structures of the
nuclear power plant, it might only be a matter of time.
In conclusion, I want to return to the topic of today’s
meeting and stress that we are conducting strikes
against infrastructure in response to the unbridled flow
of weapons to Ukraine and the reckless appeals of Kyiv
to defeat Russia. Weakening the military capacity of
the Ukrainian army, which threatens the security and
territorial integrity of Russia, is one of the goals of
this special military operation, and it will be carried
out by military means until the Kyiv regime adopts a
realistic position, which would allow for discussion and
trying to resolve through negotiations the issues that
22-70986

23/11/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

S/PV.9202

motivated us to begin the special military operation
in the first place. In the meantime, whate we are
hearing from Mr. Zelenskyy and his supporters is not
“readiness to achieve peace”, but rather the language of
reckless threats and ultimatums. Western sponsors are
only encouraging this reckless approach, as the war “to
the last Ukrainian” is in their interest and allows their
military industrial complex to make huge profits and
test NATO armaments. In that way, Western countries
are trying to consolidate their geopolitical hegemony
by using the bodies and lives of ordinary Ukrainians.

tons of wheat to countries in need, including to
Afghanistan, Myanmar, the Sudan and Yemen

Mrs. Kamboj (India): I would also like to thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing at
this emergency meeting.

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Ghana.

India continues to remain concerned about the
situation in Ukraine, including the targeting of civilian
infrastructure and the deaths of civilians. History has
regrettably shown us that the killing of civilians and the
devastation of civilian infrastructure have been used as
legitimate weapons of war. India strongly condemns the
use of oppressive violence against innocent civilians
and the targeting of civilian objects in armed conflicts,
regardless of who commits such actions.
Since the beginning of the Ukraine conflict, India
has consistently called for an immediate cessation
of hostilities and for an end to the violence. We have
repeatedly called upon both sides to return to the path
of diplomacy and dialogue and have also expressed
our support for all diplomatic efforts undertake to end
the conflict. Our Prime Minister’s statement that this
cannot be an era of war was welcomed across the world.
India’s position on the Ukraine conflict is premised on
that principle. We continue to support all efforts aimed
at de-escalation.
India’s approach to the conflict will continue to be
people-centric. We are providing both humanitarian
assistance to Ukraine and economic support to
some of our neighbours in the global South that are
experiencing economic distress from the ripple effects
of this conflict. India has provided humanitarian aid
to Ukraine and its neighbouring countries of Poland,
Romania, Hungary and the Slovak Republic. Further,
at the request of the Ukrainian Government, India
has also provided financial aid for the reconstruction
of educational institutions. In addition, to help lowincome countries fight against price rises and shortages
of foodstuffs, India has exported more than 1.8 million

In conclusion, we continue to express our support
for all diplomatic efforts aimed at ending the conflict.
We therefore sincerely hope for an early resumption
of peace talks to bring about an immediate ceasefire
and early resolution of the conflict. We reiterate that
it is imperative that the global order be anchored in
respect for the principles of the United Nations Charter,
international law and the sovereignty and the territorial
integrity of States.

At the outset, I welcome the participation by
video-teleconference of the President of Ukraine, His
Excellency Mr. Volodymyr Zelenskyy, and thank him
for his statement. I take this opportunity to reaffirm
Ghana’s unwavering commitment to the sovereignty,
political independence and territorial integrity of
Ukraine. I also thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, UnderSecretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs, for her briefing, which once again highlighted
the brutality of war and the compelling humanitarian
imperative for an immediate end to the hostilities in
Ukraine. I also welcome the representatives of Moldova
and Romania to this meeting.
Ghana remains deeply concerned about the targeted
attacks on the civilian populations of and civilian
infrastructure in Ukraine, and it regrets the destruction
and unnecessary loss of life suffered by the Ukrainian
people over the last nine months from this unjustified
war. The painful reality made evident with each
briefing of the Security Council is that civilians are
paying the highest price of the war and will continue to
suffer worsening plights unless the war is brought to an
immediate end.
With the onset of the winter season, and with
most of Ukraine’s critical infrastructure having been
destroyed or damaged, many Ukrainians can only brace
for a bitter, if not deadly, winter. Ending the war now
has never been more crucial. We urge the collective
support of all Council members in ending the hostilities
in order to bring some relief to the suffering of the
people of Ukraine.
We also remain gravely concerned by the continuing
military engagements in and around the Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant, which pose a significant risk to

22-7098613/16

S/PV.9202

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

global nuclear safety. We strongly urge the parties
to exercise restraint and ensure compliance with the
seven pillars of nuclear safety recommended by the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
The demilitarization of the Zaporizhzhya power
plant is in the interests of all humankind. We therefore
continue to follow the efforts of the IAEA in Ukraine
with keen interest, and we welcome in particular the
ongoing consultations in Istanbul by its Director
General, Mr. Rafael Mariano Grossi, on the creation of
a nuclear safety and security zone.
We reiterate our call on the warring sides to fully
comply with their obligations under international law
and international humanitarian law, including the
fundamental requirement to distinguish at all times
between civilians and combatants. We believe that the
warring parties have both legal and moral obligations
that they must uphold to avoid causing needless harm to
innocent civilians. We further urge the parties to comply
with the prohibition on direct attacks and bombardments
on civilian infrastructure, such as hospitals, medical
facilities, schools and residential facilities.
We have taken note with concern of the reports
suggesting serious crimes in Kherson and other cities,
and we continue to stress the importance of thorough,
transparent and independent investigations into all
claims of human rights violations and possible war
crimes to establish the facts of such reports. We must
collectively ensure accountability for any crimes
committed in Ukraine in furtherance of the war and
hold perpetrators accountable for their actions.
Today we reiterate our call for peace, and we once
again call on the Russian Federation to immediately
withdraw its forces from the internationally recognized
borders of its neighbour, Ukraine. The war has come
at a great cost to both sides, but, more worrisome, it
continues to endanger international peace and security.
The Charter of the United Nations, which binds
us all, provides a repertoire of peaceful means for the
settlement of disputes, including negotiation, enquiry,
mediation, conciliation, arbitration, judicial settlement
and the resort to regional agencies or arrangements.
In the light of that, we strongly advocate for dialogue
and diplomacy in addressing the respective concerns of
the parties, as it is increasingly evident that there is no
alternative to a peaceful settlement of this war. Indeed,
at no time in the history of our Organization has violence
proved strategic in resolving inter-State disputes.
14/16

23/11/2022

Before concluding, I wish to welcome the rollover of
the Black Sea Grain Initiative. We urge the commitment
of all parties and stakeholders to its full and effective
operationalization to help ease the problem of global
food insecurity.
Finally, we call for the unified efforts of all
members of the Security Council towards the immediate
cessation of hostilities and further diplomatic efforts to
restore peace in Ukraine.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Romania.
Mr. Feruță (Romania): Like Norway and other
Council members, we listened very carefully to the
statement made by President Zelenskyy. We are also
grateful to Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for
her briefing.
We requested the floor today with a sense of
alarm. The recent attacks on critical Ukrainian
energy infrastructure severely impacted the lives of
millions of civilians in Ukraine. The humanitarian
situation in Ukraine has been dire for the past almost
nine months, but it is now further deteriorating. The
civilian population is faced with the abhorrent reality
of brutal missile or unmanned aerial vehicle attacks in
areas of limited military significance. Critical civilian
infrastructure, especially energy infrastructure, is
intentionally targeted, limiting access to electricity,
water and heating for civilians in many parts of
Ukraine. The already severe impact is amplified by the
cold season. It is now night in Ukraine at this hour and
many civilians do not have access to proper heating
or electricity.
At the same time, reckless actions in the proximity
of nuclear facilities and nuclear power plants may lead
to catastrophic consequences. The utmost responsibility
is required to ensure nuclear safety and security.
The lives of many millions of innocent civilians are
at risk. Attacks against civilians are unacceptable under
any circumstances and are prohibited under international
humanitarian law. They must stop. The recent attacks
also affected the electricity interconnection among
Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and the European
electricity grid. There are ongoing efforts to restore
the supply of electricity to Ukraine, including from
Romania. We already provide a certain amount, limited
by the existing technical requirements.
22-70986

23/11/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

In the Republic of Moldova, today such attacks led
to a blackout in many parts of the country. That comes
at the time of an already very complicated context.
For the past month, as a reaction to the continuous
weaponization of energy by Russia, Romania has been
supplying the Republic of Moldova with between 80
and 90 per cent of its electricity needs. The country’s
difficult energy situation was also addressed at the
third ministerial conference of the Moldova Support
Platform, co-organized by the Foreign Ministers of
France, Germany and Romania in Paris two days ago.
The continuous shelling of the Ukrainian
territory, in particular the targeting of critical civilian
infrastructure, reinforces the need for responsibility
and accountability. Last week, the General Assembly
decisively stated that Russia must bear the legal
consequences for all its internationally wrongful acts,
including by making full reparations (see General
Assembly resolution ES-11/5). All victims of Russia’s
aggression deserve justice and reparation.
Regarding ongoing efforts, we welcomes the
extension of the United Nations-backed Black Sea
Grain Initiative beyond 19 November. That important
initiative makes food accessible on the global market
and regulates the price. We will also continue to do
our part. In addition to making its own grain available
to partners around the world, Romania will continue
to lend its strong support in facilitating the export
of Ukrainian grain. My Government takes its role
as a facilitator of the transit of grain towards many
developing countries seriously. To ensure connectivity
and diversify routes from Ukraine, two weeks ago,
Romania inaugurated a new border crossing point. So
far, more than 8.5 million tons of grain and other food
products have been exported via Romania, including
with the European Union supporting the solidarity
lanes initiative.
In conclusion, it was said in the Security Council
and in General Assembly resolutions and statements
time and again that there is only one way to bring an
end to the aggression. Russia needs to cease the use
of force and withdraw from the territory of Ukraine,
within its internationally recognized borders. Enough
is enough.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Moldova.
Mr. Leucă (Republic of Moldova): The Republic
of Moldova joins previous delegations in expressing

S/PV.9202

its strong condemnation in connection with the recent
massive attack on Ukraine’s civilian and energy
infrastructure, which triggered further destruction and
continued human suffering. We welcome the statement
made by President Zelenskyy. We thank UnderSecretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing
on the matter.
For more than nine months now, our neighbouring
country, Ukraine, has been defending its freedom,
sovereignty and territorial integrity from the Russian
Federation’s unprovoked war of aggression, which
has triggered the largest humanitarian and refugee
crisis in Europe, prompted global food shortages and
an economic downturn and deepened the European
energy crisis.
The Republic of Moldova condemns in the strongest
terms the war against Ukraine. We stand in full
solidarity with the Ukrainian people and reiterate our
support for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Ukraine within its internationally recognized borders.
The brutal war continues to cause unforeseen
human losses and the significant destruction of civilian
and energy infrastructure, worsening the overall
humanitarian situation. We are deeply concerned by the
immense human suffering, which is turning into a huge
human tragedy as the war continues to ravage Ukraine
and its people. Russia’s war in Ukraine is killing
people and is destroying residential blocks and critical
infrastructure, especially before the winter period.
The spillover effects of the war against Ukraine
are increasingly felt in the neighbouring countries,
including the Republic of Moldova. The Russian
aggression against Ukraine has far deeper implications
for the Republic of Moldova’s security and stability.
The continued attacks on Ukraine’s energy
infrastructure again left the Republic of Moldova in
darkness, following a similar incident on 15 November.
More than 50 per cent of the country was left without
electricity. There were massive blackouts across the
country. The water supply was also affected in the
pumps that were put out of order.
Our delegation would like to remind the members
of the Security Council that, at the end of October,
missile debris landed in the northern village of
Naslavcea, located at the border with Ukraine, after
a Russian fusillade was intercepted by air defences
in neighbouring Ukraine. Thankfully, there were

22-7098615/16

S/PV.9202

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

no civilian casualties, but the windows of several
residential homes were shattered, creating a great deal
of fear among the local population.
Those egregious incidents highlight one thing: the
war should stop now, in line with the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations and international law, to
prevent the catastrophic humanitarian consequences
of the war, with the ultimate goal of restoring peace
in Ukraine.
Again, in relation to what happened today, we must
mention that for a couple of hours, until our technical
teams dealt with the consequences of the blackout,
electricity, water supplies and Internet and mobile

16/16

23/11/2022

phone connections were severely disrupted and were
unavailable in the Republic of Moldova.
We reiterate our strong call on Russia to
immediately cease the military aggression, withdraw
its military forces from sovereign Ukrainian territory,
fully comply with its obligations under international
law, including international humanitarian law, and
uphold human rights. The Republic of Moldova
reaffirms its unwavering support for Ukraine’s
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
within its internationally recognized borders, as we
stand in solidarity to defend the very same values of
freedom, liberty and democracy.
The meeting rose at 5.35 p.m.

22-70986
