Re1olntion1 adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

4. Invites Member States to make available, directly
or through voluntary agencies, for the use of students
from Territories under Portuguese administration, allexpense scholarships both for the completion of secondary
education and for various forms of higher education;
5. Invites Member States whose universities enjoy
administrative autonomy to permit direct communication
between the Secretary-General and the heads of those
universities with a view to the granting of scholarships
envisaged in the present resolution ;
6. Requests Member States to inform the SecretaryGeneral of any scholarships offered and of awards made

and utilized ;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to establish appropriate machinery for dealing with applications from
Territories under Portuguese administration for education and training outside the Territories ;
8. Requests Member States to facilitate the travel of
students from Territories under Portuguese administration seeking to avail themselves of such educational
opportunities;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to report on this
question to the General Assembly at its eighteenth
session;
10. Requests the Government of Portugal to cooperate in the implementation of the present resolution.
1194th plenary meetinq,
14 December 1962.
1809 (XVII). Special Committee on Territories
under Portuguese Administration
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1699 (XVI) of 19 December
1961 by which it decided to establish a Special Committee to examine as a matter of urgency, within the
context of Chapter XI of the Charter of the United
Nations and relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, such information as was available concerning
Territories under Portuguese administration, and to
formulate its observations, conclusions and recommendations for the consideration of the Assembly and any
other body which the Assembly might appoint to assist
it in the implementation of its resolution 1514 (XV) of
14 December 1960 on the granting of independence to
colonial countries and peoples,
Considering that in its resolution 1807 (XVII) of
14 December 1962 it requested the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples to give high prioritv to
the examination of the situation in the Territories undE'r
Portuguese administration,
1. Decides to dissolve the Special Committee on Territories under Portuguese Administration ;
2. Expresses its gratitude to the Special Committee
for its efforts and for its valuable contribution to the
accomplishment of the purposes of the United Nations
under Chapter XI of the Charter and resolution 1514
(XV):
3. Requests the Secretary-General to forward the
report of the Special Committee, 6 together with the summary records of the Fourth Committee on the question, 7
7 Ibid., Seventeenth Session, Fourth Committee, 1390th to
1408th, 1415th to 1421st meetings.

41

to the Government of Portugal, the Economic and Social
Council, the Economic Commission for Africa, the
Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East and
the specialized agencies concerned, including the International Labour Organisation.
1194th plenary meeting,
14 December 1962.

1846 (XVII). Report of the Committee on lnformation from Non-Sell-Governing Territories
The General Assembly,
Recalling that, by resolution 1700 (XVI) of 19 December 1961, it decided that the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories should
examine the political and constitutional information
transmitted by the Administering Members as well as
information relating to functional fields,
Recalling further that the Committee was instructed
to undertake intensive studies of political, educational,
economic and social conditions and problems of Territories located in the same area or region, except where
circumstances require individual consideration.
Considering that, by resolution 1654 (XVI) of '27
November 1961, it established the Special Committee on
the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples,
H avinq received the report of the Committee on
Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories prepared in 1962,8
1. Takes note of the report of the Committee on
Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories on
the work of its thirteenth session;
2. Notes with satisfaction that the Committee examined the political antl" constitutional information transmitted hy the Administering Members in the spirit of
Article 73 of the Charter of the United Nations;
3. Notes that the information on political and constitutional developments transmitted thus far has not been
detailed enough to allow the Committee and the General
Assembly fully to evaluate such developments:
4. Invites the Administering Members to continue to
transmit the fullest possible information on political and
constitutional developments, especially concerninf.," the
activitiE's of the political parties and groups in the NonSelf-Governing Territories, as well as information showing the extent to which the political. administratiw and
judicial machinerv in the Territories is in the hanrls
of the indigenous people;
~- N otcs that the report of the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territorie~ was
formally transmitted to the Special, Committee on th<"
Situation with regard to the Implementation of thE'
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Co11ntries and Peoples:
6. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
report to the Member States responsible for the aciministration of Non-Self-Governing Territories, to the
Economic and Social Council. to the regional economic
commissions, to the Trusteeship Council and to the
specialized agencies concerned, for their consideration.
1198th plenar'I) mrl'tinn,
19 December 1962.
8 !bid.,

Sc11pn/ernth Session, Supplement No. 15 ( A/5215).
