S/PV.9345

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9345

th meeting
Tuesday, 13 June 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Almheiri/Mr. Abushahab. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Arab Emirates)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Immongault
Mr. Afriyie
Mr. Ishikane
Mrs. Frazier
Ms. Comoane
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. Leu
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. Kerry

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security
Climate change, peace and security
Letter dated 5 June 2023 from the Permanent Representative of the United Arab
Emirates to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2023/408)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-16647 (E)
*2316647*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9345

Threats to international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security
Climate change, peace and security
Letter dated 5 June 2023 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Arab Emirates
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2023/408)
The President: I would like to warmly welcome
the distinguished Ministers and other high-level
representatives. Their presence today underscores the
importance of the subject matter under discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representatives
of Austria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belgium, Canada,
Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Denmark, Egypt,
Ethiopia, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Hungary, India, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg,
the Marshall Islands, Mexico, the Federated States of
Micronesia, Morocco, the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Papua New Guinea, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Romania, Saudi Arabia,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovenia, Spain, the Syrian
Arab Republic, Thailand, Ukraine and Viet Nam to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. JeanPierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peace
Operations; His Excellency Mr. Juan Manuel Santos
Calderón, former President of Colombia, Nobel Peace
Laureate and member of The Elders; and Ms. Salma
Kadry, Climate, Peace and Security Expert at the
Consortium of International Agricultural Research.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the
following to participate in this meeting: His
Excellency Mr. Olof Skoog, Head of the Delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations; Her
Excellency Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed, Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations;
Ms. Laura Olson, Permanent Observer and Head of the
2/31

13/06/2023

Delegation of the International Federation of Red Cross
and Red Crescent Societies to the United Nations; and
Ms. Laetitia Courtois, Permanent Observer and Head
of the Delegation of the International Committee of the
Red Cross to the United Nations.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2023/408, which contains the text of a letter
dated 5 June 2023 from the Permanent Representative
of the United Arab Emirates to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept note on the item under consideration.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lacroix.
Mr. Lacroix: I would like to express my gratitude
to the United Arab Emirates for bringing us here today
to discuss climate, peace and security. I would also like
to convey my thanks for the opportunity to provide
a briefing.
Within the past several years, most United Nations
peace operations have faced a deteriorating security
and political environment. Alongside other crossborder challenges, environmental degradation and
extreme weather events amplified by climate change
are increasingly challenging our ability to implement
our mandates.
Today the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC) estimates that approximately 3.5 billion
people live in “climate hotspots”, and climate-related
peace and security risks are only set to heighten. As
outlined in the Sixth Assessment Report of the IPCC,
climatic and non-climatic risks, such as biodiversity
loss and violent conflict, will increasingly interact. We
already see a strong correlation between Member States
facing fragility and those facing climate change. Of the
16 countries that are the most climate-vulnerable, 9 of
them host a United Nations field mission, namely the
Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the Sudan, South Sudan, Afghanistan,
Somalia, Mali, Haiti and Yemen. It is also important
to note that the majority of United Nations peace
operations are deployed in contexts that are both highly
climate exposed and characterized by high levels of
gender inequality.
United Nations field missions do not hold the
ultimate solution to the global phenomenon of climate
change, which must come in the form of adaptation,
23-16647

13/06/2023

Threats to international peace and security

mitigation and financing. But United Nations peace
operations are profoundly affected by the impact
of climate change. Our missions witness first-hand
the dual vulnerabilities posed by climate change and
insecurity. In a number of our host nations, climate
change is diminishing natural resources, affecting
social cohesion and driving conflict. Over the past few
years, we have, for example, seen how altered mobility
routes for transhumance due to changes to seasonal
weather patterns exacerbate tension and conflict
between cattle herders and farmers.
In Mali, this challenge negatively interacts
with a high dependence on rain-fed agriculture that
is diminished by climate change and a concurrent
increased demand due to population growth.
In South Sudan, 8 of 10 states are affected
by flooding, driving temporary and protracted
displacement. This is putting different communities
in close proximity and intensifying competition over
resources. Flooding reduces the mobility of United
Nations peacekeepers, since they are then forced to
use helicopters or boats that are in high demand and
short supply. And of course, that is also the case for our
humanitarian colleagues. Military engineers in South
Sudan are diverted to deal with the floods and build
dikes on a full-time basis so that they can safeguard
critical infrastructure such as internally displaced
person camps, the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan’s own bases, major roads and the airstrip.
In Somalia, years of conflict have ravaged the
resilience of the State and communities. The current
drought, the worst in four decades, compounds
vulnerabilities and contributes to displacement, hunger
and grievance.

S/PV.9345

In our efforts to address climate change we are
seeking to mitigate security risks in tandem, so that
we can generate co-benefits and create a more resilient
future. Integrating a climate lens into peace and security
efforts also means expanding and welcoming a more
diverse set of decision makers. For instance, the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
highlights that women’s meaningful participation in
decision-making around climate adaptation and natural
resources leads to more sustainable and inclusive results.
Across the board, the Departments of Peacebuilding
and Political Affairs (DPPA) and the Department of
Peace Operations (DPO) strive to integrate climate
considerations into our work. This was the driving
ambition behind the creation of the climate security
mechanism, a joint initiative between DPPA, DPO,
the United Nations Environment Programme and the
United Nations Development Programme. Since 2018,
the mechanism has provided multidisciplinary support
to Member States, regional organizations and United
Nations entities to better understand and address the
linkages between climate, peace and security.
In line with our mandates, we have identified a
number of priority areas for action in United Nations
field missions. First, we are investing in the capacity
of our peace operations to anticipate and address the
linkages between climate change, peace and security.
The deployment of dedicated capacity on climate, peace
and security in a growing number of field missions has
been a game changer. Integrating climate considerations
across their work has strengthened missions’ abilities to
implement the mandates given by the Security Council.

In these and many other places, the cascading
effects of climate change are reshaping the parameters
for our work on conflict prevention, peacemaking,
peacebuilding and peacekeeping. Considering climate
change in all that we do, as also requested by this
Council in a number of instances, is no longer a choice.

For example, in South Sudan, the Climate, Peace
and Security Adviser of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan is providing training and enhancing
information-sharing
among
the
humanitarian,
development and peace and security actors in South
Sudan through the climate change working group.
The Adviser also supports government counterparts
at national, regional and community levels to address
climate-related security risks. This includes, for
example, working with the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development and supporting intercommunal
dialogues in flood-affected States.

The confluence of climate vulnerability and
insecurity was also a recurring topic in global
consultations on the New Agenda for Peace, reflecting
the growing importance of this topic.

Innovation and data analytics represent key areas
for capacity-building that can be brought forward
by climate, peace and security advisers in our field
missions. With the help of innovation partners, we

In Iraq, water scarcity, rising temperatures
and dust storms put heightened pressure on
intercommunal relations.

23-166473/31

S/PV.9345

Threats to international peace and security

are beginning to use satellite imagery and machine
learning to better understand climate trends and boost
early-warning capacity. Better capacity to collect,
utilize and analyse data will also help us strengthen
our understanding of the ways in which climate change
has an impact on peace and security and on the good
practices emerging to manage these risks.
Secondly, we are reinforcing the mutual benefits
of climate action and our work on peace and security.
Peacemaking is an area that demands climate-sensitive
approaches. Technical cooperation can open new entry
points for dialogue and confidence-building among
parties and help to ensure the longer-term viability
of peace agreements. The DPPA practice note on
climate-informed mediation, published last year,
provides guidance in this area.
Climate-informed peacebuilding also offers
the potential for complementary benefits. Climate
action and peacebuilding share many of the same
objectives, namely, resilient, just and inclusive
societies. Coordinated engagement in both areas can
advance multiple objectives simultaneously. This was
confirmed by the Sixth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, which
highlighted that climate-sensitive peacebuilding
and gender-sensitive approaches offer potential new
avenues to building peace.
Yet the capacities of women to address
climate impacts and drive peacebuilding are still
underexplored, even though their roles in water and
food provision uniquely position them as agents of
change. The Secretary-General’s Peacebuilding Fund
plays an important catalytic role in that regard. In
Yemen, for instance, where water scarcity worsened
by climate change is a destabilizing factor, the
Fund has helped strengthen local water-governance
structures in the valley of Wadi Rima. By taking an
innovative approach to women’s inclusion in local
water management and dispute resolution, the project
was able to increase natural-resource access and reduce
intercommunal tensions.
Overall, since 2017, the Fund has invested in
more than 70 climate-informed peacebuilding projects
implemented by 21 different entities around the world,
particularly in West Africa and the Sahel. Over the past
five years, 7 out of the 10 countries most vulnerable
to climate change have been the beneficiaries of
Peacebuilding Fund projects.
4/31

13/06/2023

A recently concluded review of climate-related
projects, which was supported by the Fund, has helped
us to identify areas for further strengthening. One of
its key findings was the importance of flexible, crossborder approaches that invest in peacebuilding and
conflict-sensitive climate action.
Not only is greater coherence between climate
action, peace and security a policy imperative, but it
also makes economic sense. Aligning peacebuilding
and climate-financing mechanisms — both United
Nations and non-United Nations — would allow us to
optimize systems to utilize limited resources in more
efficient and impactful ways.
Thirdly, as the United Nations works to more
proactively mitigate climate change, it is increasingly
imperative that we not be another cause of it. We are
therefore working to reduce our environmental footprint,
including through improved transitions to energy
efficiency and a greater reliance on renewable energy.
Today the largest United Nations peacekeeping
operations rely almost exclusively on generators that use
expensive, imported diesel that requires transportation
under often very dangerous conditions. In certain
settings these missions are among the largest single
sources of energy consumption and greenhouse-gas
emissions in their host countries. On the other hand,
many of the host countries are among the least
electrified in the world, with communities having some
of the highest energy costs in the world.
Even though renewable energy is often a cheaper
power source under these circumstances, host States
and host communities rarely benefit from climate and
renewable energy investments. In 2021–2022, six per
cent of the electricity used by United Nations peace
operations was generated from renewable energy
sources. Guided by the Environmental Strategy for
Peace Operations, the United Nations is progressively
introducing renewable energy solutions, reducing
our environmental footprint while also minimizing
the security risk for fuel convoys. In that regard, we
welcome the very promising partnership between the
United States and Nepal to deploy a large-scale solar
hybrid system in Rumbek, South Sudan.
With support from the Department of Operational
Support, peace operations are now considering ways
in which their own energy needs, their footprint and
infrastructure investments can positively contribute
to the efforts of host States to improve access to clean
23-16647

13/06/2023

Threats to international peace and security

energy. United Nations peace operations in Mali and
Somalia are also utilizing innovative renewable-energysourcing approaches through partnerships with our host
nations and the private sector.
To secure similar opportunities across other
mission sites, it is critical to get support from the host
State Governments, private sector companies and
development actors. We thank the United Arab Emirates
and Norway for launching the Compact on renewal
energy in peace operations, which is an important
vehicle for bringing the right partners together. The
Compact aims to reduce operational costs, security
risks and greenhouse-gas emissions for peacekeeping
missions, while leaving a positive infrastructure legacy
for host communities.
The 2023 United Nations peacekeeping Ministerial
meeting on peacekeeping, to take place in Ghana in
December this year, will provide additional opportunities
to strengthen United Nations peacekeeping through
the generation of pledges that meet United Nations
needs, whether they be for specialized capabilities or
new or expanded capacity-building and training, and
equipping partnerships in key areas, including that of
the environment.
Given the growing linkages between climate
change, peace and security as well as the broader
changes to the conflict dynamics in the areas in which
we work, we must continue to adapt to climate change.
Together we can build a future where our efforts in
conflict prevention, peacebuilding, peacemaking and
peacekeeping will reinforce and are complemented by
our commitment to addressing the climate crisis.
The President: I thank Mr. Lacroix for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Santos Calderón.
Mr. Santos Calderón: It is an honour to be back
at the Security Council. I want to thank the Permanent
Mission of the United Arab Emirates for the invitation.
Allow me to start with an anecdote. The day I was
going to be sworn in as President of Colombia, I went
to the Sierra Nevada, one of the most biodiverse and
beautiful mountain ranges in the world — and birthplace
of our Permanent Representative — to ask for permission
from our elder brothers, the Koguis and the Arhuacos,
the indigenous peoples who live there and who are
known to best preserve pre-Hispanic civilization.

S/PV.9345

They gave me their blessing, with a baton and
a mandate:
“Make peace with the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC), but also
make peace with nature. Peace among humans will
not be successful unless you makes peace with
Mother Nature too”, they warned me.
And they asked me to come back when I had
completed my mission. As the Council very well knows,
after six years of negotiations, we ended 50 years of
war with the FARC, and that guerrilla no longer exists.
I want to take this opportunity to express my deep
gratitude for the great support the Council has provided
over many years to the Colombian peace process.
That support remains instrumental, and it shows that
when the Council is united, it can make a significant
contribution to peace and security around the world.
The Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and
Building a Stable and Lasting Peace, the Colombian
peace agreement, is unique in many ways. It includes a
gender and an ethnic chapter, and the victims and their
rights became the centre of the negotiations. In addition,
since nature was also a victim, the protection of the
environment is present in all sections of the agreement.
Repairing nature is actually one of the sanctions
specifically mentioned for those most responsible for
war crimes and crimes against humanity.
Because the agreement has not been effectively
implemented, violence and deforestation in some areas
left by the FARC has increased. On the other hand,
in many places, former combatants and communities
have come together to preserve our forests and
rivers and to promote ecotourism, a good example of
reconciliation — not only among humans but also of
humans with nature.
In 2018, a couple of months before leaving office,
I returned to the Sierra Nevada to give back the baton.
And, as proof of mission accomplished, I gave the
leaders of the Koguis and the Arhuacos three things: a
copy of the peace agreement, information on our very
aggressive environmental policies and the text of the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), approved here
in this building in 2015, where Colombia played a key
role in its conception.
To my surprise, they told me to keep the baton
because my mission was not finished. They claimed
that in the SDGs the most important dimension was

23-166475/31

S/PV.9345

Threats to international peace and security

lacking — the spiritual dimension, which means that
humans have to accept and understand that life is
nature; that rivers, oceans and trees all have life, all
have rights and should be treated as equals. And they
are right.
I came back from the Vatican yesterday, where Pope
Francis invited 30 Nobel Peace Laureates to the first
World Meeting on Human Fraternity. In our declaration
we made a call to build environmental fraternity, to make
peace with nature, because “everything is in relation
to everything”. And that call should be embraced by
the Council.
We have for too long ignored nature and its critical
role in sustaining humankind and the planet. The science
is now clear that if we are to reverse the destabilizing
impacts of climate change, we must stabilize our
relationship with nature. Biodiversity loss and climate
change cannot be addressed separately. In countries
like mine, preserving the forests turns out to be more
net effective and as important as cutting emissions from
fossil fuels.
This year’s Climate Change Conference, in Dubai,
is of the utmost importance because we cannot keep
postponing decisions that are crucial to the survival
of humankind.
One great achievement for the upcoming twentyeighth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP28)
would be to explicitly link the Convention on Biological
Diversity with the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change and identify shared commitments
and actions under both. Even better, we could merge
them into one convention. I know that in the current
circumstances that is an impossible ideal. The point is
that both should act together to recognize and adequately
funds the protection of nature so as to ensure its role as
a fundamental solution to our climate and biodiversity
crises and as a necessary condition to achieving and
maintaining peace.
I am a member of The Elders, the group of
independent leaders founded by Nelson Mandela, whose
former Chair was Kofi Annan and today’s Deputy Chair is
Ban Ki-moon. The Elders are united in our commitment
to peace, human rights, justice and a sustainable planet.
It is our mission to call on world leaders to step up and
respond to the existential threats facing humankind: the
climate crisis, pandemics, nuclear weapons and now also
artificial intelligence, which should be urgently regulated.
6/31

13/06/2023

We are worried that people are losing faith in the
multilateral system. Deepening divisions are continuing
to undermine the Council’s ability to deliver on its core
mandate. In that regard, I commend the wise decision
by the United Arab Emirates — as COP28 host — to put
climate, peace and security on the agenda. Despite the
desire by some members of the Council to treat climate
change and security as separate issues, in the real world
the consequences of climate change and conflict very
clearly converge.
Climate change exacerbates threats to human
security and war damages nature and the environment
in numerous ways, from the destruction of dams — just
look at Ukraine — to attacks on oil pipelines and
agricultural land that sustains rural communities. Look
at my country. Even though conflict and displacement
driven by climate change have a disproportionate
effect on women, women have shown great leadership
in finding solutions — from resolving local water
disputes in Yemen to resisting environmental crimes
in Colombia.
The Council must step up and play its part in
addressing the unprecedented challenge of climate
insecurity, working with other United Nations entities
and other international institutions to find sustainable
and just solutions.
There is much that the Council could do to integrate
climate more effectively into United Nations operations
on the ground, building on the work of the Informal
Expert Group on Climate and Security. That includes
having more climate and security advisers attached to
peacekeeping missions and using climate forecasting
as part of the Organization’s prevention toolkits to
anticipate and mitigate risk in fragile contexts.
There cannot be peace without sustainable
development, and there cannot be sustainable
development without peace. It is as simple as that.
Peace can be maintained only if the very forests, soils
and rivers that communities depend on are protected
and managed sustainably.
Ahead of COP28, the international community
must help the most vulnerable to strengthen their
resilience. That starts with developed countries
delivering on their climate financing promises,
including a doubling of adaptation financing by 2025,
and multilateral institutions dramatically increasing
their financial capacity.
23-16647

13/06/2023

Threats to international peace and security

We need bold policy action. We must redouble
our efforts not only in mitigation and adaptation but
in nature-positive solutions, including conserving
high-integrity forests, peatlands, coral reefs and other
ecosystems that provide humankind with clean air and
clean water.
I would like to end by calling on the members of the
Council for unity, constructive dialogue and cooperation,
not only on climate, peace and security but also on the
Council’s mandate as a whole. We are at a moment in
history in which the world is at risk of dividing into blocs
that compete for power and supremacy over each other,
rather than cooperating to address the unprecedented
challenges and existential threats that we all face. We
must unite to cooperate, or we will perish.
The President: I thank Mr. Santos Calderón for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Kadry.
Ms. Kadry: I would like to thank the Permanent
Mission of the United Arab Emirates to the United
Nations for kindly inviting me here today and giving me
the opportunity to speak to the Security Council about
climate change and peace and security and what it means
for the Arab region.
Throughout history, the Arab region has been a
land of great civilizations and major contributions and
breakthroughs for the advancement of humankind. It
is now home to one of the youngest populations in the
world — one that I would confidently say is also the
most resilient, despite the concurrent challenges and
hardships that it has been facing over the past decades.
It is a region that has endured — and in some parts
continues to endure — conflict, political instability,
economic hardships, mounting debts, a shrinking fiscal
space and ever-harsher climate impacts, which has made
it harder and harder for people to secure the basics of a
decent life and has pushed people to use every mean and
tool to adapt and survive.
What I am afraid of is that, if we do not step up to
the magnitude of the climate crisis, a warming climate
will put my generation and future ones right in the face
of multiplying dangers and insecurity. The scientific
evidence for climate impacts in the region is clear and
strong, and we are by no means on an equal footing with
the forces of nature. I take this opportunity to bring to the
Council’s attention three issues that are of importance to
the Arab region when talking about the climate change
and peace and security agenda.

S/PV.9345

First, in many countries in the region, the social
contract is anchored in the provision of affordable
goods and commodities and basic services, and there
are multiple instances in which price spikes have been a
driver for popular unrest and instability. It is important
to be mindful that, in a context in which climate change
destabilizes food, land and water systems, the prospect
of securing food, water and energy needs is undermined,
and that can act as a major destabilizing factor,
particularly given the fact that the region is one of the
most water-scarce in the world and is heavily dependent
on food imports.
Secondly, conflict and fragility weaken governance,
cause political friction and damage the social fabric of
societies. They also destroy physical infrastructure,
water infrastructure, housing, education and health-care
facilities. They simply destabilize every resilience tool
and drives societies into a very dangerous and uncertain
pathway. In simple words, conflicts multiply risks and
challenges and take away the tools that can be used to
face the climate crisis.
Thirdly, there are global forces and processes,
including the energy transition that, if by design they do
not serve human development or bring benefits to local
development, we run the risk of reinforcing the same
inequalities and leaving the root causes of conflict and
fragility unaddressed. I invite the Council to think about
the intended and the unintended consequences of the
energy transition on the Arab region and what it means
for sustaining peace.
What needs to be done? I will put forward four
recommendations. But first I want to echo a core idea
from former Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali’s
An Agenda for Peace, a report that has shaped my
thinking on many of these issues — it is the idea that
preventive diplomacy, peacemaking, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding at their core should address the deepest
causes of conflict. The climate and peace and security
agenda should therefore be anchored in prevention,
resilience, risk mitigation, justice and equity. I will move
on to my four recommendations.
First, people are the ones who bear the brunt of
conflicts, the climate crisis and any vacuums created by
dysfunctional systems. However, they are at the centre of
adaptation, creation and innovation. I invite the Council
to revisit how effective peace and security tools are in
supporting people’s innovations and building their
resilience, particularly those of women and youth.

23-166477/31

S/PV.9345

Threats to international peace and security

Secondly, evidence-based, timely and accurate
knowledge has always been key for sound decisions
and interventions. I advise the Council to broaden the
spectrum of research that informs its decisions. One way
to do that is through leveraging local Arab networks,
researchers and thinkers who are skilful, speak the
language and have cultural appropriateness to generate
a bottom-up understanding of climate-resilient peace.
Another way is through utilizing innovative, state-ofthe-art science on food, land and water systems,
which are central to the climate security nexus,
such as through the newly launched CGIAR Climate
Security Observatory, a decision-support tool helping
stakeholders understand how climate is exacerbating
the root causes of conflicts, where that is happening
and to whom and what can be done to mitigate the
vicious cycle of climate and conflict.
Thirdly, over the past few years, there has been
growing attention to this agenda at the Arab regional
level. Most noticeably, the President of the twentyseventh session of the Conference of the Parties to the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (COP27) launched the Climate Responses
for Sustaining Peace initiative. The Arab Water
Council and the League of Arab States have created
mechanisms to advance this agenda at a regional level.
The COP28 presidency is dedicating for the first time a
thematic day for relief, recovery and resilience. In my
capacity, I am contributing to CGIAR’s global agenda
on climate-security, with a regional focus on the Arab
world, based in Cairo and aimed at generating local and
context-specific knowledge on the topic. It is important
to leverage those regional processes as a bridge between
the local level up to the Council.
Fourthly, climate financing needs to reach those
most deserving of it. The climate financing issue is a
big one, but there are few points I want to emphasize.
Reparations need to be paid to the countries that
contributed the least to this problem to enable them to
adapt and deal with loss and damage. There is a need
for simplified climate-financing tools that are tailored
to conflict countries and reach those most in need, as
well as serve climate adaptation, which is a top priority
for the region.
I will conclude by mentioning the most important
piece of the puzzle: political will. That will is the very
characteristic that sets us apart as human beings. It
is the will that can make us move mountains or stay
where we are. I acknowledge the difficulty of the task
8/31

13/06/2023

at hand, but I urge the Council to innovate and recreate
multilateral tools that will live up to the challenge and
ensure that struggles and hardships are not passed on to
my generation and those of the future.
The President: I thank Ms. Kadry for her briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister of Climate Change and Environment of the
United Arab Emirates.
I would like to express my gratitude to President
Santos Calderón, Under-Secretary-General Lacroix
and Ms. Kadry for their invaluable insights.
In 2007, the Security Council convened for the
first time to discuss the potential implications of
climate change for international peace and security
(see S/PV.5663). During that meeting, speakers raised
concerns about the potential for climate hazards, such
as a loss of natural resources, rising sea levels and
extreme weather events, to act as catalysts for conflict.
However, the correlation between climate change and
threats to peace and security was challenged by some,
who questioned whether the Security Council was an
appropriate venue for fostering and expediting climate
action. The contours of the debate were established,
and despite the fact that 16 years have now passed,
it has seen little evolution. Nevertheless, the threat
of climate change as a risk multiplier is no longer a
hypothetical scenario. It is a daily lived reality in various
conflict settings around the world. Scientific studies
have delineated the complex relationship between
vulnerability, climate change and armed conflict, and
how those elements can form a destructive cycle.
For example, in Somalia, the terrorist group
Al-Shabaab capitalizes on the persistent drought in the
Horn of Africa, driving recruitment among displaced
communities and imposing taxes on desperate farmers
and herders. The resulting growth in Al-Shabaab’s
numbers and resources is increasingly reflected in its
enhanced ability to attack Government and international
targets. Just last month, the repercussions of that
dynamic were manifest when members of the group
killed 54 Ugandan peacekeepers serving as part of the
African Union Transition Mission in Somalia. Moreover,
the Middle East — home to 14 of the 33 most waterstressed countries globally — has been increasingly
plagued by climate change, escalating tensions within
and across national borders. For example, Iraq’s acute
vulnerability to climate change and water shortages has
endangered its post-conflict recovery through the risk
23-16647

13/06/2023

Threats to international peace and security

of increased rates of displacement and the deterioration
of agricultural livelihoods, as well as increased stress
on relationships with neighbouring countries over
water resources. In South Sudan, persistent flooding
has worsened an already severe humanitarian crisis,
hindering the ability of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan to implement its Security Council mandate
to protect civilians. At the same time, the adverse effects
of climate change have inflamed existing tensions
between pastoral and farming communities, contributing
to outbreaks of violent conflict.
In conflicts around the world, climate change
has further entrenched the epidemic of gender-based
violence and inequality, as women and girls are exposed
to more precarious situations when natural resources
and agricultural production are undermined. The
ramifications of climate change will only increase in
intensity and strength over time, and there is a risk that
their cumulative effects will snowball. Despite those
realities, the Security Council’s response has remained
insufficient for two primary reasons.
First, the unparalleled scale and complexity of
climate change pose a unique challenge to our multilateral
system’s response capacity. We stand before a global
crisis in which a myriad economic, political, security
and historical factors intertwine, making reaching
international consensus extremely daunting.
Secondly, while the impacts of climate change on
peace and security are highly variable and contextspecific, they should not be overlooked. As recent
research by the Institute for International Peace
Studies has demonstrated, our inability to easily
isolate and quantify climate effects should not deter us
from acknowledging and addressing the larger issue,
which is that climate change and conflict are mutually
reinforcing. Going forward, it will be crucial for the
multilateral system, including the Security Council, to
adapt to the systemic, slow-paced and dispersed nature
of climate change. While the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change serves as the primary
intergovernmental forum for negotiating the global
response to climate change, its role was never intended
to be exclusive. It is clear that addressing the climate
crisis requires the specific expertise of other forums,
as demonstrated by ongoing discussions on enhancing
the role of international financial institutions in the
climate response. For the Security Council, that implies
embracing innovative attempts to better understand and
address the interplay between climate change, peace
and security.

S/PV.9345

The Council must approach conflict through a
climate-sensitive lens. We must strengthen the capacity
and mandates of relevant peacekeeping operations to
incorporate climate change into their risk mitigation
and adaptation strategies, as well as their efforts in
conflict prevention and resolution. That could be
achieved by leveraging the work of the Climate Security
Mechanism and the deployment of climate security
advisers to United Nations missions, as well as making
greater use of the Council’s Informal Expert Group on
Climate and Security. It should also be complemented
with systematic data collection and reporting by the
Secretary-General across relevant files. And we must
avoid polarization around the Council’s consideration
of the issue.
The stakes are too high to dismiss or vilify
those with legitimate concerns about the Council’s
jurisdiction. We should provide opportunities to hear
from and engage with local representatives from frontline communities, particularly women and young
people, as well as regional organizations driving
climate-related initiatives, enabling them to propose
solutions specific to their contexts. That would not only
enrich the Council’s response by including local nuance
and gender-responsive approaches to discussions of
climate change and conflict, but it would strengthen
its engagement with various stakeholders and develop
sustainable solutions.
Across different but complementary forums, we
must foster holistic solutions to this multidimensional
challenge. At the twenty-eighth Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change (COP28), to be held in Dubai later this
year, the incoming United Arab Emirates presidency
plans to introduce a relief, recovery and peace day. That
will be the first of its kind at any COP, and its purpose
is to highlight the intersection of climate change, peace
and security and propose practical solutions to prevent
and address the climate burden on stability. We are
therefore promoting an ambitious agenda at COP28 in
response to the critical lack of accessible, affordable
and sufficient climate financing, particularly for
countries and communities experiencing humanitarian
and security crises. In some cases they receive 80 times
less per capita than other developing countries that are
already receiving inadequate flows.
The nexus of climate change, peace and security may
be an underdeveloped issue for the Council. However,
if we choose to overlook it in our deliberations, we

23-166479/31

S/PV.9345

Threats to international peace and security

risk jeopardizing the possibility of long-term peace and
security for people worldwide. Now is the time to fully
expose and better comprehend how such phenomena
interact, what role the international community can play
and how we can collaborate to build more prosperous,
climate-resilient and peaceful societies.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Gabon.
Mr. Immongault (Gabon) (spoke in French): I
commend the United Arab Emirates for taking the
initiative to convene this important debate. I thank
Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix and
former President of Colombia and Nobel Peace Prize
laureate Mr. Juan Manuel Santos Calderón for their
informative briefings. I also followed with great interest
the very informative briefing by Ms. Salma Kadry.
Focusing debate on climate change within the
Security Council underscores once again the critical
importance of taking into account the nexus between
climate and security and of reacting to their effects on
international peace and security. It is our responsibility.
In addition to its environmental dimension, the
current climate crisis poses a clear threat to the stability
of several regions in the world, in particular on the
African continent, on which 17 of the 20 countries most
affected by climate disruption are located and where
the majority face inextricable security challenges. That
reality is one of the driving forces behind Gabon’s plea
for recognition of the link between climate vulnerability
and security.
Despite its marginal contribution to global warming,
Africa is particularly vulnerable to the increasing,
severe and irreversible effects of extreme weather
events, which, undoubtedly, affect the way in which local
populations function, undermine livelihoods, cause mass
internal displacement and, consequently, exacerbate
community tensions.
Without a doubt, constraints linked to access to
water, drought, desertification and recurrent flooding are
all scourges that weaken the economic and social fabric
of the Horn of Africa and the Sahel and affect community
cohesion as much as they modify their natural habitat.
They therefore encourage the resurgence of violence and
armed conflict, in particular in countries in conflict or
post-conflict situations, due to the very limited capacity
of political systems and institutions and their weakness
in adapting to socioeconomic challenges.
10/31

13/06/2023

In addition, the multiple impacts of climate
change reduce people’s ability to implement survival
and resilience strategies to climate shocks and fuel
illicit activities. The 2022 joint report by the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA),
the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) and the Climate Security Mechanism
identified the increase in organized crime and the
activities of armed groups, maritime piracy and the
growing threat to the Congo basin rainforest as the
main impacts of climate change on peace and security
in the subregion.
Due to climate disruption and its harmful effects,
there could be several million internal climate migrants
in Africa by 2050. Those mass movements go hand
in hand with destabilization and the increase in
tensions, crises and conflicts in the regions affected.
Regrettably, there is a real risk that those population
movements will create tensions that could develop into
cross-border conflicts. The shrinking of Lake Chad,
for example, fuels conflict and migration in the region,
with herders and fishers regularly clashing over natural
resources. I believe that it would be a good idea to
incorporate climate risk into conflict modelling, with
reference to conflict prevention and lasting solutions
to conflict. Climate mobility therefore requires support
and planning, as well as building the capacity of local
communities to adapt to the changes it brings.
The many political, security, socioeconomic
and ecological challenges faced by humankind
today are increasingly complex, interdependent
and interconnected. That interdependence therefore
requires effective and urgent action, which could begin
by broadening the debate on climate change beyond the
environmental sphere. The climate and security nexus
must be systematically incorporated into all geopolitical
strategies for international peace and security.
The most recent synthesis report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, published
0n 20 March, confirms the gravity of the climate threat
and indicates that global warming shows no sign of
slowing down. To confront that challenge, being aware
of it is a matter of urgency in order to protect populations
and territories, build resilience to climate disruption,
develop decarbonized economies, strengthen mitigation
and adaptation measures and prevent and manage
climate-security conflicts, with a view to supporting
peacekeeping and peacebuilding processes.
23-16647

13/06/2023

Threats to international peace and security

To that end, it is imperative to establish a dialogue
that is based on a holistic and inclusive approach,
by strengthening cooperation and partnership on
climate security between subregional and regional
organizations and the United Nations, following
the example of the trilateral cooperation that exists
between UNOCA, ECCAS and the Climate Security
Mechanism. We must also take advantage of existing
strategies and best practices at the national, regional
and international levels. However, providing relevant
climate responses also implies predictable, adequate
climate financing, based on the principle of common
but differentiated responsibilities, in order to develop
adaptation and mitigation strategies and measures to
strengthen the resilience of local communities. To that
end, international financial institutions and donors
have a key role to play.
That is the basis for the participation of the President
of the Gabonese Republic and Head of State, His
Excellency Mr. Ali Bongo Ondimba, in the summit for
a new global financing pact to be held in Paris on 22 and
23 June. The dynamic of action will certainly be one of
the challenges of the twenty-eighth Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change, organized under the presidency
of the United Arab Emirates, whose commitment I
welcome. The Conference will be held in Dubai from
30 November to 12 December.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Gabon’s
constant commitment and the clear determination
of President Ondimba in the fight against climate
change. The fight against climate change is much
more than a question of sustainable development. It
is a question of survival for the populations that are
affected — a question on which the peace and security
of many peoples of the world depend. It is a collective
responsibility. We must act and unite our efforts
without delay in a coordinated manner. Failure to act
will be fatal to us all and irreversible for the security
and survival of present and future generations.
The President: I now call on the Minister for
Environment, Science, Technology and Innovation
of Ghana.
Mr. Afriyie (Ghana): I thank the United Arab
Emirates for convening today’s high-level debate on
climate change, peace and security.
We welcome the briefings by His Excellency
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for

S/PV.9345

Peace Operations, and His Excellency Mr. Juan Manuel
Santos Calderón, former President of Colombia, Nobel
Peace Laureate and member of The Elders. We equally
thank Ms. Salma Kadry, climate and peace and security
specialist, for her additional perspective.
As a member of the Group of Friends on Climate
and Security, we associate ourselves with the statement
to be read out by the representative of Germany on
behalf of the Group.
Climate change is not only an existential threat
to humankind; it is driving and exacerbating threats
to international peace and security in several regions
of the world, especially the Sahel. The strong link
between climate change and international peace and
security can no longer be denied or, indeed, ignored,
as the adverse impact of climate change on the stability
of countries manifests itself in conflict, terrorism
and violent extremism and the further shrinking or
displacement of State presence.
In Africa, for instance, from the Lake Chad region
to the Sahel and other parts of the continent, we are
witnessing the multiplier effect of climate change on
peace and security, including food and water insecurity
and climate-induced displacements. In the Lake Chad
region, the lake has contracted by some 90 per cent
from its 1960 size, due to drought in that region and has
contributed to incidents of violence between farmers
and cattle herders. The accompanying loss of livelihoods
and weakening of community resilience has been
exploited by terrorist groups to recruit and radicalize
vulnerable people in the affected communities in their
bid to displace States.
As we confront the unprecedented and worsening
ecological threat to the stability of regions and its
resultant socioeconomic and political impacts, we must
harness available global and regional instruments. They
include the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change and the African Union Climate Change
and Resilient Development Strategy and Action Plan
2022–2032 to reverse climate change and its impact on
security. The twenty-seventh Conference of the Parties
to the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change, held in Sharm El-Sheikh, reaffirmed
the reality of the climate menace by recognizing
that it not only exacerbates the causes and effects of
conflict but also affects the ability of communities and
institutions to help make and build peace in specific
contexts. In that regard, it is pertinent that we work

23-1664711/31

S/PV.9345

Threats to international peace and security

to see our views converge on the notion that when
we seek to resolve conflicts, climate risks — where
relevant — must be tackled as part of peace efforts. It is
against that backdrop that I would like to highlight the
following points, which we deem critical to addressing
climate change and its adverse impacts on global peace
and security.
First, the unprecedented security risks associated
with climate change underpin our belief that the
Security Council, as the primary body responsible for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
has a role to play and should continue to find space on
its agenda to discuss the issue and complement efforts
to tackle it.
Secondly, the Security Council can better integrate
climate change into its peace efforts by encouraging
special political missions to integrate and mainstream
a climate perspective into mediation and peace
negotiations. It will also be useful to enhance the
capacity of United Nations peacekeeping missions to
enable them to continually assess climate-related risks
and opportunities across United Nations early-warning
and planning processes and other prevention measures.
The inclusion of climate-specific language in a number
of peace operations’ mandates, including that of the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel,
is an example that should be encouraged and replicated
in other missions, where the challenge exists, during
mandate renewals. That should include utilizing the
findings of risk assessments undertaken by the United
Nations in order to make the efforts of missions to
sustain peace more robust.
It is also important to continue leveraging the work
of the Group of Friends on Climate and Security and the
Climate Security Mechanism in dealing with the issue.
As a troop-contributing country to United Nations peace
operations, Ghana encourages the United Nations and
donor partners, including the Council, to support peace
operations that leverage innovative tools to reduce their
carbon footprint in areas that are seriously affected by
climate change.
Thirdly, we can further consolidate the gains made
in tackling the issue by encouraging the inclusion of
climate fragility issues in the reports of the SecretaryGeneral. That would give visibility and enhance the
adoption of innovative and robust measures to enable
United Nations missions to adapt to climate situations
and respond effectively.
12/31

13/06/2023

Fourthly, adequate funding remains critical to
addressing climate-related security risks. We underscore
the importance of continually engaging with United
Nations bodies such as the Peacebuilding Commission
and welcome the fact that since 2017 the Peacebuilding
Fund has allocated funds for climate-security-related
projects in countries on the Council’s agenda. As
reports have indicated, returns on investment in
climate adaptation range between $2 and $10 for
every dollar invested. In that regard, multilateral and
bilateral support to finance climate activities, including
resilience-building and risk assessments, is critical. We
note and welcome the commitments and aspirations of
developed countries to jointly mobilize $100 billion
annually in climate financing between 2020 and 2025,
and encourage more to be done in that regard.
Fifthly, deepening cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional mechanisms
in the crusade against climate change and insecurity
is crucial. We therefore encourage strengthening the
capacity of regional and national actors to enhance
their early-warning systems and data analysis
capacities, which are critical for regional preventive
action. In that regard, we note the international
support for the Africa Multi-Hazard Early-Warning
and Early Action System situation room for disaster
risk reduction and the Economic Community of West
African States regional climate strategy, to mention
only a few examples. Leveraging partnerships with
such regional arrangements will further strengthen
and build resilience as well as effective responses to
climate-related security risks.
Lastly, in dealing with the climate and security
issue, we must not forget to include women, girls and
young people in targeted policies that recognize the
agency of those groups in building climate resilience.
In conclusion, Ghana believes that climate-related
security risks are evident and require serious national,
regional and, indeed, international commitment to build
resilience and protect the well-being of our societies.
The President: I now call on the Minister of State
Administration and Public Service of Mozambique.
Ms.
Comoane
(Mozambique)
(spoke
in
Portuguese; English interpretation provided by the
delegation): Mozambique has the honour to thank
you, Madam President, for the invitation to participate
in this important debate on the climate and peace
and security nexus. That thematic area is a priority
23-16647

13/06/2023

Threats to international peace and security

for Mozambique in its mandate as a non-permanent
member of the Security Council. On behalf of His
Excellency Mr. Filipe Jacinto Nyusi, President of the
Republic of Mozambique, I would like to convey our
greetings to the members of the Security Council and
all representatives of States and organizations at this
high-level open debate, organized under the presidency
of the United Arab Emirates. We would also like to take
this opportunity to congratulate the countries newly
elected to the Council for the term 2024–2025.
Today’s debate represents an important opportunity
for the Security Council and the entire United Nations
system to reaffirm their commitment and show their
sense of solidarity with all victims of the negative
effects of extreme events associated with climate
change. As a non-permanent member of the Security
Council, Mozambique advocates for an interventionist
multilateralism in all thematic issues with the potential
to contribute to promoting the welfare of humankind.
That includes the global agenda to combat climate
change and mitigate its effects, especially taking into
account the increasingly inescapable link between
climate and international peace and security.
In our current circumstances, climate change, along
with global terrorism, constitutes a threat and a scourge
across every latitude and longitude of planet Earth.
No country is immune to that evil, and no country is
individually capable of combating climate change and
mitigating its effects. That justifies the relevance of
strengthening international cooperation on the issue.
Furthermore, as has been confirmed, the frequency
of extreme climate events has been increasing at
catastrophic rates, creating challenges for Governments
that require that they systematize their approaches
to disaster risk management. By way of illustration,
several countries have been facing prolonged droughts
owing to irregular rainfall. This situation generates
food insecurity and the degradation of the quality of
life of the population in the face of the destruction of
essential infrastructure, following floods and cyclones.
The systematic and predominant occurrence of
extreme weather events, namely, droughts, floods
and cyclones, precipitate large displacements of the
population from risk areas to those considered safe,
causing great pressure in the accommodation areas
on the already scarce resources for sustenance. Those
factors tend to contribute to the occurrence or increase
in the number of conflicts.

S/PV.9345

Mozambique is an example of that. Our country has
been cyclically suffering from the adverse effects of
climate change, with the occurrence in 2019 of Cyclones
Idai and Kenneth, which caused approximately 500,000
internal displacements in the provinces of Sofala,
Zambézia, Manica, Tete, Nampula and Cabo Delgado
and, more recently, Tropical Cyclone Freddy which
devastated the central region of Mozambique and
affected around 1.3 million people.
There is no doubt that climate change has a
negative impact on the project of building international
peace and security, if we take as a reference its negative
impact and its action as one of the driving factors of
conflicts caused by both the need to control territories
and by the scarcity of natural resources.
As members of the United Nations, we are
called upon to reiterate and reinforce our collective
commitment, including by increasingly mobilizing
non-State actors, as well as the private sector and
civil society organizations, in each of our countries
to strengthen a sense of responsibility, a sharing of
experiences, as well as information and strategies with
a view to jointly addressing the devastating effects of
climate change and its negative impact on international
peace and security.
In that regard, in peace support operations it should
be noted that the impact of climate change is substantial,
considering that in many geographic realities, the
implementation of the objectives of the mandate
of peacekeeping missions has been significantly
challenged by adverse weather phenomena. Such are the
cases recently registered in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, where heavy rains caused constraints
for the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
and in Syria, where an earthquake followed by heavy
rains constrained the United Nations humanitarian
operations there.
Similarly, the United Nations peacekeeping
missions are confronted by the growth in the number
of armed groups, some of which are terrorist groups.
Those groups have exploited the vulnerabilities
generated by the effects of climate change, namely,
the shortages of food and water resources, as well as
the changing geographical configuration of population
density to settle themselves in semi-abandoned areas
and design recruitment strategies under the promise
of providing increasingly scarce resources. Those

23-1664713/31

S/PV.9345

Threats to international peace and security

events are intrinsically associated with the exploitation
of pre-existing vulnerabilities, with emphasis on
essential infrastructure for agriculture, transport and
basic sanitation.
While it is a fact that climate change is a global
phenomenon, it is also a fact that its effects and impact
are not felt with the same intensity across countries.
Without leaving any other region behind, African
countries, owing to their socioeconomic situation, have
been the most affected, with disastrous consequences
for the economy, food security and the network of
infrastructure and essential services. The modifications
and redefinitions of the hydrological cycle, the
deterioration of water quality under conditions of
higher temperature and lower flows, are factors
that, together with armed conflicts, tend to place the
African population, especially women and children, in
a situation of increasing vulnerability.
In this sad and unavoidable reality, Mozambique,
my country, has also been affected, owing to its
geographical position along the coastal and tropical
zone. It is one of the countries cyclically affected by
extreme climatological phenomena, causing the loss of
lives of people and animals, the destruction of public
and private infrastructure, among other consequences,
as recently witnessed with the passage of Cyclone
Freddy in February, as mentioned before.
Given that geographic vulnerability and its sense of
shared responsibility, Mozambique has been proactive
in building collective solutions, materialized by the
approval and implementation of important governance
instruments related to the fight against climate change;
ready participation in all climate conferences at the
United Nations, the African Union and the Southern
African Development Community (SADC). The setup,
in the city of Nacala in northern Mozambique, of the
SADC Humanitarian and Emergency Operations
Centre, is proof of our country’s commitment to the
issue of managing the risk of disasters resulting from
severe weather events.
I will conclude by reiterating the gratitude of
Mozambique for the inclusion of the topic of the
climate, peace and security nexus at the level of the
Security Council, which demonstrates our collective
commitment and engagement with respect to the nexus
between climate change and global peace and security.
The President: I now call on the Special Presidential
Envoy for Climate of the United States of America.
14/31

13/06/2023

Mr. Kerry (United States of America): Let me
begin by thanking, as others have, Under-SecretaryGeneral Lacroix and my friend His Excellency
President Santos Calderón. I also thank Ms. Salma
Kadry very much for setting the stage for this important
discussion. And I thank you, Madam President, for the
leadership of the United Arab Emirates in calling this
really critical meeting on the security implications of
the climate crisis.
I particularly take note of the comments of the
representative from Mozambique, who really described
the unfairness of the impacts and in effect defined one
of the threats that will come out of this crisis that we all
face as a consequence of the unfair distribution of the
impacts and the unfair distribution of the causes. And I
will say more about that in a moment.
Let me just begin by saying to everybody that it
is now indisputable that the climate crisis is one of the
top security threats, not just to the developed world but
to the entire planet, to life on the planet itself. And it
is a crisis that already today costs countries billions of
dollars each year, which we spend not even to prevent
at this point, but just to clean up the mess. And most
important, it costs the world millions of lives. It is an
active threat against the livelihoods and the peace of
people everywhere on this planet.
We see with our naked eyes and the observations
that are now coming more rapidly in larger amounts than
were predicted by the scientists and at a greater speed
than was predicted by the scientists that there is really
very little security against the most severe consequences
of the crisis of extreme temperatures. Millions of people
actually die every year now from extreme heat.
We see the impacts of the spread of disease and
the infestations of insects that live longer and attack
the trees and forests of countries that depend on them
more than ever before, bringing with it the loss of food.
We see the chaos of mass migration, which has hardly
reached the levels that it is predicted it will reach if we
continue to have the biodestruction that is taking place
on a global basis. I do not think there is a single country
that now lives sustainably, and not necessarily because
that is what countries have actively chosen, since certain
processes have been forced on them by virtue of the
global economy.
There is no finding peace solutions for the 7 million
people a year around the world who die from the impact
of greenhouse-gas pollution. We fail to call it pollution
23-16647

13/06/2023

Threats to international peace and security

as frequently as we should, I think, because that is what it
is. Without action, the costs of climate-crisis destruction
will go up, and the spread of its impacts will grow. It is
fair to say that the world we experienced last year will
be a better world than the one we are going to experience
this year or the ones we will see in the foreseeable future
unless we do a better job of attacking the crisis itself.
The cost will rival the cost of many wars, even of
those being fought today. Last year, as we heard from
the Minister of Mozambique, double cyclones hit from
Mozambique to Vanuatu. In the United States, we saw
death and destruction in the wake of intensive tornadoes.
In the United States alone, three storms several years ago
were responsible for approximately $265 billion worth of
damage. Yet we manage not to find the $100 billion we
need. This year, we will find the $100 billion. This year
we will have the $100 billion. But think how long that
has taken. Obviously, we had a president who regrettably
pulled us out of the Paris Agreement and set us back for
the four years of his term by not putting any money in the
budget for the issue.
Today the Horn of Africa has experienced the
worst droughts on record, driving crop failures and
food shortages that make keeping peace difficult, as
we heard from the Under-Secretary-General. Last
October, United Nations peacekeepers in South Sudan
had to deal with some of the worst floods the area had
ever experienced, worsening an already terrible period
of conflict. Everyone who was in New York last week
had the unfortunate experience of dealing with the air
quality, as we all inhaled smoke and could literally taste
the impact of the fires in Canada, fuelled significantly
by drought and heat. I am not saying exclusively created
by drought and heat but fuelled very significantly to a
certainty by them.
There is no legitimate debate. There is no space for
procrastination. How many issues on the Security Council’s agenda can one say that of? There is no room for
debate on the science in that regard. The crisis is growing. It is undermining our collective peace and security.
Without concerted action from this body and every single governmental entity that deals with these issues, the
impact of the crisis on the world is going to get worse,
and it will continue to threaten our peace, our lives and
our security in greater fashion, every day and every
year that we do not do what we know we need to do.
Furthermore, one should not minimize the degree to
which the droughts, the floods and the fires that we are
experiencing are driving mass economic, social, political

S/PV.9345

and environmental disruptions and the displacement
of human beings around the world, which in its own
way creates chaos. No one in this Chamber can deny
the way the politics of certain countries have changed
dramatically, and not for the better, as a consequence of
the movement of people, the conflicts we face and the
disruptions to our economies. Last year, in Pakistan, we
saw 30 million people displaced by just one event. Without
action, therefore, the instability produced by climate
disruptions is only going to grow, and climate-driven
events will increasingly stress our peacekeepers and our
countries’ militaries.
A number of years ago, our military at the highest
level, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, came to the conclusion
that the climate crisis is a threat multiplier. All of the
other forces that create wars or conflict are multiplied
as a consequence of what happens with this struggle.
That is why we welcome the peace and security issue,
and the twenty-eighth session of the Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change (COP28), which was announced in this
Chamber by the President of the Council in her capacity
as Minister of Climate Change and Environment of the
United Arab Emirates. Obviously, if we are going to
resolve this, the Security Council and the United Nations
will have to step up and be heard from even more than
they have been heard from to date.
We certainly understand the Secretary-General’s
frustration at the lack of action about which he has
been constantly reminding us. We need to pledge our
resources to the Secretary-General’s Early Warnings
for All initiative, and we need to make sure that it takes
into account the needs of the most vulnerable people.
We have to integrate those threats into the New Agenda
for Peace and reimagine how the United Nations system
itself can best address the growing impact of this crisis
on world security.
Specifically, we have to ensure that the climate crisis
is included in the conflict-prevention and mediation efforts
of United Nations peacekeeping missions worldwide. We
all need to help make that happen. I would remind Council
members that, here, in the United States, after we finally
got the Inflation Reduction Act — the most important
legislation we have ever passed and which is already
having a dramatic impact on choices — signed into law,
President Biden created the President’s Emergency Plan
for Adaptation and Resilience plan, which is now helping
half a billion people in developing countries adapt to
and manage the impacts of the climate crisis by 2030.

23-1664715/31

S/PV.9345

Threats to international peace and security

It has been mentioned by several speakers that,
in approximately six months, many of us are going to
gather in Dubai for COP28. There are already three
mandated outcomes. The first is winning the challenge
of adaptation. An adaptation report will be delivered.
Secondly, we will address loss and damage, whose
dynamic we changed successfully, but not completely,
in Sharm El-Sheikh. Thirdly, there will be a global
stock-taking, which will be a stark assessment of where
we are. Nobody will be particularly pleased. But it also
must be more than that: it will have to show what the
road map is going forward. That is the best stock-taking
we could deliver to the world.
We need to make sure we try to do that. We must
respond to reality. This is the way we see the reality: 48
countries in sub-Saharan Africa account for 0.55 per
cent of all emissions. The challenge we face is therefore
not coming externally from some threat. It is not a
nation that is trying to grab more territory. It is not the
politics or even the drive of one authoritarian leader or
another to dominate. The challenge we face is us. It is
everybody. It is the way we choose to heat our homes,
light our factories, propel our vehicles. It is the unabated
burning of fossil fuels that is creating the problem. The
issue is therefore whether or not we — all of us — are
going to move to do enough about it.
Forty-eight countries account for 0.55 per cent of
emissions. Twenty countries account for 76 per cent
of all the emissions. We all pledged in Paris and in
Glasgow and in Sharm El-Sheikh to get on a glide path
to 1.5°C, but we are not all doing it.
I am not here to point fingers. Every one of our
countries need to work together. We have technologies;
we can do things; we have great universities; we have
great laboratories. We can do more to be able to bring
ourselves together to deal with this crisis. In the end, only
one thing is going to save us from ourselves — meeting
the target the scientists are giving us with respect to the
reduction of emissions. And even if we get to net zero
by 2050, we still have to suck 1.6 trillion tons or so of
carbon dioxide out of the atmosphere. That means that
we have to have some carbon capture in order to do that.
The goal ahead of us is absolutely clear — we need
to end the permitting of new, unabated coal plants
now. Unabated means that we would not be capturing
any emissions. And we need to pool the financing
together — and that is in the trillions. I am glad to say
that next week, in Paris, President Macron’s Climate
16/31

13/06/2023

Finance Summit will take place and, hopefully, we
will expand the ideas for blended financing and for the
terms we need in order to achieve this goal.
Knowing what we know about this crisis, no country
should be bringing online new sources of pollution
from anywhere. We therefore have to recommit to our
2030 Goals and not only to those, because if we do not
do enough by 2030, then there will be no net zero by
2050. That goal will be unachievable. There will be no
keeping the 1.5°C. It will be gone. The decisive decade
is now, and we need to step up with better plans and real
plans with respect to 2050. Those are the things that we
have to do in order to ensure the safety of our citizens
and — no small objective — to ensure the security of
the planet worldwide.
I emphasize one observation — that, obviously,
the time for talk is well behind us. We have the tools
and technology we need in order to achieve a 45 per
cent reduction by 2030, but not all of us are applying
it. We can avoid the worst effects of the climate crisis,
according to what the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change said in 2018 in its warning to us, but
the time and clock are ticking.
This is not a matter of building capacity; it is a
matter of living up to the promises that we made. We
made promises in Paris; we made promises in Glasgow;
we reiterated those promises in Sharm El-Sheikh; and
we cannot just go to Dubai and reiterate them yet again.
Every member of the Security Council, permanent
and otherwise, has to renew ambition and resolve
what is necessary to win this fight. That is in all of
our security interests, spread evenly among us, and
it is only by working together that we can repair the
planet and defend all nations against one of the greatest
threats the world has ever known. We still can win this
fight, and I hope that the Security Council is going to
be given plenty of opportunities in the next months in
order to help do that.
The President: I now call on the State Secretary of
Switzerland.
Ms. Leu (Switzerland) (spoke in French): The most
systemic threat to humankind remains climate change,
as the Secretary-General of the United Nations has
stated. In a world that is heating up, climate security
and sustainable peace are inseparable. That is why
Switzerland has made climate security a priority at the
Security Council.
23-16647

13/06/2023

Threats to international peace and security

I would therefore like to thank the United Arab
Emirates for organizing this important debate and for
their continued commitment through the presidency of
the twenty-eighth Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
The work of the Security Council and the
implementation of the Paris Agreement on climate
change are complementary in addressing those
immense challenges. President Santos Calderón,
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and Ms. Kadry,
whom I would like to thank for their testimonies, have
illustrated that clearly: climate change fuels the risk
of conflict. Recognizing the undeniable link between
climate change and security is therefore imperative. For
that reason, too, Switzerland supports the declaration
of the Group of Friends on Climate and Security.
Climate change, the loss of biodiversity and
pollution are compounding global tensions and
conflicts. Many felt that here in New York last week.
It is a triple global crisis. Heat and drought, storms and
floods are destabilizing numerous regions of the world.
The vicious circle of tension, fragility and conflict is
often reinforced by climate change. In the Sahel for
example, as Ms. Diouf, a representative of civil society,
pointed out to the Council last month (see S/PV.9322).
Or in South Sudan, where persistent flooding is
preventing the Mission mandated by the Council from
fully accomplishing its task of protecting civilians.
The impact of climate change is unprecedented.
Our response must therefore be innovative.
First, we need to put science and new technologies
at the service of conflict prevention. For example, the
Climate Risk and Early Warning System initiative,
of which the World Meteorological Organization is
a key partner, implements early-warning systems.
That triggers rapid action ahead of extreme events in
vulnerable countries and, thus, represents a concrete
contribution to conflict prevention. Another example
is the International Organization for Migration’s
Displacement Tracking Matrix, which analyses data on
displaced populations.
Integrating scientific and diplomatic expertise is
a strategic approach for Switzerland. In recent years,
we have created a centre of expertise in Geneva on the
effects of climate change on human security, which
benefits the entire United Nations system.

S/PV.9345

Secondly, our collective efforts to build and
consolidate peace must also integrate the links between
climate change and security. The United Nations
Peacebuilding Fund, which Switzerland supports,
confirms that need. Lessons to be learned include climate
financing in fragile countries, which must reflect local
priorities, empower women economically and value the
expertise of younger generations.
Thirdly, the mandates of the peacekeeping operations
must be sensitive to climate risks. Realities on the
ground have already prompted some missions to react.
Climate and environmental advisers are instrumental in
supporting missions with the integration and mitigation
of climate risks into their work.
The Climate Security Mechanism, a joint initiative
of various United Nations actors and programmes,
also enables the United Nations to address these risks
more systematically. I would like to highlight the role
of the Informal Expert Group on Climate and Security,
which we co-chair with your country, Madam President,
and Mozambique. In March, together with Malta, we
launched a series of concrete measures on climate,
peace and security within the Council. We invite other
members to join our efforts.
Climate security is one of the cornerstones of
stability. We must anchor climate action — not only in
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, but also in
the New Agenda for Peace.
Inaction is not an option. That is why the Council
must act on the complex interplay between climate, peace
and security. That is the only way to fulfil its mandate,
which is to maintain international peace and security.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I would like to
begin by thanking the briefers for their comments and
remarks on this important subject.
As a responsible actor historically engaged in
multilateralism and the sustainable development
agenda, Brazil will always act in a constructive and
consistent way, promoting concerted solutions to the
major challenges faced by the international community.
Climate change is unequivocally one of the greatest
challenges to humankind. Without an effective and
consistent response, we will not be able to address its
root causes and adverse impacts on our societies.
As a token of our firm, renewed and reinvigorated
commitment to tackling climate change, last November,
during the twenty-seventh session of the Conference of

23-1664717/31

S/PV.9345

Threats to international peace and security

the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change (COP27), then President-elect Lula
presented Brazil’s pledge to host COP30 in 2025 in the
Brazilian Amazon region. We are grateful for the recent
endorsement and support of all the countries of the
Group of Latin American and Caribbean States in that
regard. We are honoured by the trust placed in Brazil
and will dedicate ourselves with the highest sense of
priority to promoting a COP 30 that will contribute to
a decisive advancement of the climate change regime.
We also look forward to COP28, to be held in Dubai
later this year. We expect to have a meaningful discussion
on climate change under the existing formal tracks of the
multilateral climate change regime. The global stocktake
to take place during COP28 will be a pivotal moment in
our common efforts to combat climate change. It will point
out advances and identify key implementation gaps in the
regime, particularly regarding climate financing. We are
convinced that the global stocktake will be fundamental
for the future of the climate change regime and for a
successful COP 30, to take place two years from now.
The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (UNFCCC) and the Paris Agreement on climate
change are the most appropriate forums for discussing
the global response to climate change. We believe that a
thematic and cross-cutting discussion of this topic within
the context of the Security Council is neither productive
nor effective. It brings up a very serious and potentially
unsolvable problem regarding the encroachment of the
Council into themes typically addressed by the UNFCCC
and the United Nations development pillar. The Security
Council, when performing its functions, may and should
contribute in that regard by supporting the efforts of host
countries on the ground, at their request, to increase
local resilience and build capacities. That does not
mean that the Council has or should have a mandate to
thematically and systematically address climate change.
Let us not forget that, according to the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC),
which is our multilateral body responsible for climate
change science, the influence of climate on conflicts is
assessed as “relatively weak” when compared to other
socioeconomic factors. The IPCC also stresses that
vulnerability to climate change is higher in locations with
poverty, governance challenges and limited access to basic
services and resources, and that “development challenges
causing high vulnerability are influenced by historical
and ongoing patterns of inequity, such as colonialism”.
18/31

13/06/2023

Not only does the Security Council lack the
necessary legitimacy to address climate change in a
consistent, comprehensive and meaningful way, it also
lacks the adequate tools to do so. The UNFCCC and
the development pillar of the United Nations already
have the proper tools and mechanisms to address the
underlying development challenges and to reduce
vulnerability to climate change in fragile contexts.
We must recall the commitment to addressing the root
causes of climate change, including, in particular, the
transitions towards low-emission energy systems. To
effectively fight climate change, we all need, in the
first place, to reduce fossil-fuel burning. Throughout
our history, carbon emission has happened mostly in
developed countries, not in conflict zones. The Council
does not have the appropriate tools, for instance, to tackle
the key issue of the provision of climate financing and
means of implementation of our collective mitigation
and adaptation efforts.
The amount necessary to match the needs and
priorities of developing countries to combat climate
change, according to the UNFCCC’s first needs
assessment report, ranges from $5.8 to $11.5 trillion
by 2030. If climate change is really a priority for those
countries, we need to see concrete and meaningful
progress in that regard in the proper forums. The
provision and mobilization of new, predictable,
additional and adequate resources is the urgent need of
the hour for developing countries.
The multilateral climate change regime, grounded
on the UNFCCC, its Kyoto Protocol and its Paris
Agreement, is, for good reasons, already based on a
number of principles that ensure balance, transparency
and inclusivity, with decisions based on the consensus
of all countries as parties to the Convention. Nothing
could be further from the reality of the Security
Council, which is a body that operates and is structured
in a fundamentally different way. The suggestion for
the Council to improve its transparency and inclusivity
by actively engaging non-Council members and a wide
array of stakeholders in discussions on climate, peace
and security, while well-intentioned, is not going to fix
that. The Security Council urgently needs a profound
reform, precisely because it is unbalanced, opaque
and non-inclusive. Cosmetic, superficial changes of an
ad hoc nature will not turn the Security Council into
an inclusive body. Moreover, the views of developing
countries, which are the most affected by the adverse
impacts of global warming, are not adequately
23-16647

13/06/2023

Threats to international peace and security

represented. The IPCC indicates, for instance, that
the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean
will potentially be some of the most affected by the
changing climate. However, our region is largely
underrepresented in the Council.
In conclusion, adding the issue of climate change
only overburdens the mandates of missions authorized
by the Council, in a scenario in which many are already
under serious pressure due to the overstretching of
their multidimensional roles. The treatment of the issue
in appropriate forums, and above all the delivery of
financial commitments under the Paris Agreement, could
certainly have a more tangible impact on the ground.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): We are grateful
to the United Arab Emirates for focusing the Council’s
attention on this subject today. I also thank UnderSecretary-General Lacroix, former President Santos
Calderón and Ms. Kadry for their important briefings.
There has been some progress since the United
Kingdom first brought the issue of climate security
to the Council in 2007 (see S/PV.5663). But as the
implications of climate change are increasingly being
integrated into our work on conflict, peace and security,
the physical effects and cascading risks of climate
change are increasingly being felt across the world and
are exacerbating pre-existing fragilities. The link to
international peace and security is clear and has been
powerfully detailed today by Ministers from Africa
and the Middle East — regions that are the focus of the
majority of our work in the Council. We need urgent,
coordinated global action now to address the threats.
Let me highlight three issues that are priorities for the
United Kingdom.
The first is the need to increase and improve access
to financing for the countries most affected by climate
change, as Mr. Kerry highlighted so powerfully just now.
We are working to reform the international financial
system and scale up public and private financing for
climate resilience and sustainable peace, including
for countries on the Council’s agenda. Regional risk
pools founded by the United Kingdom have transferred
$1 billion of risk from Africa, with Somalia receiving a
first payout from drought insurance this year. In July we
will convene events on climate financing in the United
Kingdom and here in New York, including for countries
with humanitarian needs, to contribute to this theme at
the twenty-eighth Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.

S/PV.9345

Secondly, we need to ensure that the drivers of
conflict are considered within climate interventions.
Conflict-sensitive climate adaptation should be part
of the solution for destabilized countries. And women,
girls and local actors need to be meaningfully included
in formal systems and negotiations.
Finally, climate and conflict risk reduction and
early responses should be integrated into humanitarian,
peacebuilding and development programmes, in line
with the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction
and the Secretary-General’s Early Warnings for All
initiative. Reducing risk and the impact of disasters
is critical to ensuring continued progress towards the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), especially
SDG 13, on climate, and SDG 16, on conflict.
The United Nations system is well-positioned
to coordinate climate, development, peacebuilding
and security efforts. As others have said, climate and
peace and security advisers in United Nations missions
play an important role. The Council could do more to
support that by helping to drive a more coherent and
integrated response to stabilization, peacebuilding
and climate-resilient development across United
Nations activities.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes you, Madam President, to the Security
Council to preside over our meeting. We also thank
Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix, His
Excellency Mr. Juan Manuel Santos Calderón and
Ms. Salma Kadry for their briefings.
The challenges posed by climate change to human
life and to the development of all countries are being
felt ever more acutely. It is all the more urgent and
imperative for the international community to unite
and work together to address climate change. China
supports the international community’s endeavours
in a number of areas — upholding the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)
as the main forum for deliberations on climate issues;
adhering to the principles of common but differentiated
responsibilities, equity and respective capacities;
strengthening policy coordination; increasing support
for developing countries in terms of financing,
technology and capacity-building; fully and effectively
implementing the UNFCCC and its Paris Climate
Agreement and continuing to make new headway
in global climate governance. China supports the
important role of the United Nations in addressing

23-1664719/31

S/PV.9345

Threats to international peace and security

climate change and fully supports the United Arab
Emirates as host of the twenty-eighth Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change (COP28). We believe the upcoming
COP28 will produce major positive outcomes with its
President, Sultan Al Jaber, at the helm.
The linkages between climate and security have
been discussed at many meetings of the Council. It is
clear that opinion remains divided and further in-depth
discussions are needed. On the one hand, in developing
countries that lack climate resilience we are seeing a
high incidence of extreme weather events and natural
disasters that decimate development gains, exacerbate
resource shortages and trigger intercommunal and
inter-ethnic clashes. On the other hand, when examined
from a broader perspective, the connection between
climate change and security risks is very complex, and the
precise link between the two is not yet fully understood.
Just as it is not scientific to deny the existence of a
relationship between climate and security, I venture to
say that it is equally unscientific to make generalizations
about the security implications of climate change by
taking the issue out of a specific context. What matters
here is doing the right thing with the right approach.
That being the case, we are of the view that the Security
Council should analyse the dynamics between climate
and security by putting the issue in context while taking
into account the Council’s own mandate and existing
agendas and the resources and means available to it,
as well as country-specific situations. We should be
problem-oriented, identify the root causes of security
risks and develop practical solutions that actually work.
Haiti’s recent floods have exacerbated the country’s
pre-existing humanitarian woes. There is some connection
with climate, but Haiti’s underlying challenges,
particularly gang violence and political corruption, have
not changed. Iraq is dogged by ecological problems such
as water scarcity, drought and desertification, and while
of course that has a connection to climate change, Iraq’s
main challenge is dealing with the dire consequences of
foreign invasion. Years of war and hostilities, including
the use of depleted-uranium munitions by external
forces, have led to the irreparable degradation of Iraq’s
ecosystems, and explosive remnants of war have rendered
large areas of land unusable. Merely bringing the climate
change perspective to the Council’s work while ignoring
those underlying problems will not point us towards the
right solutions or produce the desired results.
20/31

13/06/2023

It is also worth considering why the socioeconomic
consequences of climate extremes in North America
are different from those in the Pacific Islands. It is
no secret that there are vast differences between the
abilities of various countries to address climate change.
Behind and beneath that disparity are major differences
in their levels of development. The most conclusive way
to stop climate change from becoming a security risk is
therefore to take the development approach. That means
helping developing countries to bridge the development
divide and to enhance their climate resilience and
response capacity. In that regard, the Security Council
should not become a salon for idle talk, interested only
in political correctness. It should be grounded on terra
firma and guided by its mandate, making bona fide
efforts to help developing countries in a tangible way to
address security risks.
First, the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change (UNFCCC) and the Paris Agreement are
the most important guiding instruments for addressing
climate change. The basic consensus enshrined in the
Convention is that developed countries have a historical
responsibility to shoulder when it comes to global
climate change. It stands to reason that they take the
lead in significantly reducing emissions and achieving
net-zero or even negative carbon emissions sooner.
Unfortunately, since last year, there has been a reversal
in the energy policies of some developed countries.
Their fossil energy consumption and carbon emissions
have increased, not decreased. Those developments
are disconcerting.
The Security Council should play its role and
watch those developments very closely. They also raise
a question: if climate change is deemed a potential
security threat, does it not follow that negative
regressive behaviour in the fulfilment of emissions
reduction obligations, including unilateral withdrawal
from the Paris Agreement, also constitutes a threat
to international peace and security? Can the Council
take enforcement measures under the authority of
the Charter of the United Nations to redress such
negative actions? That calls for and warrants some
in-depth contemplation.
Secondly, the lack of financing is the biggest
bottleneck for global climate governance. Developed
countries are in huge arrears on climate financing. The
annual shortfall of $100 billion must be made up as soon
as possible, and a new quantified collective goal for the
post-2025 period set. The twenty-seventh Conference
23-16647

13/06/2023

Threats to international peace and security

of the Parties to the UNFCCC, held in Sharm El-Sheikh,
Egypt, last year, established the loss and damage fund.
Developing countries are eagerly awaiting the fund’s early
operationalization. The relevant United Nations agencies
should do their part to promote the implementation of
the fund, including the creation of a mechanism to
monitor the implementation of climate financing and to
encourage developed countries to genuinely translate
political commitments into concrete actions.
In order for the Council to play its role, it should
pronounce itself strongly in those areas as well. At the
same time, the Security Council should stake out its role
in that regard through tangible action. As a first step,
the Council could consider authorizing its field missions
in those countries more heavily affected by climate
change and its larger missions to collect information on
the host country’s annual receipts of climate financing
from developed countries and to inform the Council on
a regular basis. It goes without saying that the missions
themselves should become benchmarks or, indeed,
role models for energy conservation and emissions
reduction by doing their part for the climate actions of
host countries.
Thirdly, green protectionism in developed countries
is something we must watch out for. Under the pretext of
promoting their own energy transitions, certain countries
have invested hundreds of billions of dollars in hefty
subsidies for their manufacturing industries through
various unfair bills and administrative initiatives,
while setting up major trade barriers against the green
industries of other countries and blocking developing
countries’ access to green technologies. Those acts are
a blatant violation of World Trade Organization rules, as
they disrupt global green industrial and supply chains,
undermine countries’ efforts to achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals and run counter to the international
community’s collective efforts to address climate change.
Those acts have also made certain countries’ bombastic
slogans sound hollow, anaemic and hypocritical.

S/PV.9345

sanctions have a very hard time obtaining even the most
basic means of livelihood and production, let alone
improving their capacity to address climate change.
The Council should listen to the voices of the people
in the affected countries, take the climate and security
risks posed by green protectionism and illegal unilateral
sanctions very seriously and have the courage to take
targeted measures to uphold equity and justice. Those
points illustrate the direction in which the Council
should engage in climate change-related issues.
The ecological environment is the foundation of
human survival and development. China upholds its
green development vision, expressed as “limpid waters
and forested mountains are the real treasure troves”,
and remains firmly on the path towards modernization
with Chinese characteristics, with harmonious
coexistence between human beings and nature. Over
the past decade, China has, with a responsible attitude,
matched its commitments with actions, cutting carbon
dioxide emissions per unit of gross domestic product
by 34.4 per cent, building the world’s largest carbon
market and vigorously carrying out reforestation and
sand control projects.
Our achievements in the field of ecological
improvement and environmental protection have
impressed the entire world. China is an active player in
South-South cooperation on climate change, providing
support and assistance to other developing countries,
especially small island States, least developed countries
and African countries, so they can better address
climate change. Our efforts are applauded and lauded
by the majority of developing countries.
China stands ready to continue working with
all parties to promote a fair and just global climate
governance system with win-win cooperation, so that
together we can build a clean and beautiful planet Earth.

If the Council is to do its job properly, it must firmly
reject such behaviour and practices. Green protectionism
is becoming a ball and chain that shackles developing
countries and keeps them at the bottom of the global
value chain.

Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peace Operations, Mr. Juan Manuel Santos
Calderón, former President of Colombia, Nobel Peace
Prize laureate and member of The Elders, and Ms. Salma
Kadry, Climate, Peace and Security Expert at the
Consortium of International Agricultural Research, for
their briefings.

Another ball and chain that hamstrings the ability
of developing countries to achieve development and
maintain stability is none other than illegal unilateral
sanctions. Many countries on the receiving end of such

The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
concluded in its most recent report that human-caused
climate change is already affecting many meteorological
and climate phenomena, rendering them extreme in all

23-1664721/31

S/PV.9345

Threats to international peace and security

regions of the world and, without a doubt, most severely
in the poorest and most vulnerable countries and those
in conflict situations. Paradoxically, those countries
have contributed the least to climate change.
The first time the Security Council discussed the
issue was in 2007 (see S/PV.5663), but we have not yet
been able to reach a common reading of the subject.
However, we have been able to navigate the scenarios
that are likely to take into account the adverse effects of
climate change as risk multipliers. As recognized in all
United Nations forums and international declarations,
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change and its Paris Agreement constitute the principal
intergovernmental forum for negotiating the global
response to climate change, providing the guidance for
comprehensive management of the issue.
What we are concerned with today is exploring how
the Security Council might ensure that climate change
does not become a risk multiplier for the conflicts in the
countries in which it works. That calls for an objective
analysis that both complements and contributes to, but
does not duplicate, the roles of the climate architecture
and does not disrupt its financing.
National ownership is acknowledged as a guiding
principle in peacebuilding, and the same principle is
the cornerstone of the Paris Agreement. Indeed, the
Agreement’s main tool is to channel common efforts in
climate action to nationally determined contributions.
For that reason, it is crucial to build national capacities
for countries in situations of conflict. Peace and
security, as well as a reinvigorated rule of law and
robust institutions, are all essential in that regard.
The Secretary-General has suggested some timely
initiatives, such as the Early Warnings for All initiative,
which is focused on climate change adaptation, and the
Adaptation Fund Climate Innovation Accelerator, which
enables the most vulnerable countries to be able to
submit financially viable projects to multilateral funds.
In addition, the establishment of the loss and damage
fund at the twenty-seventh Conference of the Parties to
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change was a milestone which vindicated the principle
of common but differentiated responsibilities, and we
hope that it will be operationalized as soon as possible.
In that connection, one effective way of addressing and overcoming the challenges posed by climate
change, in particular in countries beset by conflict,
would be to crystallize the commitment of developed
22/31

13/06/2023

countries to mobilize $100 billion per year as of 2020
and to channel those funds via the financing mechanisms of the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change and the Paris Agreement, making them
available to develop developing countries, including for
those eligible for priority access.
The adverse effects of climate change lead to social
tensions. They exacerbate, prolong or contribute to the
risk of conflict and instability. In global conflict prevention strategies, we must take climate-related security
risks into account as a central component. The consequences of prolonged droughts or floods leading to population displacement, food insecurity and public health
emergencies are, above all, humanitarian in nature. In
that context, special political missions and peace missions must work hand in hand with United Nations country and regional offices, which benefit from staff specialized in climate change.
In that regard, I note the example of the United Nations Office for West Africa, which established, last year,
the Regional Working Group on Climate Change, Environment, Security and Development in West Africa.
Moreover, we welcome the regional initiatives that have
developed specific road maps to address climate change
and security, such as, for instance, the African Union
and the Pacific Islands Forum. We deem such initiatives
to be complementary and positive in the context in which
they are applied.
Against that backdrop, the only solution is joint climate action. For that reason, we urge developed countries to lead the way in reaching net zero greenhouse-gas
emissions by 2040. In the same vein, Ecuador supports
the holistic integration of climate-related risks, particularly the gender perspective, as one component of the
United Nations wide-ranging strategies on the matter.
I will conclude by reaffirming that Ecuador supports a pragmatic and constructive approach in furthering analysis into the links between climate and security
mentioned by the briefers in this meeting, considering
the root causes of conflicts on a case-by-case basis, with
a view to strengthening peacebuilding.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix,
President Santos Calderón and Ms. Kadry for their statements. We thank the United Arab Emirates for its assiduous preparatory work in the lead-up to the twenty-eighth
session of the Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(COP28) in Dubai.
23-16647

13/06/2023

Threats to international peace and security

We believe the discussion of the global issues faced
by humankind as a result of the changing climate to
be fundamentally important, especially for developing
countries. However, we believe that, at the United
Nations, we are not stressing enough the crucial role
of sustainable development issues in the package
of measures for conflict prevention and are instead
singling out only climate-related issues from the
broader context.
Promoting economic growth and social welfare
and fighting inequality are key elements to building
resilient societies that are able to effectively adapt to
climate challenges. Achieving sustainable development
without a doubt contributes to eradicating the root
causes of conflict.
We underscore the importance of the issue of
climate financing. We draw the Council’s attention to
the fact that developed countries are masters of fuelling
alarmism about the climate crisis. It is easy to make
such populist statements, but when the discussions at
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (UNFCCC) turn to substantive issues about real
measures, including financing and technology transfers,
concrete adaptation measures and contributing to the
new loss and damage fund, all the enthusiasm of donor
countries curiously disappears. Instead of merely
flooding all possible processes and bodies with that
popular agenda, we urge developed countries to first
fulfil their obligation to provide financial resources and
technology transfers to developing countries to support
their climate change adaptation and mitigation efforts.
The Honourable John Kerry also spoke about
financing. It is the implementation of the decisions to
contribute to the loss and damage fund at COP28 that
would be a genuine litmus test of the willingness to
combat the negative consequences of climate change,
not discussions in the Security Council.
Yes, in some country-specific and region-specific
situations, the climate element can be an additional
factor that exacerbates conflict. However, the Russian
Federation has consistently maintained that discussing
climate change is not part of the Security Council’s
mandate and merely detracts attention from the
main — often socioeconomic — causes of conflict.
The views of various institutions and research
centres do have a right to exist. However, we doubt that
they have sufficient expertise in the area of assessing
the linkage between climate and security. A direct link

S/PV.9345

between the climate agenda and security is not supported
by science, as confirmed by the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change. Incidentally, we would like to
recall that climate change on planet Earth has occurred
in all periods of its existence, be it in the direction
of temperatures increasing or decreasing, with often
negative consequences for habitat.
The UNFCCC and the Paris Agreement are key
mechanisms in the consideration of issues related to
climate change and have been effective in bringing
countries together to collectively address that global
issue. The division of labour enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations must be respected, and the work
of those instruments must not be duplicated. We firmly
believe that the General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council, the United Nations development
system and once again, the UNFCCC and the Paris
Agreement, represent reliable platforms for tackling
challenges in the area of sustainable development and
the environment as a whole. The Russian Federation
stands ready to continue proactively engaging with all
countries within the aforementioned formats to counter
the adverse consequences of climate change.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): I offer my thanks to the United
Arab Emirates for convening today’s important open
debate. I also thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix,
His Excellency President Juan Manuel Santos Calderón
and Ms. Kadry for their insightful observations.
We remain firm in our belief that climate change
is an existential issue that must be tackled in a holistic
manner. As the Secretary-General has stated, the
climate, peace and security nexus cannot be ignored or
underestimated. Indeed, climate change is an aggravating
factor for instability, conflict and terrorism. This
clearly illustrates how the multidimensional challenges
posed by climate change are evident, multifold and
far-reaching. Strong scientific evidence shows that if
climate-security-related risks are left unchecked, they
could lead to devastating consequences. This evidence
therefore requires a change in paradigm, where we can
no longer treat conflict dynamics and climate fragility
on separate tracks.
Regions in conflict are often the most climate
vulnerable, with instability being further exacerbated
by climate shocks. Proof of this is the degradation of
agricultural land through flooding and droughts in
parts of Africa, and rising sea levels affecting low-lying
communities and small island States. Trends of farmer-

23-1664723/31

S/PV.9345

Threats to international peace and security

herder violence, food insecurity, mass displacement
and, more broadly, Statehood complications, remain a
part of this reality.
Women and children are disproportionately affected,
with inequalities widened when climate-induced mass
displacement increases the risk of early and forced
marriage, child recruitment and sexual and gender-based
violence and exploitation. Water and energy shortages,
further precipitated by environmental hazards from the
impacts of chemical weapons and explosive devices, also
deepen the burdens on women and girls.
United Nations missions should, in carrying out
their mandates, scale up their response to climate and
environmental consequences, as these affect their
operations on the ground. With half of United Nations
peace operations located in Africa, and a quarter in the
Middle East, these consequences are unquestionable.
For example, roads are often becoming inaccessible due
to heavy flooding or droughts, which affects missions’
mobility and operations. With this in mind, Malta
remains supportive of strengthening the mandates of
United Nations missions through climate-related risk
assessment and management, complemented by genderand age-responsive approaches.
The deployment of climate, peace and security
advisers in the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia, the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
and the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq is
crucial in understanding the interplay with climate in the
countries and regions in which they serve. The United
Nations climate security mechanism also remains a
central tool in our efforts.
Malta has kept the climate-peace-security discourse
at the heart of its priorities on the Council. Our open
debate on sea level rise (see S/PV.9260) held during
our presidency is a testament of many delegations’
support for addressing the security challenges posed by
climate change. These challenges could have devastating
consequences for countries’ infrastructure, livelihoods
and security — and their very own existence.
The recent Joint Pledges related to Climate, Peace and
Security as spearheaded by the United Arab Emirates,
together with my own country, Malta, Switzerland,
Mozambique and Gabon, are a reflection of our continued
commitment towards focusing on climate implications
for peace and security. We trust that these Pledges can
serve as guidance to present and future Council members
in ensuring that this discourse continues.
24/31

13/06/2023

In conclusion, Malta remains convinced that the
nexus between climate change, peace and security
warrants the attention and action of the Security
Council. Having the Council address these issues is
in no manner diverting the attention from the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change or
other relevant bodies, but rather complements them and
reinforces their distinguishable roles.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): We thank the United Arab
Emirates for calling this meeting as a genuine effort
to keep this issue on the Security Council’s agenda
and explore concrete ways to contribute to promoting
resilience in the face of multiple vulnerabilities and
growing humanitarian needs and security threats
caused by climate change.
I thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix, President
Santos Calderón and Ms. Kadry for their briefings.
Last week, heavy and dangerous smoke from
Canadian forest fires was all over the city and the east
coast. It alerted us to the connection between climate
change and the increased number and severity of
wildfires worldwide, one of the consequences of the
climate breaking down.
Millions of people are already suffering the
devastating consequences of climate change, with
floods, droughts and suffocating heat. Last year,
which ranked among the hottest on record, the World
Health Organization estimated that Europe, one of the
most developed parts of the world, saw 15,000 heatrelated deaths, compared to 6,701 deaths globally
from terrorist attacks. Millions across the globe lose
their lives. Climate change is already causing famine,
displacement, unrest and instability. It can exacerbate
grievances and increase the risk of insecurity and violent
conflict when its impacts interact with social, political
and economic stresses to compound vulnerabilities.
In this Chamber, we are used to discussing a range
of threats in different countries and various parts of the
world. Yet climate change is the most existential threat
to our continued existence on this planet. It is already
hitting some regions hard, but it does not stop at any
border, and it will not spare any corner of the world.
Despite the warning bells incessantly ringing,
there is not yet agreement on the need for the Security
Council to address climate change and its impact on our
security. This is not a mere environmental problem, nor
is it simply a development issue. Science tells us that
23-16647

13/06/2023

Threats to international peace and security

this is not a recurring hazard. We humans, thanks to our
behaviour, are to blame. It is a profound and dangerous
disruption with serious security implications, and it
generates consequences that reach to the very heart of
the security agenda.
Rising sea levels, desertification and extreme
weather events can displace large numbers of people
from their homes. This can lead to increased migration,
both within countries and across borders, straining social
and political systems. Let us not forget: an increase of
less than two feet in sea level alone would put at risk the
very survival of populations on many Pacific islands.
Climate change can contribute to political instability
and conflict. In regions already struggling with poverty,
weak governance and ethnic tensions, climate-related
impacts can amplify existing grievances. Disruption
of livelihoods, water scarcity and food insecurity can
fuel social unrest and increase the risk of violence and
terrorism. The very nature of the interconnected world
means that events in one region have the potential to
affect others.
The Security Council cannot remain indifferent to
the security implications of climate. Failing to recognize
the profoundly disruptive effect of climate on the security
landscape will not be the solution, and ignoring this
existential threat should not be the way ahead. For us,
there is no doubt that it is an acute matter of collective
security in a fragile and increasingly interdependent
world, including, as we heard, for the United Nations
peacekeeping operations, which remain underprepared
and ill-equipped in the face of growing challenges.
I would like also to underline the disproportional
impact that climate change has on women and girls in
conflict zones and beyond. Climate and environmental
action and disaster risk reduction need to be genderresponsive, value and promote women, girls and youth as
agents of change, and directly address the risks they face.
In that spirit, Albania joined the statement presented
this morning by the representative of the United Arab
Emirates on joint pledges on climate, peace and security,
on behalf of the United Arab Emirates, Switzerland,
Gabon, Malta and Mozambique.
The goals have been set and the road map is clear:
the world must remain united in efforts to reduce carbon
emissions; we need to reach carbon neutrality by 2050;
we need to limit temperature rise to 1.5°C; we need to
increase funding. That is the path. That is our lifeline.

S/PV.9345

The urgency of the climate crisis demands that we
unite around a common cause, transcending political
divisions and partisan differences. The risks posed
by climate change to peace and security, prosperity
and well-being are multiple, and the magnitude and
immediacy of the challenges require action now.
As Secretary Kerry said earlier, in clear terms, it is
about keeping promises, with everyone doing their part.
We may choose to continue debating among ourselves,
kicking the can down the road, but the price we will pay
will only be higher, especially for our children and the
generations to come.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Under-Secretary-General, President
Santos Calderón and Ms. Kadry for their briefings.
It has been said time and again — climate change is
an aggravating factor in a context of fragility. Of the 20
countries most affected by conflict, 12 are among the
most vulnerable to climate change. And those countries
regularly alert us to the impact of climate change on
their security.
Yet we are still a long way from the goal we set
ourselves in 2009, in General Assembly resolution
63/281, which called on the United Nations to redouble
efforts to address the impact of climate change on
international peace and security.
It is no longer the time for words, but for action,
especially in this forum. That requires the full
mobilization of the Council. It must be in a position
to better assess, anticipate and prevent the impact of
climate change on international peace and security and
to draw all the relevant conclusions so that the United
Nations can take action on the ground.
I would therefore like to make three proposals.
First, the Council must be informed in detail about
the impact of climate crises in the most vulnerable
regions. We therefore call on the Special Representatives
to provide us with precise information during their
briefings and to present recommendations for targeted
action for certain areas, in particular Africa, where
ambitious initiatives such as the Great Green Wall are
taking shape.
Secondly, our Council must place greater emphasis
on risk prevention. We must strengthen the mandates
of United Nations missions so that they can support
the most vulnerable countries in risk assessment and

23-1664725/31

S/PV.9345

Threats to international peace and security

management. Missions must also be encouraged to
identify concrete actions, as the Special Representative
for South Sudan has done, for example, by proposing to
make the Nile a demilitarized route and a common asset.
Thirdly, we must continue to support the work of the
United Nations on the ground. The climate, peace and
security advisers deployed to United Nations missions
play a particularly useful role. They help countries
build their capacity to assess and manage risks and
work to strengthen partnerships with local and regional
players. France is mobilized to that end, particularly in
support of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq. Other European countries are also mobilized. We
must all work together in that direction.
We also encourage the United Nations, in
conjunction with troop-contributing countries, to pursue
the implementation of environmental strategies within
the peacekeeping operations themselves, including
through the mobilization of renewable energy.
We call on Member States to join the collective effort
by signing up to the Climate Security Mechanism, whose
aim is to help integrate the impact of climate change
when addressing peace and security issues. France is
committed to that through its co-presidency, together
with Germany, of the Mechanism’s steering committee.
We must therefore act together, without delay, in
those three directions. The planet will not wait for us.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I thank the United Arab
Emirates for holding this important open debate. I
also thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix, former
President Santos Calderón and Ms. Kadry for their
valuable inputs.
Climate change is an imminent and critical
threat to all countries in various ways. For instance,
climate-change-induced sea level rise threatens the
very existence of small island developing States. In
Africa, mass flooding, droughts, desertification and
land degradation, to name a few, trigger and exacerbate
conflicts, as the Council has recognized.
Whatever the impacts are, climate change multiplies
the risk of conflicts and those conflicts, in turn, make
States more vulnerable to the adverse impacts of
climate change. Japan believes that in order to break
that vicious cycle, the Security Council should squarely
address climate security.
26/31

13/06/2023

Mitigation and adaptation are the main actions
to be taken in order to help reduce risk and break the
vicious chain reaction. Enhancing the resilience of
countries and thereby accelerating robust development
in the long run is key. The Council must coordinate and
cooperate holistically with all stakeholders in the United
Nations system and beyond, such as the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), the Economic and Social Council,
Resident Coordinators and international financial
institutions. In particular, Japan has consistently called
for greater communication between the Council and
the PBC.
Japan also believes that the Council should deepen
discussions on the rule of law, as it ensures transparency
and fairness among people and communities. Taking
sea level rise as an example, legal stability and
predictability are the necessary foundation, especially
for small island developing States (SIDS) and African
coastal States that are exposed to various uncertainties
due to sea level rise. In that context, as Prime Minister
Kishida articulated in the new plan for a free and open
Indo-Pacific in March, Japan reiterates its position
that it is permissible for coastal countries to preserve
the existing baselines and maritime zones established
under the United Nations Convention on the Law of
the Sea, notwithstanding the regression of coastlines
caused by climate change.
For its part, Japan will continue to assist in
strengthening the resilience of climate-vulnerable
groups. Under Japan’s presidency, the leaders of the
Group of Seven reaffirmed their commitment to
mobilize up to $600 billion in financing for quality
infrastructure through the Partnership for Global
Infrastructure and Investment to tackle challenges,
including climate change, at the Hiroshima summit
last month. Among the various projects implemented
under the Partnership, we support capacity-building
for SIDS, aimed at improving the resilience of their
infrastructure to climate change and disaster risk. The
Japan International Cooperation Agency also launched
the Facility for Accelerating Climate Change Resilient
and Sustainable Society of up to $1.5 billion to finance
infrastructure projects by public and private entities
that accelerate climate action.
In conclusion, as the former President of Colombia
pointed out, making peace with and reconciling with
nature is an urgent challenge that we all need to
address. Strong political will is needed in order to do
so, as Ms. Kadry stated. We do not have the luxury of
23-16647

13/06/2023

Threats to international peace and security

spending our time idly in pointing fingers at others
and shifting responsibility to others for whatever
motivations. We do not have the luxury of spending our
time idly in questioning scientific evidence that prove
a 100 per cent causal correlation between climate and
security, while damage is currently being done on the
ground. Japan reiterates its commitment to continue
and intensify efforts to counter this global challenge,
in cooperation with the United Nations, its Member
States, international institutions and other stakeholders,
including civil society.
The President: I now call on the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Trade of Hungary.
Mr. Szijjártó (Hungary): First of all, I would
like to begin by expressing our appreciation and
great respect for the United Arab Emirates, not only
for convening today’s important meeting on the very
pressing matter of the relationship between peace and
security and environmental issues, but also because
the United Arab Emirates has been strengthening the
global pro-peace majority and its pro-peace stance and
efforts to keep the channels of communication open.
That is highly significant from the perspective of my
country, which is located close to an ongoing war. It is
a regional war, but one with global effects and where
the threat of escalation increases with each passing day.
And the longer the war lasts, the more people will die.
We are living in the neighbourhood of that war,
and we all know that if there is an escalation, it will
happen in the geographic neighbourhood first, not
thousands of kilometres away. I am also speaking on
behalf of a nation some of whose members are dying
in this war, and we do not want more to die in this
conflict. We therefore believe that the goal and duty
of the international community should be to save
people’s lives, and the only way to do that is through
peace, which means ending the war. Hungary therefore
urges for an immediate ceasefire, because that would
give peace talks a chance to be established, and with
peace talks there is hope for a peace deal to be made.
We are all certain that there are no solutions on the
battleground for any wars, including the one in our
neighbourhood, because battlegrounds produce only
casualties and dead people. The solution must always
come from the negotiating table.
That is why we appreciate all the efforts of all
those nations, including your country, Mr. President,
that are ready to speak up for peace. We also have to

S/PV.9345

understand, unfortunately, that the rhetoric of war is
currently louder than the rhetoric of peace, although
I still believe that the global majority would like to
see peace. That is why it is time to speak up and to
be louder, so that the global pro-peace majority can be
heard loud and clear.
Even before the war in our neighbourhood broke out
in February 2022, we were already living in an age of
pressing threats and danger resulting from accelerated
climate change, the growing issue of migration and
the most serious threat of terror the world has ever
seen. And all three have created a vicious circle. Now,
on top of those threats — climate change, terror and
migration — the war has created another terrible
vicious cycle. As a result of the war, grain exports from
the countries at war have fallen, destabilizing already
fragile regions where an insecure food supply has
opened up the space for extreme ideologies. And when
extremist ideologies are proliferating, the threat of
terror increases. As a result, we are now facing the most
serious threat of terror ever, globally speaking. That is
one of the major root causes of migration, and we all
know that massive migratory waves give terrorists a
chance to hide in those waves and perpetrate attacks
all over the world. We in my country know that all too
well, given our very particular geographic location.
Our neighbour to the east is Ukraine, where the war is
ongoing, and more than a million refugees have come
from there so far. And our southern border is basically
the end of the Western Balkan migration route, which is
currently the most active such route, globally speaking.
We had to stop 270,000 illegal migrants there last year.
Unfortunately, the war can cause very serious
natural disasters as well. Every day the war continues
increases the chances for other natural disasters to
occur. We all know that Europe’s biggest nuclear power
plant is now operating in very risky circumstances.
That fuels negative discrimination and ideological
attacks against nuclear power, which is factually a
clean, safe and sustainable way of generating electricity.
And without nuclear power, it is obvious that our fight
against climate change and in favour of protecting the
environment has no chance of succeeding.
In conclusion, the war in Ukraine, the increasing
migratory pressure, the most serious threat of terror
the world has ever seen and the huge challenges ahead
regarding the struggle to protect the environment and
counter global climate change create a terrible vicious
circle. The international community should unite its

23-1664727/31

S/PV.9345

Threats to international peace and security

efforts to break that vicious circle. If we are not able to
do so, we may very easily end up in a crisis that will be
totally insoluble.
I once again thank you and your Government,
Mr. President, and especially your Foreign Minister, for
convening today’s open debate of the Security Council
on a very important and pressing matter.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Ms. Stewart (Canada): I am honoured to address
the Security Council on behalf of Australia, Canada
and New Zealand on the serious matter of climate
change and its current and projected impacts on global
peace and security.
On behalf of our three Governments, I would like
to take this opportunity to reiterate our commitment
to constructive and collaborative engagement with the
United Arab Emirates in its role as President of the
twenty-eighth Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(COP28). We share a firm commitment to multilateral
engagement and the rules-based international order, and
we really look forward to continuing to work with the
United Arab Emirates to ensure a successful outcome
at COP28.
Climate change will bring unprecedented
challenges to our security as nations, communities
and individuals. No nation in the world is immune to
the consequences of climate change. Climate-related
disasters are becoming more frequent and increasing
in intensity over time. Those and other indirect impacts
will affect Member States’ security interests in many
ways, some of which we do not yet fully understand.
We do recognize, however, that climate change is a
threat multiplier, aggravating pre-existing security
risks. Rising sea levels, polar warming and increasingly
unpredictable weather cannot be separated from their
security implications. We have seen that in the Sahel,
for example, where the additional stresses on resources
exacerbate existing tensions and conflicts.
To respond to the evolving challenges created by
climate change, we collectively need to better assess
and understand its security implications, including
how it affects fragile and conflict-affected States and
sustainable peacekeeping and its specific impacts on
women, young people and indigenous persons. Valuable
lessons have been recorded already in some United
28/31

13/06/2023

Nations peace operations, but those are valuable only
if we can share them. Similarly, successes in the areas
of women and peace and security and youth and peace
and security may have to be adapted to combat specific
climate-change effects.
The Council should keep pushing to improve
the integration of climate risks into peacekeeping
mandates and practices. The United Nations also needs
to measure and assess how various forms of assistance
and intervention, such as supporting adaptation
and resilience, affect security outcomes. We should
exchange best practices and policy interventions through
multilateral platforms such as the Climate Security
Mechanism, the Peacebuilding Fund and the Climate
for Peace Initiative, spearheaded by Germany and the
Group of Seven. Building understanding, sharing such
lessons learned and adjusting our actions accordingly
should be a continual process, one that will help us
to ensure that the right preventive measures are taken
today for better peace and security outcomes tomorrow.
That is why Canada, along with fellow NATO
allies, will be establishing a new Climate Change and
Security Centre of Excellence in Montreal in 2023 to
better understand and address the security challenges
associated with climate change. Canada, and 11 other
founding NATO nations of the Centre of Excellence,
approach the launch of the new Centre as a unique
and innovative opportunity for NATO and its allies
to help break down the silos on climate action across
the international peace and security-developmenthumanitarian nexus. We strongly believe that the
Centre will provide a new platform for the improved
coordination of efforts across that triple nexus, aimed at
better addressing climate vulnerability and increasing
resilience in the countries most affected by climate change.
Australia is committed to strengthening its
engagement with Indo-Pacific countries to promote
climate change cooperation, security, good governance,
disaster management, health and resiliency. For
example, the Australia Pacific Climate Partnership
supports Australian aid investments across the Pacific
to be climate- and disaster-risk-informed, and in
partnership with UN-Women, the Women’s Resilience
to Disasters programme supports women’s leadership
in climate and disaster-reduction efforts.
New Zealand is committed to supporting the Pacific
in building resilience and improving security in the face
of climate change. New Zealand’s International Climate
23-16647

13/06/2023

Threats to international peace and security

Finance Strategy — Tuia te Waka a Kiwa — guides the
delivery of New Zealand’s $1.3 billion international
climate financing commitment for 2022 to 2025. At
least 50 per cent of the commitment will support Pacific
island countries, and at least 50 per cent will target
adaptation. New Zealand’s climate financing initiatives
will enhance resilience and adaptation to the impacts
of climate change, promote ambitious mitigation action
and improve institutional capability for evidence-based
decision-making. In addition, since 2018, New Zealand’s
defence policy has formally recognized the importance
of climate change as one of the two most significant
long-term trends affecting New Zealand’s security.
Faced with the common threat to humankind
that climate change presents, we must strengthen
cooperation as never before if we are to keep our
populations safe and secure. Success will require
transformative change in our institutions, including
humanitarian, development, peacebuilding, defence
and security commitments. It will require considerable
investments, focused leadership and, finally, true
dedication to cooperative action. I hope that this
discussion pushes us all to adopt this common outlook
and join the fight against this unprecedented challenge.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on behalf of the Group of Arab States in New York,
on presiding over the Security Council for the current
month. I would also like to express my appreciation to
the delegation of the sisterly United Arab Emirates for
convening this open debate and well representing Arab
interests in the Council. I would also like to thank the
briefers, Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peace Operations; Mr. Juan Manuel
Santos Calderón, former President of Colombia; and
our colleague Ms. Salma Kadry, Climate, Peace and
Security Expert at the Consortium on International
Agricultural Research.
Climate change is one of the major dangers facing
our world today. Reports indicate that climate change
increases conflict-related tensions. The international
community must comprehensively address climate
change, including through the peace and security nexus,
as the negative consequences of climate change fuel
conflicts and disputes. It results in increased numbers of
displaced people in many regions, such as the Sahel, the

S/PV.9345

Horn of Africa and Darfur, owing to competition over
natural resources, periods of drought and water scarcity,
which has an impact on the security and stability of both
the Arab and African regions.
The Arab Group stresses the importance of promoting
joint international action to address such challenges. In
that regard, I would like to note the following.
First, reports by the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (IPCC) indicate that the developing
countries are more vulnerable to the negative
consequences of climate change. That includes drought,
water scarcity, sea level rise, desertification, biodiversity
loss and forest fires. It is worth mentioning that nearly
2.5 billion people worldwide are currently suffering from
water scarcity. That figure is expected to double by 2050.
Around 90 per cent of the citizens in Arab countries
suffer from water scarcity, adding increased tensions on
Arab water security. It is also a challenge to ensuring
Arab food security.
Secondly, the Standing Committee on Finance of
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (UNFCCC) indicates that developing countries
need around $5.6 trillion to implement their nationally
determined contributions by 2030.
Thirdly, reports by the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development also note that the cost of
adaptation projects in developing countries will amount
to approximately $300 billion by 2030.
The Arab Group underlines that addressing the
root causes of climate change and adaptation, with its
catastrophic consequences, will strongly contribute
to reducing peace and security challenges, especially
those that will be resulting from climate change. That
cannot be achieved unless developed countries meet
their financial obligations to developing countries in line
with the UNFCCC, especially meeting the $100 billion
annual target. Concessional financing must be part and
parcel of the financial tools provided to developing
countries. Another $100 billion by 2025 must remain a
priority that we all work together to achieve. We support
the Secretary-General’s calls to allocate 50 per cent of
climate financing for adaptation and resilience. That
would help us to address the destructive impact of.
Climate change,
The Arab Group supports international efforts
to curb the dangers of climate change. That was
exemplified when the city of Sharm El-Sheikh hosted

23-1664729/31

S/PV.9345

Threats to international peace and security

the twenty-seventh Conference of the Parties to the
UNFCCC (COP27) in 2022. The conference succeeded
in reaching important outcomes that meet developing
countries aspirations, especially the historical decision
to establish the loss and damage fund on climate
change. The United Arab Emirates will host COP28
in Dubai this year. The Arab Group looks forward to
the conference adopting resolutions that respond to the
negative consequences of climate change. The Arab
Group commends the close cooperation between the
presidencies of Egypt and the United Arab Emirates to
ensure a smooth transfer of responsibilities.
We also commend all relevant initiatives, especially
by the sisterly Kingdom of Saudi Arabia on a green
Middle East, as well as the Egyptian presidency’s
COP27 initiative on climate responses aimed at
sustaining peace and development, in line with the
principle of national ownership and specificities.
The Arab Group stresses the importance of
addressing the climate change issue in a comprehensive
manner that identifies radical solutions to this
existential challenge. We will effectively engage in
all international meetings and forums to contribute to
addressing those challenges and ensure the achievement
sustainable development, peace, stability and prosperity
for all countries.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Ms. Leendertse (Germany): It is my honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the Group of Friends
on Climate and Security, a broad and diverse group
comprising 66 members from all regions of the world.
The Group of Friends is united by a common
concern, that is, climate change is the defining challenge
of our time. It increasingly threatens livelihoods and
ecosystems, sustainable development, prosperity and
stability, thereby posing a serious challenge to peace
and human security. We are therefore grateful to the
United Arab Emirates for convening today’s important
and timely debate.
As we speak, our colleagues in the global
community have been gathering in Bonn, preparing for
the negotiations of the twenty-eighth Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change (COP28) with a view to reaching
much-needed substantive results in the fight against
the climate crisis. For COP28 in Dubai to be a success
30/31

13/06/2023

and take bold measures to limit global warming, it is
critical that we all raise our ambitions on climate action
to achieve the objectives set out in the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change and the
Paris Agreement.
Staying within the 1.5°C limit is critical. In addition,
minimizing future warming will reduce the risk of
triggering tipping points and associated challenges.
But that reflects only part of the challenge ahead of us.
We must admit that we can no longer prevent all the
negative effects of climate change. Especially in fragile
contexts, those impacts act as risk multipliers. That is
why we must also invest in adaptation measures to build
resilience in times of climate change. The entire United
Nations system should address that complex challenge
in all relevant forums and within all relevant mandates,
and the Organization is already doing important work in
that regard. The Climate Security Mechanism is a prime
example of inter-agency cooperation, strengthening
the capacity of the United Nations system to analyse
and address the adverse effects of climate change on
peace and security. We encourage all Member States to
continue to support and engage with the Mechanism.
Recent meetings of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) on specific regional contexts where climate
change has a direct impact on security and stability,
such as the Pacific Islands, the Sahel and Central Asia,
are very encouraging, because the discussions have
been launched at the initiative of the countries affected
and have raised challenges and opportunities reflective
of their lived reality. The Security Council’s work would
benefit greatly from considering the findings of those and
future PBC meetings on the issue, and the Council could
receive them through the Commission’s written advice.
The Security Council has a crucial role to play,
given its primary responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security. The Group of Friends
welcomes the progress made in that regard, including
through the growing recognition of the effects of climate
change when the Council is considering mandates
for peacekeeping and special political missions. The
Informal Expert Group on Climate and Security, made
up of Council members, has proved crucial in informing
the Council’s work. The Group of Friends also takes note
of the leadership of some of the elected members of the
Security Council — Malta, Mozambique, Switzerland
and the United Arab Emirates — in developing a joint
pledge to consistently address climate and security
issues in the Security Council.
23-16647

13/06/2023

Threats to international peace and security

While those are steps in the right direction, more
must be done, including within the Security Council.
The Group of Friends has repeatedly called on the
Council to create specific tools to enable the United
Nations to do its part in preventing and resolving
conflicts that are driven at least in part by the effects
of climate change. We are calling for concrete, tangible
action to be considered. That includes regular reporting
by the Secretary-General on the peace and security
implications of the adverse effects of climate change
and the appointment by the Secretary-General of a
special representative for climate, peace and security
who could strengthen coordination between the
relevant United Nations entities in order to improve
the Organization’s ability to address climate-related
security risks.
Furthermore, the Council should make use of
climate-related early-warning systems that also
incorporate conflict prevention, mediation and
peacebuilding. As appropriate, we should consistently
incorporate climate risks into the mandates of all the
relevant United Nations peacekeeping and special
political missions. Climate and peace and security
advisers have proved to be a useful tool, providing
informed expertise and advice for holistic solutions.
The Council should encourage all United Nations
missions, particularly peacekeeping missions, to

S/PV.9345

improve their environmental footprint and increase
their environmental management action. There is broad
consensus among the States Members of the United
Nations that the Security Council should also refer
to climate-change-related risks in specific country or
regional situations. It is therefore important for the
Council to ensure the speedy adoption of presidential
statements on the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa and the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel, which have not been issued since
2019 (S/PRST/2019/10) and 2021 (S/PRST/2021/16),
respectively. That also corresponds to the wishes of the
countries concerned.
An increasing number of countries and communities
have been experiencing insecurity and instability as a
result of climate change. The Group of Friends urges
the Security Council and its members to live up to the
requests for action that those countries have made.
We stand ready to support all efforts to enhance
comprehensive risk assessment, capacity-building and
operational responses.
The President: There are still a number of speakers
remaining on my list for this meeting. Given the lateness
of the hour, with the concurrence of the members of the
Council, I intend to suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.15 p.m.

23-1664731/31
