V.

32/169.

Resolutions adopted on the reporu of the Seeond Committee

Implementation of the recommendations of the United Nations Conference
on Desertification with respect to financia! and technical assistance to the least
developed among the developing countries

The General Assembly,
Taking note of the resolutions adopted by the United
Nations Conference on Desertification, held at Nairobi
from 29 August to 9 September 1977,101
Recognizing that desertification constitutes a worldwide economic and social problem,
Reaffirming the cardinal principie of the permanent
sovereignty of States over their natural resources,
Bearing in mind resolution 2 of 9 September 1977
adopted by the United Nations Conference on Desertification, in which the Conference recognized that the
least developed among the developing countries with
limited resources at their disposal were in need of immediate financia! and technical assistance from the
United Nations, the specialized agencies and other
organizations within the United Nations system,
Taking note of resolution 98 (IV) of 31 May 1976
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, 102
1. Recommends the speedy implementation of recommendation 28 of the United Nations Confercnce on
Desertification with respect to financia! and technical
assistance to the least developed countries; 103
2. Urges the United Nations and its Member States,
the specialized agencies and international and regional
financial institutions to ensure the implementation of
the recommendations of the United Nations Conferencc
on Desertification in favour of those countries by extending additional international and bilateral assistance;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-third scssion on the
implementation of the present resolution.
107th plenary meeting
19 December 1977

32/170.

Measures to he taken for the henefit
of the Sudano-Sahelian region

The General Assembly,
Considering the Plan of Action to Combat Desertification and the relevant resolutions and recommendations adopted by the United Nations Conference on
Desertification, held at Nairobi from 29 August to
9 September 1977,104
Bearing in mind the resolutions and recommendations of the United Nations concerning the drought in
the Sahel and the implementation of the medium-term
and long-term programme for the recovery and rehabilitation of the region,
101 See A/CONF.74/36, chap. II.
1 02 See Proceedings of the United

Nations Conference 011
Trade and Development, Fourth Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.II.D.10
and corrigendum), part one, sect. A.
103 See A/CONF.74/36, chap. I.
104 !bid., chaps. I and II.

105

Aware of the particular seriousness of desertification
in the Sudano-Sahelian region and of the recurrent
critica! situations resulting from it, which hamper the
economic and social development of the region and
have particularly adverse effects on the way of life
of the population,
Noting, in particular, the harmful effects of the particularly low level of rainfall in the region,
1. Stresses the need for the immediate implementation in the Sudano-Sahelian region of the Plan of Action to Combat Desertification and of the relevant resolutions adopted by the United Nations Conference on
Desertilication;
2. Invites the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme to consider at its sixth
session, on the basis of a report by the Executive Director of the Programme which will take account of
the role and activities of the competent existing organs
in the region, measures to improve institutional arrangements in the Sudano-Sahelian region, íncluding the
establishment of a subregional office of the Programme
for thc purposc of supporting efforts undertaken at
the national and regional levels by the countries concerned to combat desertification and of encouraging
and co-ordinating, in co-operation wíth competent existing organs, assistance from developed countries, multilateral financia! institutions, intergovernmental organizatíons and non-governmental donors;
3. Further invites the Governing Council to inelude in its agenda, when it considers the implementation of the Plan of Action to Combat Desertification,
an ítem concerning measures and modes of action for
implementing projects and programmcs to combat desertification in the Sudano-Sahclian region.
107th plenary meeting
19 Decemher 1977
32/171.

Livin~ <'onditions of the
people

Palestinian

The General Assembly.
Recalling the Vancouver Declaration on Human
Settlements, I 976, 10 " and the relevant recommendations
for national action 106 adopted by Habitat: United Natíons Conference on Human Settlements, held at Vancouver from 31 May to 11 June 197 6,
Recalling also resolution 3 on the living condítions
of the Palestinians in occupied territories, as contained
in thc recommendations of the Conference for international co-operation, 107 and Economic and Social Council resolution 2100 (LXIII) of 3 August 1977,
Reca/ling General Assembly resolution 31 / 110 of
16 December 1976,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
on thc living conditions of the Palestinian people in
the occupied territories 108 and expresses the víew that
there is need for further analysis in arder to meet fully
the objectives of General Assembly resolution 31/110;
2. Requests therefore thc Secretary-General, in collaboration with the relevant United Nations organs and
105 Report of Habitar: United Nations Co11fere11ce on Human
Settlements (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.IV.7
and corrigendum), chap. I.
106 tbid., chap. !l.
107 !bid., chap. III.
]OS A 1 32/228.

106

General Assembly-Thirty-second Session

specialized agencies, particularly the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East and the Economic Commission for
Western Asia, to prepare and submit to the General
Assembly at its thirty-third session a comprehensivc
and analytical report on the social and economic impact of the Israelí occupation on the living conditions
of the Palestinian people in the occupied territories;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in preparing the
above-mentioned report, to consult and co-operate with
the Palestine Liberation Organization, the representative of the Palestinian people;
4. Urges all States to co-operate with the SecretaryGeneral in the preparation of the report.
107 th plenary meeting
19 December 1977
32/172.

United Nations
ertification

Conference

on

Des-

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-Vl) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974 containing the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a
New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of
12 December 1974 containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States and 3362 (S-VII) of
16 September 1975 on development and International
economic co-operation,
Recalling further its resolution 3337 (XXIX) of
17 December 197 4, in which it decided to convene the
United Nations Conference 011 Desertification,
Taking note of the report of the Sccretary-Gencral
on the results of the Confercncc, 10 ~
l. Approves the rcport of the United Nations Conference on Desertification, held at N airobi from 29 August to 9 September 1977; 11 º
2. Expresses its gratitude to the Government and
people of Kenya for acting as host to the Conference;
3. Expresses its apprec:iation to the Secretary-General o_f t~e Conference for its efficicnt preparation and
orgamzat1on;
4. Calls upan all Governments to consider on a
priority basis, the recommendations for national 'action
contained in section IV of the Plan of Action to Combat
Desertifi~at~on 111 an~, where ne~essary, the desirability
of cstabhshmg a nat1onal authonty to co-ordinate consolidate and implement national anti-dcsertificati~n action programmes;
5. Rec:ommends that subregional co-operation be
initiated or intensified, as considered necessary amono
co~ntries affected by desertification, with the ~equircd
ass1stance from the United Nations Environment Programme and other organizations concerned, with a view
to formulating specific joint programmes and rcqucsts
for development assistance for implementation of the
Plan of Action;
6. Requests the regional commissions to undertake
intensified and sustained action in support of national
efforts to combat desertification to assist Governments
'
'
109 A/32/257 and Corr.1.
11 A/CONF.74/36.
111 /bid., chap. I.

º

at their request, in the implementation of the Plan of
Action to Combat Desertification and to convene as
appropriate, in co-operation with interested Govemments and regional organizations, intergovernmental regional meetings, technical workshops and seminars to
consider the immediate implemcntation of the rccommendations contained in section V of the Plan uf
Action;
7. Requests the organs, organizations and other
bodies of the United Nations system to support international action to combat desertification within the
contcxt of the Plan of Action;
8. Decides to en trust the Governing Council and
the Exccutive Director of the United Nations Environment Programrne, as well as the Environment Coordination Board, with the responsibility of following
up and co-ordinating the implementation of the Plan
of Action, in accordance with recommendation 27
thereof, 112 and requests the Governing Council to rcport, through the Economic and Social Council, to the
General Assembly at its thirty-third session and every
two years thereaftcr;
9. _Calls upan all countries, in particular developed
countnes, as well as multilateral financia! institutions
and non-governmental donors, to provide and increase
t~cir assist~nce to countries suffering from desertifica11011, esl?ecially for the financing of their subregional
an_d reg10nal l?rogrammes and projects within appropr_ia!e consortrnm arrangements, such as those pertammg_ to the Sahel green belt, and urges developing
~ount~1cs to give due priority to desertification problerns
m the1r devcloprnent assistance requests;
JO. Authorizes the Execut.ive Director to convene
immediately a consultative group, which would mcet
as and when required, comprising representatives from
the organizations referred to in paragraph 7 above,
such ~ther org!lnizations as might be required, donor
countnes, mult1lateral financia} agencies as well as dcvel?ping countrics having a substantial interest in combatmg dcsertification, to assist in mobilizing resourccs
for the activities undertaken within the framework of
implementing the Plan of Action;

11. E1:dc:rses in rrinciple the creation of a spccial
account w1thm the Umted Nations for implcmentino the
Plan of Action;
º
12: Requests the Secretary-General to prepare and
subm1t a study on the establishment and operation of
su~h an a_ccount to the General Assembly at its thirtyth1rd scss10n, through the Governino Council and the
Economic and Social Council·
º

'

13. Invites the Gov_erning Council to have prepared,
by a small group of h1gh-level specialists in the intcrnational_ financing of projects and programmes, a study
?f add1t1ona~ mea_sures and means of financing for the
1mplementat1011 of the Plan of Action, and to submit a
final report on the subject of additional measures uf
fina?cing to thc General Assembly at its thirty-third
sess10n, through the Economic and Social Council;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to approach
Member States and competent organizations and bodies
wit~in !he _United Nations system, as well as the scient1fic mst1tutions concerned outside the system for
further research, development and refinement of the
data pertaining to desertification, in order to close any
11 2 /bid.,

chap. I, sect. VII.
