S/PV.8727

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fifth year

8727th meeting

Wednesday, 19 February 2020, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Belgium)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Jürgenson
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Djani
Mr. Abarry
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. King
Ms. Goolab
Mr. Ladeb
Ms. Pierce
Mrs. Craft
Mr. Pham

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-04312 (E)
*2004312*

S/PV.8727

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of the Syrian
Arab Republic and Turkey to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Geir
Pedersen, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Syria, and Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator.
Mr. Pedersen is joining today’s meeting via videoteleconference from Geneva.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Pedersen.
Mr. Pedersen: Since my briefing two weeks
ago (see S/PV.8715), I cannot report any progress in
ending the current violence in north-west Syria or in
reconvening the political process.
Yesterday, the Secretary-General called for an
immediate ceasefire in north-west Syria and for
international humanitarian law to be upheld. I repeat
that call today. However, I regret to report to the
Council that hostilities, including heavy strikes from
both the air and the ground, continue. As the SecretaryGeneral has stressed and as Mr. Lowcock will shortly
brief Council members in more detail, we are alarmed
by the rapid deterioration of the humanitarian situation
in north-west Syria and the tragic suffering of civilians.
The ongoing offensive has displaced nearly 900,000
civilians since 1 December 2019, often multiple times.
Hundreds have been killed during the same period.
The hostilities are now approaching densely
populated areas, such as Idlib city and the Bab
Al-Hawa border crossing, which has among the highest
concentration of displaced civilians in north-west Syria
and serves as a humanitarian lifeline. People are on the
move in freezing temperatures in search of safety, which
has become increasingly difficult. More than four of
2/22

19/02/2020

every five of the newly displaced civilians are women or
children, who face specific vulnerabilities and threats
to their security. Young children are dying from the
cold. The potential for further mass displacement and
even more catastrophic human suffering is apparent as
an increasing number of people are hemmed into an
ever-shrinking space.
Syrian Government forces and their allies have now
regained control of the entire eastern side of the M5
highway and several territories west of the highway,
including western rural Aleppo. Residential areas of
Aleppo that previously had been subject to attacks
from the de-escalation area appear no longer to be in
firing range.
The Turkish Ministry of Defence has announced
that further reinforcements were deployed inside
Syrian territory in the Idlib de-escalation zone. Those
forces have reportedly deployed close to the front lines
in armoured vehicles and tanks. We have witnessed
repeated violent confrontations between Turkish and
Syrian Government forces. For its part, the Russian
Federation is actively engaged in support of the Syrian
Government’s military operations.
Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham and other proscribed
terrorist groups remain a major presence inside Idlib.
Resolutions 2253 (2015) and 2254 (2015) call for
Member States to prevent and suppress terrorist acts
committed by such groups and to eradicate the safe
havens that they have established. However, military
operations of all parties, including actions against
and by designated terrorist groups, must respect the
rules and obligations of international humanitarian
law, which include the protection of civilians and
civilian objects. The principle of proportionality must
be respected.
I stressed that in high-level contacts with senior
Russian and Turkish officials at the Munich Security
Conference last weekend, as well as with senior
Iranian officials in Tehran. As sponsors of the Idlib
de-escalation arrangements, Turkey and Russia can and
must play a key role in finding a way to de-escalate
the situation now. Russian and Turkish delegations have
met intensively in recent days in Ankara, Munich and
Moscow, and there have also been presidential contacts.
However, no understanding has yet emerged. To the
contrary, public statements from different quarters,
Syrian and international, suggest an imminent danger
of further escalation.
20-04312

19/02/2020

The situation in the Middle East

As I stated in my latest briefing, I believe that
through serious international cooperation, building
on and enhancing previous agreements and in the
spirit of Security Council resolutions and respect for
international law and Syria’s sovereignty, it would
be possible to find a solution for Idlib that addresses
the serious ongoing threat posed by internationally
proscribed
terrorist
groups
without
causing
unacceptable humanitarian suffering. For that to be
possible, the combined resources of the international
community need to come together.
There are worrying developments elsewhere on
the ground as well. The situation in southern Syria
remains of concern. Northern rural Aleppo has seen
renewed hostilities, in particular in and around Afrin,
Tell Rifaat, Nubul and Al-Zahraa, with reports of
civilian casualties. The resurgence of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant is very worrying, with
frequent attacks registered in the north-east, the desert
region and around Homs and other areas. According
to a statement issued last week by the Syrian military,
Syrian Government air defences responded to enemy
missiles coming from the occupied Syrian Golan.
In the north-east, there are unresolved tensions
and the presence of multiple actors. A United Statesled coalition spokesperson stated that a United States
patrol came under small-arms fire from local militia
members and killed a combatant. Syrian State media
says the person was a Syrian civilian. That episode
stands as a stark reminder of the need for a sustainable
arrangement for the north-east that is inclusive of all
actors and respects and ultimately restores Syria’s
sovereignty, unity, independence and territorial
integrity, in line with resolution 2254 (2015).
The devastating scale of humanitarian suffering is
primarily caused by violent conflict. More broadly, the
Syrian economy continues to face serious challenges
as a result of a variety of actors, developments and
measures. All of these developments across the country
remind us that Syria’s sovereignty, territorial integrity
and independence remain seriously compromised by
the continuing conflict, and that we are a long way from
finding a way to ensure that the legitimate aspirations of
the Syrian people for peace, security and a better future
are realized. That, in turn, is a reminder that there is
no military solution to the conflict and that a political
process is required to move towards a political solution.

S/PV. 8727

I had hoped that the launch of the Constitutional
Committee on the basis of the composition and the
terms of reference and core rules of procedure formally
agreed with the Syrian Government and the Syrian
opposition could open the door to building some trust
and confidence and to a wider positive dynamic for
such a process. So far, that has not been the case, but
as I continue to press all with influence to work for
immediate calm I also remain fully engaged in efforts
to try to unlock progress on the political track.
I have continued to engage the Syrian parties to
narrow differences on the agenda for a third session
of the Constitutional Committee, based on the strict
observance of the agreed terms of reference and rules
of procedure — something that Foreign Minister
Al-Moualem and I confirmed was vital when we met
in Damascus late last month. I have continued to
communicate with the co-Chairs nominated by the
Government of Syria and the Syrian Negotiations
Commission, who have been submitting and reacting
to proposals from the other on a possible agenda. The
co-Chair nominated by the opposition was in Geneva
for further consultations, and Deputy Special Envoy
Matar met with the Government-nominated co-Chair
in Damascus last week. Differences remain, but I hope
that we will soon be in a position to reconvene the
Constitutional Committee in Geneva.
My team hosted the working group on the release
of detainees/abductees, the handover of bodies and
the identification of missing person in Geneva as
part of a rotation between locations chosen by its
members — Iran, Russia, Turkey and the United
Nations. The International Committee of the Red Cross
also participates as an observer. That file is immensely
important on humanitarian grounds. Progress would
also be essential to building trust and confidence. The
discussions were constructive, particularly on processes
related to the core issue of missing persons. However,
efforts on that file have not yet produced meaningful
progress in scale or pace with regard to releasing
detainees and clarifying the fate of tens of thousands
of Syrians unaccounted for. I reiterate my plea for
unilateral releases, particularly of women and children.
I also urge the parties to improve access to information
for families about their detained or missing relatives.
Ultimately, a lasting political settlement, in line
with resolution 2254 (2015), needs a broader process.
It will need to build trust and confidence, and one way
of doing so is through a step-by-step process. Given

20-043123/22

S/PV.8727

The situation in the Middle East

the current level of violence on the ground, the human
suffering and heightened international tensions with
regard to Syria, one immediate priority is to reverse
a set of dynamics that could further undermine trust,
entrench divisions and render any political process even
more difficult. But beyond that, we must explore a way
forward based on reciprocal and mutually reinforcing
actions undertaken by Syrians and international
partners. I intend to continue to pursue this discussion
with the Syrian Government and the Syrian opposition
and all international stakeholders, and I believe that
the profound instability and suffering that the Syrians
are experiencing today remind us that such a political
approach is the only sustainable way forward.
Much more needs to be done to advance such a
process, in furtherance of resolution 2254 (2015), but
today my primary concern is for the Syrian civilians
caught in the fighting, who continue to relay the urgency
of their situation and their desperate need for safety.
They feel that they are not being heard. I appeal once
again for full respect for international humanitarian law
and for an immediate ceasefire in Idlib and ultimately,
nationwide. I urge key international players to maintain
and intensify their links with their contacts in order
to restore calm. I urge all members of the Council to
put their weight firmly behind the search for a political
way forward. As the Secretary-General reminded
us yesterday, only in this way can we truly serve the
interests of the Syrian people.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Pedersen for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lowcock.
Mr. Lowcock: I would like to start by paying tribute
to two of our humanitarian colleagues — staff members
of OXFAM, who were killed this afternoon while on
mission in Dar’a governorate in southern Syria.
Yesterday, I met Dr. Amani Ballour, a Syrian
paediatrician who worked for five years in a hospital
built underground in order to protect it against air strikes
throughout the five-year siege of eastern Ghouta. She
is the subject of a documentary film, The Cave, which
was nominated at last week’s Oscars. I recommend that
everyone see that film. Dr. Ballour is a humanitarian
heroine. She told me that
“the same children I treated in eastern Ghouta
are displaced again in Idlib. They are still under
4/22

19/02/2020

the bombs, still afraid, still without shelter, still
without education. It is not life”.
She described the situation of the newly displaced
sleeping in the streets, in the fields, out in the cold, with
nowhere to go. “Children are afraid, they want safety”,
she said.
I last briefed the Council on the unfolding
humanitarian catastrophe in north-western Syria on
6 February (see S/PV.8715). Since then, the horror has
multiplied. At least 100 civilians were killed between
1 and 16 February by air and ground-based strikes in
the north-west, according of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. Thirtyfive of those killed were children. More than 90 per cent
of those deaths occurred in areas not controlled by the
Government. As UNICEF Executive Director Henrietta
Fore has said, “such abject disregard for the safety and
well-being of children and families is beyond the pale”.
Blatant disregard for the life and safety of civilians runs
contrary to the obligations that all parties must uphold
under international humanitarian law and international
human rights law.
As Geir has just told the Council, front lines in Idlib
and western Aleppo have moved swiftly. Advancing
front lines have driven huge population movements
in a matter of days as families try to escape the
relentless aerial and ground bombardment. Over this
last weekend, from 13 to 16 February, 160,000 people
were recorded fleeing, mostly from Atarib and Daret
Azza subdistricts, away from advancing front lines.
And again, as Geir has said, we now believe that nearly
900,000 people have been displaced since 1 December,
most of them — more than 500,000 — children.
People are fleeing under horrendous conditions.
Many are on foot or on the backs of trucks in belowfreezing temperatures in the rain and in the snow. They
are moving into increasingly crowded areas that they
think will be safer. But in Idlib nowhere is safe. Almost
50,000 are sheltering under trees or in other open
spaces. I am getting daily reports of babies and other
young children dying in the cold. Imagine the grief of a
parent who escaped a war zone with their child only to
watch that child freeze to death.
As the Secretary-General warned yesterday,
hostilities are now all around areas densely populated
with the terrified people who fled. Those areas include
Dana and Sarmada, in the direction of the Bab Al-Hawa
border crossing. With the huge number of new arrivals
20-04312

19/02/2020

The situation in the Middle East

of internally displaced persons (IDPs), Dana now has
a greater population density than the capital cities of
many of our countries, and the number of new arrivals
is growing by the day. If hostilities reach these areas
packed with civilians, the human cost will be instant
and huge.
On 10 February a child was killed and two others
were injured in an air strike on an IDP camp in Idlib’s
Kafr Aruq, and on 14 and 15 February ground-based
strikes hit two makeshift IDP camps in the Sarmada
area of northern rural Idlib, killing a civilian and
injuring nine others. As High Commissioner Bachelet
said yesterday, no shelter is now safe. The bombing
of women and children living under scraps of plastic
sheeting and in freezing conditions is cruel beyond
belief. We are still trying to count the number of
civilians killed yesterday.
We have today given new maps to all the relevant
parties showing all the very large number of locations
where we think displaced people who have fled now
are. It is incumbent on all parties to protect those
people. The mass movement of people into ever-smaller
areas of Idlib and Aleppo is placing immense additional
strain on local communities. Most markets have closed,
available basic goods are prohibitively expensive, and
the price of basic goods has increased by 70 per cent
over the last six months. Since December, 72 hospitals,
primary health-care centres, specialized care centres
and mobile clinics have ceased activities, collectively
suspending the services of nearly 200 doctors, more
than 300 nurses and more than 50 midwives.
The maternity and child-care hospitals in Atarib
and Idlib city, which provide life-saving maternal
and child-care treatments, have stopped functioning.
As Dr. Ballour told me, with the closure of hospitals
and medical facilities, many doctors have nowhere to
work, even as needs grow ever greater. Humanitarian
operations continue cross-border from Turkey to
provide assistance, but, as I said before, the aid effort
is overwhelmed.
On 6 February I briefed the Council (see S/PV.8715)
on our appeal for an additional $336 million to help
800,000 newly or potentially displaced people over the
next six months. Because of what has happened since
then, it is now clear that that will be inadequate. In the
next few days we expect to publish a revised plan for
some $500 million to assist at least 1.1 million people.

S/PV. 8727

We are considering all options to increase
support into the north-west. We are working with the
Government of Turkey to expand the opening of the
Bab Al-Hawa border crossing to seven days a week in
order to increase the number of aid trucks coming in.
We are asking the Government of Syria for permission
for a mission from Damascus to areas they have
recently taken control of in order to see who is there
and to assess their needs.
Two years ago, almost to the day, the Security
Council voted in favour of a 30-day ceasefire in Syria
(see S/PV.8188). The Council’s vote was unanimous,
and resolution 2401 (2018) expressed “outrage at the
unacceptable levels of violence”. Is the violence we are
seeing now not an outrage? I repeat again the SecretaryGeneral’s renewed call yesterday for an immediate
ceasefire and for international humanitarian law to
be upheld.
Let me finish with a message from Dr. Ballour:
“We cannot wait. Every minute people are dying.
The Security Council can help. The Security
Council knows what is happening. They are
watching. Yet they do nothing”.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Lowcock for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members
wishing to make statements.
Mrs. Craft (United States of America): “It’s
like the end of the world” — The New York Times;
“’Breaking point’; babies freezing to death amid Idlib
push” — Al Jazeera; “These people are begging the
world to listen to their plight” — CNN; “Turkey-Russia
standoff in Syria leaves millions of refugees caught in
chaos” — Wall Street Journal.
Nearly 1 million Syrians have been forced to flee
their homes in the past 90 days — 1 million people
in 90 days. And so I ask, how much longer will we
tolerate these headlines? The unyielding military
campaign of the regime, Russia, Iran and Hizbullah
amounts to a wholesale rejection of United Nations and
Security Council efforts to facilitate a political process
in Syria. Speaking candidly, it is a marvel to me that
our Russian colleagues can speak of ceasefires and
political solutions in this Chamber with a straight face
when their own warplanes have struck hospitals and the
homes of children.

20-043125/22

S/PV.8727

The situation in the Middle East

Indeed, every passing day without a real ceasefire
further dims the prospect of a United Nationsfacilitated political solution. The Al-Assad regime is
already declaring a military victory and has promised
to continue its assault in north-western Syria, this while
children are freezing to death in the fields in Idlib.
The Council cannot allow Syria, Russia and Iran to
continue pursuing the subjugation of Syrian civilians,
as failure to end the Al-Assad regime’s assault through
a United Nations-brokered ceasefire risks the lives of
millions of internally displaced persons, most of them
women and children. Further military actions aim
to sideline the Security Council and prevent it from
implementing resolution 2254 (2015), a resolution
aimed at just and lasting peace and endorsed by the
Russian Federation.
President Trump and the United States of America
strongly desire to see Russia end its support for the
Al-Assad regime’s atrocities in Syria and instead commit
to a political resolution of the conflict. The outcome
of the conflict will have a significant bearing on the
credibility and moral authority of the Council. If we do
not abide by the unanimously adopted commitments set
out in resolution 2254 (2015), and if we do not restore
the former Idlib de-escalation zone, then what can we
be trusted with? What kind of precedent are we setting?
It is at best a deeply troubling one.
The United States supports the legitimate interest of
our NATO ally, Turkey, which has done more than any
other country to assist Syrian refugees. We understand
its concern about additional refugee flows as a result of
ongoing hostilities.
We unequivocally reject statements by Russian
officials in Moscow that falsely blame Turkey for the
escalation of violence in north-western Syria, and there
is no doubt that the Al-Assad regime and Russia — not
Turkey — are responsible for orchestrating and executing
this military offensive. As our Special Representative
for Syria Engagement, Jim Jeffrey, stated last week in
Ankara, the United States will continue to coordinate
with Turkey on diplomatic approaches to restore a
ceasefire to the Idlib de-escalation zone and achieve a
pullback of Al-Assad regime forces to the 2018 Sochi
ceasefire lines.
On that note, for too long, we have outsourced the
work of establishing ceasefires to Russia and its Astana
format. It was not clear before but it is certainly no
longer appropriate to trust the Astana group to end the
6/22

19/02/2020

violence. The clearest path we see to an immediate end
to violence in north-west Syria is for the United Nations
to take full charge of a new ceasefire initiative. This
should be the most urgent priority of the SecretaryGeneral and of United Nations Special Envoy Pedersen.
Let me close by taking a moment to address the
men, women and children in the Idlib province. Today,
they will likely hear the Russian Federation and those
officials who claimed to represent them dismiss their
suffering as insignificant and even imagined, or perhaps
the Russian Federation and the officials who say they
represent Idlib province will acknowledge the suffering
of the people of Idlib but claim that it is unrelated to the
campaign of the terror they have waged against these
innocent people. This is falsification in pure form, and
it is a disgrace.
The people of Idlib deserve far better from those
who claimed authority over them, but I want to ask
them not to give up hope — not yet. In the days ahead,
the United States will not spare any effort, including
working with allies, to isolate the Al-Assad regime
diplomatically and economically and to deliver the
relief, the resources and ultimately the peace that has
been kept from the people of Idlib province for far
too long.
The questions I ask before the Council today, then,
are: what will tomorrow’s headline be, and what are we
going to do about it?
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): There is not very much
I can add to what my American colleague just said
and what was said by the two briefers at the very
beginning of today’s meeting — this is a nightmare we
are confronting.
Let me add a couple of quotations to those already
cited. In his statement of 17 February, Mark Lowcock
himself said that if things continue as they do we are
faced with the biggest humanitarian horror story of
the twenty-first century. Looking at the pattern on
the ground where it appears that the Syrian regime
supported by Russia and other allies are primarily
targeting areas where a high number of displaced
persons have sought shelter, to quote Michelle Bachelet,
it is cruel beyond belief that civilians living in freezing
conditions are being bombed.
With the situation is as bad as it is, all we can do
is support the Secretary-General of the United Nations,
who has called for an immediate ceasefire. I would also
20-04312

19/02/2020

The situation in the Middle East

echo actually what the representative of the United
States has just said: basically, the Astana formula
does not work anymore, and the United Nations has to
step in. There is no recourse but to support what Geir
Pedersen has said and what he is doing, but I also think
that it is now time for the Secretary-General also to
step up to the plate. It is an immense responsibility that
we face here as the United Nations and as the Security
Council, namely, to stop what is what is happening. We
must spare no effort.
We are also concerned about the escalation around
the Turkish observation force, and we demand that the
Syrian regime stop its attacks against Turkish forces.
We call for an immediate return to de-escalation.
We always say that, when it comes to problems,
there is no military solution to a problem if sustainable
stability is to be achieved. I think we are confronted
in this regard with a situation where Syria, Russia
and their allies are trying to prove the opposite, that
there is a military solution and that control of the
territory of one’s country can be recovered by driving
out a million people from the area. Overall, there are
probably 3 million people in the area, and the attacks
are continuing. This has to be stopped if we do not want
to end up with the biggest humanitarian horror story of
the twenty-first century.
There may be a situation if this continues that
we will soon have more Syrians living outside of the
country than inside of it, and those who remain are
left in a country that is totally destroyed morally and
physically. For a peaceful Syria, there is therefore no
alternative but to go to a political process, to have the
Constitutional Committee work, to have reconciliation
in the country, to have, also, accountability for the
crimes that have been committed.
By the way, in this afternoon’s Arria formula
meeting, we will hear from the Commission of Inquiry,
which will focus on violations of children’s rights
during the Syrian conflict and offer recommendations
to all parties to the conflict on the way forward. This is
the way we forward.
Let us go back to where all of this started. It was
first and foremost the Syrian regime’s policy of brutal
violence, repression and prosecution that caused this
conflict and is still keeping Syrian internally displaced
persons and refugees from returning home. We all know
about the arbitrary arrests, torture, sexual violence and
forced disappearance, extradition, killings of detainees

S/PV. 8727

and other grave human rights violations, which are at
the origins of this conflict. I would therefore conclude
with a plea to our Russian colleague to stop the support
of Syria. If he tells the Syrians that there is no longer
military support for the Syrian regime, it will have to
stop the onslaught against its own population.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): At the outset, we
would like to express our condolences to the families
and friends of those Oxfam workers mentioned by
Mr. Lowcock who were killed.
I thank Mr. Pedersen and Mr. Lowcock for
their briefings.
I agree very much with my German and my
American colleagues. I am not going to rehearse the
figures that Mr. Lowcock has so starkly set out, but
I would like to echo High Commissioner Bachelet
who asked how can anyone justify carrying out such
indiscriminate and inhumane attacks. She also said that
93 per cent of the deaths since 1 January were caused
by the Syrian Government and its allies.
I would therefore like to put the High
Commissioner’s question back to the Russians and the
Syrians — specifically to their representatives in this
Chamber today. How can they justify carrying out such
indiscriminate and inhumane attacks? What are they
doing to uphold international humanitarian law? What
are they doing to protect the people who were fleeing?
Where do they expect those people to flee to? What
are they doing to protect medical facilities and ensure
that the people that Mr. Lowcock so vividly described
get the help that they need? And when does this start
to end?
We have now heard that the Syrian Government
has said that it will continue its offensive. How can
the regime do that in the face of the accounts that
we have heard today, when the entire international
community — barring about three countries — is
condemning it for what it is doing to the people of Idlib?
I agree with the German and American
representatives: Astana is not working. We have all
given it a chance and we have waited in effect too long.
We need to come off Astana and we need to work with
the United Nations to get the political process under
way and uphold resolution 2254 (2015).
There is one area where I disagree with
Mr. Lowcock, if I may. It is not that the Security Council
is doing nothing; 13, possibly 14, members of the

20-043127/22

S/PV.8727

The situation in the Middle East

Security Council are ready to act, but what the Syrian
Government is doing on the ground is protected by a
Russian veto. This was not the purpose of establishing
the Security Council and it was not the purpose of
giving the five permanent members a veto — so that
these innocent people on the ground could suffer not
just once but multiple times under the cruelty and
barbarity at the Syrian regime.
I would also like to echo what my German and
American colleagues said about Turkey. We need the
attacks on Turkey to stop. Turkey has made efforts to
seek a peaceful solution in Idlib and we are concerned
about the impact of the escalation on Turkey, which has
already borne the burden of hosting over 3.5 million
refugees forced to flee Syria. I therefore look forward to
hearing what the Turkish representative has to say later.
I join the others in calling on Russia to end its
support for this murderous campaign and the barbaric
Syrian Government. I join the Secretary-General in
calling for an immediate, genuine and lasting ceasefire
in Idlib and for a lasting solution to the situation there.
We once more call on Syria, Russia and Iran to observe
their obligations under international humanitarian law
and to give us an answer on what they are doing to
protect civilians and civilian infrastructure.
Turning to what Mr. Pedersen said about the
Constitutional Committee and the political process,
we remain deeply disappointed at the stalling of the
Constitutional Committee. It is hard to believe that not
only do we have a barbaric situation on the ground, but
that the Syrian authorities are actually hindering the
political process. They should come to the table. I want
to place on record once more the United Kingdom’s
support for the United Nations Special Envoy in his
efforts to restart the Committee, and I want also to
assure the United Nations that the United Kingdom
stands ready to support any United Nations-backed
agreement and that we continue to support the Special
Envoy’s work under resolution 2254 (2015).
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we wish to express
our deepest condolences at the deaths today of two
humanitarian workers, which provide yet further
impetus for collective action on our part to stop the
violence in north-western Syria.
We thank Ambassador Pedersen and Mr. Lowcock
for their briefings. We take this opportunity to reiterate
our support for them and our determination to continue
8/22

19/02/2020

forging ahead in consolidating the peace process
in Syria.
The Dominican Republic reiterates once again its
deep concern about the situation in the Syrian Arab
Republic in general and in the north-west of the country
in particular. We reiterate that, as long as such violence
prevails, characterized by violations of international
law, including international humanitarian law, progress
towards a negotiated political solution will remain
impossible. This has meant, notwithstanding other
possible factors, that it has not yet been possible to
resume the Constitutional Committee. We believe that it
is both regrettable and unacceptable that, after so much
effort, time and energy was invested in establishing
the Committee, there seems only a remote possibility
that it will fulfil its mandate. That is to say, a military
solution, incorporating counter-terrorism measures,
and a political process are simply mutually exclusive.
There must be a way to find a third way allowing
us to both address the alarming situation of the civilian
population in the north-west and to protect the political
process. There are 900,000 reasons to seek such a
middle way and to do so urgently; 900,000 is the
number of Syrians who have been displaced, half of
them children, and they need solutions. They are dying
of cold and hunger. They deserve protection and have
the right to a decent life. However, Syrian refugees also
have the right to return in a safe, dignified and voluntary
way to their places of origin or some other place of their
choosing, provided they receive lasting guarantees for
their well-being and development. The same goes for
the Syrian civilians who were left behind — those who,
in the absence of economic means to move north away
from the violence, had no option but to remain, perhaps
facing death, in the places they once knew as safe.
I would like to highlight some very specific aspects
of this difficult and delicate situation. A complete and
immediate ceasefire in the north-west must be the
absolute priority to avoid large-scale escalation. The
United Nations must be at the heart of such efforts, as
the supporter and facilitator of a lasting solution. In that
spirit, we call on the parties to come to the negotiating
table and renew their commitment to abiding by the
ceasefire agreements and to restore calm.
The fight against terrorism cannot be conducted
as business as usual in Idlib. Given the presence of
3 million Syrian civilians, counter-terrorism actions
must respect international law, including international
20-04312

19/02/2020

The situation in the Middle East

humanitarian law, so as to ensure the protection of
the civilian population. Humanitarian access must be
guaranteed and facilitated to meet the pressing needs
of a population crushed, shaken and traumatized by too
many years of Syrian-on-Syrian violence.
Finally, we regret that the door the Constitutional
Committee could have opened to a broad political process
does not seem to have materialized. The prevailing lack
of trust and apparent apathy will require greater efforts
from all of us in the Council, as guarantors resolution
2254 (2015), to break the cycle and move ahead without
further delay or excuse. I remind the members of the
Council and the representatives of the United Nations
that history will judge us for our lack of action.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): At the outset, I should like
to join others in thanking Special Envoy Pedersen and
Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for their briefings.
As mentioned earlier by the Special Envoy,
regrettably there is no progress on the political track
and differences remain with regard to the Constitutional
Committee. However, my delegation believes that
the Syrian parties fully realize the importance of
this process for moving forward, and that they will
honour their responsibilities eventually to agree on
constitutional principles. As much as we want the
Syrian parties to build trust and confidence among
themselves, the international community must also
have trust in them and fully support the Syrian-led and
Syrian-owned political process, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of resolution 2254 (2015).
The situation in north-western Syria is extremely
disturbing. As we heard from Special Envoy Pedersen,
since 1 December, 900,000 people, the majority of
them women and children, have been displaced. That
is quite a large number. We have been hearing reports
of babies and children dying because of the freezing
temperatures. Families have fled their homes, looking
for safety. However, they have ended up sleeping
outside because the camps for internally displaced
persons are overcrowded.
The humanitarian response is overstretched.
Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock, in his latest
statement, said that humanitarian workers themselves
were being displaced and killed. This is a nightmare
for the Council and the entire international community.
However, this is not a nightmare for all those displaced
people. This is a not a nightmare for mothers who are
trying to protect their dying babies from the cold.

S/PV. 8727

This is, rather, the reality that they have to suffer — a
catastrophic reality.
Indonesia wishes to emphasize three points. First is
the need for an immediate de-escalation. My delegation
urges an immediate de-escalation and appeals to all key
relevant parties on the ground to immediately restore
calm and not to prolong the suffering of civilians. The
escalation and violence must stop. The ceasefire must
be fully respected. All parties involved in the conflict
must respect their obligations to protect civilians,
as well as public infrastructure, under international
humanitarian law. As mentioned by Mr. Pedersen, the
principle of proportionality should always be respected.
All parties must respect international law and the
Security Council resolutions.
Secondly, there must be the creation of an enabling
environment for dialogue. The establishment of a
positive environment on the ground is key to advancing
the work of the Constitutional Committee and to
allowing any constitutional reform in Syria. In the
meantime, we hope that the Syrian parties will always
make themselves available for genuine dialogue and
to continue the United Nations-facilitated talks in
good faith.
Thirdly, it is important to avoid any provocative
rhetoric or actions. The complex situation in Syria
should not be exacerbated by unnecessary actions or
rhetoric that would further provoke and complicate the
current circumstances. Now is the time for all of us to
exercise restraint and find concrete solutions. We must
focus on saving people’s lives. That is what is expected
of us.
In conclusion, once again we stand by the Special
Envoy in trying to find a solution to this long-standing
issue in Syria. The efforts of the Special Envoy and
his team, such as the return of detainees and missing
persons, small as they may seem, should be continued
in order to build trust. We affirm once again the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria. We stress
that there is no military solution, that a lasting political
solution is needed and that our objective should be
easing the humanitarian suffering of the people of Syria.
Concrete actions are needed to end the suffering of the
Syrian people. That can start from the Council. Let us
be united in saving people’s lives. As Mr. Lowcock
mentioned just now, people are watching us all.
Ms. Goolab (South Africa): Let me begin by
thanking Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and Under-

20-043129/22

S/PV.8727

The situation in the Middle East

Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for their briefings
on the situation in Syria. I would also like to express
South Africa’s full support for Special Envoy Pedersen
and commend his efforts to resolve the current impasse.
While we recognize the right of the Syrian Arab
Republic to restore its control over the whole of its
territory, South Africa is concerned about the conflict
in north-western Syria, particular its impact on the
humanitarian situation. We urge all parties to seek a
peaceful resolution of the conflict. Such a peaceful
resolution requires a cessation of hostilities and a
solution that upholds Syria’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity. In that regard, external support for armed
groups must cease immediately. We cannot allow
external role players to use the devastating conflict in
Syria as a proxy for their own interests.
The increase in violence has a direct impact on
the humanitarian situation in Syria, with thousands of
civilians fleeing the hostilities to already overcrowded
refugee and internally displaced persons camps. South
Africa reiterates its call for all parties to respect their
obligations under international law and international
humanitarian law, particularly with regard to the
protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure. In
addition, we call on the relevant authorities to ensure the
safe, unimpeded and impartial delivery of humanitarian
aid and assistance to all who require it. The severe
winter conditions have given further impetus to the
need to provide essential humanitarian aid, including
winterization and shelter packages. Civilians must also
be assured access to humanitarian corridors.
With regard to the political process, the only
sustainable option is the attainment, through an
inclusive Syrian-led dialogue, of a political solution
that is reflective of the will of the Syrian people. In
that regard, we welcome and encourage the active
participation of women and religious groups in such
peace talks, as all groups have unique perspectives
to offer.
South Africa welcomes the formation of the
Constitutional Committee, as well as the drafting
committee, as a representation of all Syrian people — the
Government, the opposition and civil society — in
carrying out their mandate to draft a new constitution
for Syria. South Africa urges all members of the
Constitutional Committee to make a concerted effort
towards agreeing an agenda for genuine discussions
on the drafting of a constitution that would form an
10/22

19/02/2020

essential component of a sustainable solution to the
conflict in Syria.
The work of the Constitutional Committee is but
one aspect of the larger political process in Syria, as
set out in resolution 2254 (2015), which must be fully
implemented and respected by all parties. For it to be
sustainable, the political process must be Syrian-owned
and Syrian-led. External interference in that process is
detrimental to its success.
In order for such peace negotiations to make
credible progress, the parties must have confidence
in each other. In that regard, South Africa encourages
all side to undertake trust and confidence-building
measures. Those could include progress in the release
of detained civilians, particularly vulnerable groups
such as women, children, the elderly and those with
disabilities. My delegation has noted the recent meeting
of the Working Group on Detainees and Missing
Persons in Geneva and looks forward to its outcome.
We urge the Working Group to make every effort to
achieve real progress on the matter. As part of such
confidence-building measures to promote progress, the
easing of economic measures imposed on Syria should
be considered if there is progress on the political front.
In conclusion, South Africa firmly believes that
the humanitarian and political situations in Syria are
interlinked, with credible progress in one area leading
to credible progress in the other. We must do all we
can to promote progress on those two tracks in order to
achieve a comprehensive and peaceful settlement to the
conflict. The Syrian people deserve nothing less.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): I
thank Geir Pedersen and Mark Lowcock for their very
comprehensive briefings. We join others in expressing
our sympathy to the families, relatives and friends of
the two Oxfam humanitarian workers who lost their
lives earlier today.
Only two weeks ago, we sat in this Council to voice
our shared concern about the situation in north-west
Syria (see S/PV.8715). We are here again today because
the situation has continued to worsen. We echo our
previous calls for an immediate and sustained cessation
of all hostilities, as this is the only way to put an end
to the suffering, which has sadly become a feature of
everyday life for many Syrian people.
Continuing along the current military path will
not end the current conflict. It will not accomplish the
20-04312

19/02/2020

The situation in the Middle East

objectives of resolution 2254 (2015). It will not end the
humanitarian crisis or bring stability to Syria. What
it will bring about are the further displacement of
civilians into dire conditions where they must fight to
survive, the interruption of vital humanitarian aid and
the loss of many more lives. For that reason, we once
again express our support for the work of Special Envoy
Pedersen. We recognize and applaud his recent efforts
towards attaining a political solution by engaging in
dialogue with the parties. As a staunch advocate for
dialogue, we hope that it will lead to a de-escalation and
the prevention of a full-scale military confrontation.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines welcomes
all efforts to broker and uphold a ceasefire in Idlib,
including through the Astana format and the United
Nations. Indeed, any solution should include all the
parties concerned and the United Nations. In that vein,
we welcome Special Envoy Pedersen’s engagement with
the Astana guarantors. We applaud the earnest efforts
of the Astana guarantors and support the involvement
of the United Nations.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines once again
emphasizes the need for a credible, balanced and
inclusive political process that meets the legitimate
aspirations of the Syrian people. That is the only viable
route to lasting peace and stability.
The presence of United Nations-designated
terrorist entities in the country presents legitimate local
and regional security concerns that have necessitated
military operations. However, we must remind parties
that those operations do not absolve them of their
obligations under international humanitarian law
and international human rights law. Measures aimed
at building confidence are also key elements of the
success of the political process. As such, the issue of
missing and detained persons should be addressed to
foster good will. Further, conditions must be created
for the safe, dignified and voluntary return of refugees
and internally displaced persons. Syria and its people
deserve security in order to live in a state of calm. This
conflict has taken too much from them and will continue
to take from them if we fail in our responsibility to see
to it that the suffering ends here.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Envoy Pedersen and Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock for their briefings. China appreciates the good
offices of the Special Envoy and supports his ongoing
efforts to enhance communication with all parties

S/PV. 8727

in Syria and the Astana guarantors, to listen to the
reasonable requests of the Syrian Government and to
continue to advance the political process in accordance
with the principle of Syrian leadership and ownership
and resolution 2254 (2015).
Due to the interconnectedness of the grave political,
security and humanitarian issues in Syria, we must take
certain measures to advance the political process in
the country.
First, we must stay the course towards a political
settlement and make good use of the Constitutional
Committee as a platform. A political solution is the
only way to end the Syrian crisis and must be based
on maintaining Syria’s sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity. The establishment of the
Constitutional Committee was a good start for the Syrian
political process. Its role should be fully leveraged
on the basis of the existing outcomes. Differences
among Syrian parties in the work of the Constitutional
Committee, while unavoidable, should be resolved
through dialogue. We should pay particular attention
to maintaining the independence of the Committee’s
work and creating the conditions necessary to enable
all parties in Syria to narrow their differences and build
consensus. We hope that the members of the Committee
will demonstrate their political will, uphold the spirit of
compromise and play a constructive role in reaching
consensus among all parties in Syria.
Secondly, terrorism in Syria must be eradicated in
order to create a favourable security environment for
advancing the political process. Rampant terrorism
has significantly undermined prospects for a serious
political process and a better future for the country.
As such, it must be taken seriously and be addressed
by all parties. Idlib has become a breeding ground for
terrorism, and the acute problem of foreign terrorist
fighters has had substantial knock-on effects. Countries
should eliminate the safe havens established by terrorist
groups in Syria, in accordance with international
law and all relevant Council resolutions, including
resolution 2254 (2015). China supports all the parties
in their continuing efforts to seek comprehensive, longterm solutions to the Idlib problem through dialogue
and negotiations.
Thirdly, efforts should be made to improve the
humanitarian situation in Syria, which would help
to advance the political settlement process. The
international community must step up humanitarian

20-0431211/22

S/PV.8727

The situation in the Middle East

aid to Syria and support the United Nations in
providing help to the displaced persons. Humanitarian
aid should be dispensed with no political strings
attached. In the long run, we should support the Syrian
Government in rebuilding where the security situation
is relatively stable. The international community has
a moral responsibility to help Syria restore economic
development and calm. In order to effectively carry
out humanitarian relief operations in Syria, we should
enhance communication and coordination with the
Government and respect Syria’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity.
Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I extend my condolences to Oxfam and the
humanitarian family following the deaths of two of
their own today in Syria. I thank Mr. Pedersen and
Mr. Lowcock for their briefings today. I welcome
Mr. Pedersen’s diligent efforts to create conditions
conducive to a political settlement to the Syrian crisis.
While the establishment of the Constitutional
Committee offered a glimmer of hope, unfortunately it
did not translate into substantial progress as the parties
have remained intransigent. I encourage Mr. Pedersen
to pursue his efforts to allay suspicion and build trust
between the parties, and thereby defuse tensions in the
negotiating environment.
It is regrettable that since 1 December, the rise
in violence has pushed hundreds of thousands of
Syrians — primarily women and children — to abandon
their homes at this frigid season. While we must all
combat terrorism wherever necessary, we must do so in
full compliance with international humanitarian law and
specifically ensure the protection of innocent civilians
and secure their access to humanitarian assistance.
My delegation calls on belligerent elements on
both sides to exercise maximum restraint and to work
towards de-escalation. We remind the parties concerned
to respect their commitments in the framework of the
agreements reached in order to achieve a ceasefire.
The Niger remains convinced that the political and
humanitarian situations in Syria cannot be tackled
independently because ongoing hostilities adversely
affect the humanitarian situation, which in turn affects
the political situation.
My delegation believes that a settlement to the
Syrian crisis must be political rather than military, in a
process led by the Syrian people, including all elements
of their society. That is why we must urgently get the
12/22

19/02/2020

political process back on track, in accordance with
resolution 2254 (2015).
In conclusion, we once again call on all parties to
the conflict to ensure respect for the ceasefire and to
facilitate the access of humanitarian organizations to
civilian populations that greatly need humanitarian
assistance, especially in this period of bitter cold. We
cannot remain indifferent to the harrowing briefings
of Mr. Pedersen and Mr. Lowcock. It is time to act. It
is time to contribute practically to putting an end to
despair in Syria. It is time for the Council to take up its
responsibilities, as its credibility depends on it.
Mr. Pham (Viet Nam): First, we would express
our thanks to Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and UnderSecretary-General Mark Lowcock for their briefings
today to the Council after their briefings two weeks ago
(see S/PV.8715).
Viet Nam’s position on this issue remains
unchanged. We continue to support the ongoing efforts
of the United Nations, the Secretary-General and the
Special Envoy towards a peaceful settlement of this
protracted crisis. We support the work of the United
Nations-facilitated Constitutional Committee, which
serves as a platform for genuine dialogue among Syrian
parties. Some have called it a door-opener for the peace
process in Syria. If the door is to remain open and
accessible, we must build enough trust and confidence
to pave the way to a tangible outcome. All parties must
continue to step up confidence-building measures.
Secondly, we firmly believe that the only way
to bring peace to the people of Syria is through a
comprehensive and credible political solution in
accordance with international law, the Charter of the
United Nations and, most importantly, the relevant
Security Council resolutions, including resolution 2254
(2015). That solution demands good and strong political
will from all relevant parties in the process of dialogue
and negotiation. We welcome the ongoing discussions
among the parties concerned to address the situation.
However, it is sad to see no progress made, month
after month.
Thirdly, we remain deeply concerned about the
escalation of the situation in north-west Syria and its
grave impact on the well-being of 4 million people
in the area. The longer the conflict and escalation
continue without a political solution, the more intense
the suffering of innocent civilians becomes. We are
especially concerned over reports of the continued
20-04312

19/02/2020

The situation in the Middle East

increase in displacement and redisplacement, affecting
some 100,000 people during the past two weeks, almost
60 per cent of whom are children. In addition, reports
indicate that a high number of civilians have been killed,
including in camps for internally displaced persons.
The temperature there is like in New York now.
It is hard to imagine the situation of people without
adequate shelter and the necessary supplies, especially
women and children. In this regard, we once again call
upon all parties to exercise maximum restraint so as
to avoid any further deterioration of the situation. The
fight against terrorism is a must, but the protection
of innocent civilians and the avoidance of civilian
suffering must always be an imperative for all. We
therefore support the call of the Secretary-General for
an immediate ceasefire.
Last but not least, the Security Council, together
with the international community, should continue
to urge for and support further efforts, including
international diplomatic efforts, to achieve a political
settlement for the situation in Syria, with full respect
for international law as well as the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Syria. This is the most viable
path to peace, stability and development in Syria and
the region.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Special Envoy Geir
Pedersen for his briefing. We also listened carefully
to the briefing of Under-Secretary-General Mark
Lowcock. The actions of the Security Council’s
penholders, who asked to invite Mark Lowcock at the
last minute, surprised us, but for us the motivations
are clear, as we have talked about this more than once.
This month we have already discussed humanitarian
issues in some way twice, and the programme of work
of the the Security Council also includes a monthly
briefing on the humanitarian aspects of the situation in
Syria on 27 February. Maybe next time we can invite
Ms. Nakamitsu, High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, and discuss all the various aspects of the Syrian
crisis that are considered by the Security Council.
But today we would like to focus on the discussion
that was planned for today, on the political track. We
are trying to promote the peace settlement process.
With a key role played by Russia, together with
Turkey and Iran, the Constitutional Committee was
established, and there is simply no other mechanism for

S/PV. 8727

a political dialogue. There have been two sessions of
that Committee to date.
Now the Special Envoy and his team are working
on convening a third meeting and are in constant
contact with the Syrian sides. To that end, the Special
Envoy and then his Deputy recently visited Damascus.
We believe that this approach is the right one — the
parties should first agree on an agenda for a meeting
so as to ensure that discussions take place on concrete
issues. Of course, we would all like to see progress on
the political track, but to push through or impose readymade solutions would violate the principle on which we
all agreed: that the future of Syria should be decided on
by the Syrian people. We will also seek to encourage all
Syrians to work constructively.
Russia has been given advice on what to do and
how to do it. We too can make a few recommendations.
First, what needs to stop is the protection of fighters,
including those from organizations by the Security
Council, such as Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham. Recently we
once again heard a statement from James Jeffrey that
it might be possible to reach an agreement with Hayat
Tahrir Al-Sham. To provide political cover to terrorists
by portraying them as revolutionaries and to force the
Syrian Government to engage in negotiations with them
will not be possible.
The Ministry of Defence of Russia reports that there
are samples of modern Western munitions in weapons
depots captured from the terrorists, many of which
were organized in schools and hospitals converted
into combat positions. It is important to stop supplying
terrorist fighters with weapons. By the way, when
armed regiments were marching on Damascus, with
the approval of some Western States, I do not recall
that the Security Council meetings were held so often at
that time to discuss this matter, although the casualties
among civilians and in the Syrian army were enormous.
Yet we have already learned that some of our colleagues
make a strict distinction between the right Syrians and
those who support the legitimate authorities.
We have already heard all today’s rhetoric more
than once also this month. Some are playing the card
of civilian suffering and long-term truce every time
the terrorists they cherish are in danger. How can
we respond to their accusations about exterminating
civilians? Whatever we say in attempt to persuade
them, they do not listen and stubbornly keep speaking

20-0431213/22

S/PV.8727

The situation in the Middle East

19/02/2020

about the deliberate bombings of schools, hospitals and
refugee camps.

companies taking part in post-conflict reconstruction.
How is that related to their concern for Syrians?

Of course, anyone who is human and who has a
heart will of course react to such statements. It is a ploy
that is 100 per cent guaranteed. Who is going to try to
understand whether it is true or not? Last time we spoke
in detail about the efforts of our military to protect
civilians and to respect international humanitarian
law. Maybe our British colleague missed this, but I
just wanted to remind her of something else that we
discussed. It is not good to boast of destruction, but
objectively speaking, the level of destruction of civilian
targets as a result of anti-terrorist activity by Syrian
forces in Idlib is many, many times less than what we
saw during the actions of the so-called international
coalition in Raqqa and other cities, which were the
targets of merciless bombing as part of the fight
against terrorists at that time.

Like other members of the Council, the Russian
Federation expresses its concern with regard to the
situation of tens of thousands of internally displaced
persons who found themselves locked outside of camps.
Resolving their problems should be the top priority of the
humanitarian community, especially given the winter
period and the high number of vulnerable individuals
among that group of people.

We deplore the deaths of Oxfam personnel in the
south of Syria in Dar’a governorate, which we heard
about today. They were attacked by an armed group,
which simply confirms the need to fight armed groups
and restore Government control over the entire territory
of the country.
We appeal to all those who have influence on
the factions in Idlib to work to stop the shelling of
the civilian population, drone attacks on the Russian
Khmeimim air base, and provocations against the
Syrian forces. For the information of Council members,
over the past day there were 29 such attacks, in Latakia,
Idlib, Hama and Aleppo. It will be impossible to
achieve a sustainable ceasefire if we do not stop this.
As was recently pointed out to us, humanitarian law
applies to all types of conflicts. We therefore ask for
pressure to be put on the terrorists in Idlib to stop using
civilians as human shields and allow them to leave
through humanitarian corridors, and to stop executing
and torturing those who demonstrate or protest against
the invasion of terrorists. By the way, for those who
doubt that humanitarian corridors are functioning,
on 18 February alone 177 people crossed the Bjarez
checkpoint, 171 in Maaret al-Numan and 35 in Habit.
Thirdly, it is also important to begin work right
now on the post-conflict reconstruction of the country.
Our colleagues who are holding the Arria Formula
meetings are simply strengthening the sanctions regime,
which, on 17 February, was expanded to target Syrian
14/22

As far as we understand, humanitarian agencies
have the resources to do so, as donors have so far spared
no effort in providing financing to regions that are not
under Government control. Furthermore, we cannot but
note that these kinds of problems have to be aniticpated
and provided for in order to make sure that people do
not find themselves without shelter in winter.
Once again, people are trying to hype this. We
know these techniques very well. In order to undestand
how they work, let us recall the same sensation from
last month — the cross-border assistance mechanism
(see S/PV.8707). Council members will remember
how everyone criticized us for the closure of the
Al-Yarubiyah border crossing. We were asked to
work with the Syrian side to find alternative ways of
delivering humanitarian assistance as soon as possible.
We were told that the situation was extremely urgent
and that supplies of medicine in Al-Hasakah were
going to run out. For some reason, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) did
not inform the Council or the public at large about the
subsequent developments on the issue. We will tell
Council members now.
The Syrian side responded to the United Nations
request for an alternate itinerary one day after it
received the request — I say this in response to those
who say that Damascus does not respond quickly — and
it covered routes both through Iraq and through Syria,
according to a specific note dated 29 January. Today
is 19 February, and the convoy has not yet been sent,
either from Iraq or from Damascus. United Nations
colleagues have simply remained silent for three weeks
now. What happened to the urgency? Maybe because
it was no longer in the headlines, so the needs of
Al-Hasakah were no longer important. We hope that
this will be reflected in OCHA’s report on alternate
itineraries through Al-Yarubiyah.
20-04312

19/02/2020

The situation in the Middle East

If the oil fields were returned to Government control,
it would also significantly improve the humanitarian
situation in Syria. If some of our colleagues are indeed
so worried about protecting oil fields from terrorist
fighters, they could recommend that these fighters
reach an agreement with Damascus. Otherwise their
presence in Syria is illegal, as it is in other areas, like
in Al-Tanf, where the situation with the Rukban camp
has not yet been resolved, or in the area beyond the
Euphrates, where refugees still suffer in the Al-Hol
camp. This includes visits by officials to territories that
are not under control of the Syrian Government. How
can they visit those territories if terrorists are operating
in those regions?
I would also like to note that on the eastern side
of the Euphrates River there is a growing danger of
fighters, including foreign terrorist fighters, who have
fled prisons. Some of them keep a low profile and
stay in refugee camps; others spread out all over the
region. We express our extreme concern about such
developments.
On our part, we will continue efforts to normalize
the situation in Syria. We believe that it is important to
restore normal relations among the various population
groups of the Syrian Arab Republic, which have been
hurt tremendously by attempts to tear the country
apart. Achieving stability in Syria is possible only
by respecting its sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity.
To our German colleague, who asked a direct
question: we will not stop supporting the legitimate
Government of Syria, which is conducting a legitimate
fight against international terrorists.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): First, let me thank
Special Envoy Pedersen and Under-Secretary Lowcock
for their briefings and their efforts in working for the
sake of the Syrian people.
The main takeaway of the briefings is simple. As it
is now, the Constitutional Committee is dysfunctional.
The Astana format is dysfunctional. Since our last
regular meeting (see S/PV.8715), little progress has
been made towards convening a third session of the
Committee. At the same time, war in Syria continues
with full force.
Instead of dedicating itself to a political process
pursuant to resolution 2254 (2015), the Syrian regime
continues to block any steps towards de-escalation. Let

S/PV. 8727

us not forget that it is not only a rhetorical stalemate.
The empty promises are followed by attacks against
fleeing civilians in Idlib, who now number more
than 900,000. That is why Estonia joins today those
countries that are calling for an immediate nationwide
ceasefire and unimpeded humanitarian access to those
in need across the country.
Unfortunately, the Syrian regime and Russia have
chosen a military solution over a political one. It is a
grave mistake. The so-called liberation of demolished
cities is one thing, but actually rebuilding a country
is a completely different thing. Our Syrian colleagues
in the Chamber need to understand that Russian and
Iranian bullets will not feed their nation. That is also
a reason that almost no people are willing to return
to regime-held areas. Estonia and the members of the
European Union remain fully committed to finding a
lasting and credible political solution to the conflict
in Syria, as defined in the resolution 2254 (2015) and
the 2012 Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex).
That includes an actually working Constitutional
Committee, political transition with free and fair
elections, the release of arbitrarily detained people
and accountability for those who have violated human
rights and committed crimes against humanity.
Accountability mechanisms, such as the General
Assembly’s International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, the
Human Rights Council’s Commission of Inquiry and
the Fact-Finding Missions of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, all play a central role
in collecting evidence and uncovering crimes against
Syrians from both sides. We fully support those efforts
and hope to bring them closer to the Security Council
and its agenda.
However, if the Government in Damascus decides
to ignore the demands of resolution 2254 (2015)
and continues carrying out attacks, then, instead of
recognition, the Syrian Government will face growing
international isolation. The Caesar Act of the United
States, the recently expanded European Union (EU)
sanctions and other similar means underscore the
pariah status of the Syrian regime. The EU already has
on its sanctions lists 277 persons and 71 entities. Those
numbers are destined to grow. The European Union has
made it clear that support for the reconstruction of Syria

20-0431215/22

S/PV.8727

The situation in the Middle East

can come only when a comprehensive and inclusive
political transition is under way, based on the resolution
2254 (2015) and the 2012 Geneva communiqué.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Geir Pedersen, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, and Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, for their
invaluable briefings. We would also like to express our
condolences to the families of the two Oxfam workers
who were killed in Syria.
We follow with concern the military escalation that
is taking place in the north-west of Syria. We regret
that developments are not leading to a path that would
enable a resumption of the political process on a solid
basis and in an environment of calm, stability and
mutual trust. We also express our deep concern over
the humanitarian situation in Idlib and its vicinity as a
result of the recent security developments that have led
to growing casualties among civilians, the displacement
of large numbers of residents and the lack of shelter for
thousands of displaced people after housing capacity
was exhausted under severe weather conditions, leading
to the deaths of a large number of children. We also call
upon all parties to respect their obligations pursuant to
international humanitarian law and international law
in order to guarantee the protection of civilians and
civilian infrastructure.
Priority must urgently be given to de-escalation
through a cease-fire, and parties on the ground must
exhibit maximum self-restraint and avoid any further
escalation in the region. We hope that the ongoing
contacts between Russia and Turkey will contribute
towards that end. We also support the United Nations
involvement in supporting efforts to achieve a full and
lasting cease-fire.
The de-escalation agreements in Idlib, while
important, will remain only temporary unless they
effectively include practical and comprehensive
solution that excludes terrorist organizations, such as
Hayat Tahrir al-Sham and its allies, guarantees an end
to their presence both within and beyond Syria and
maintains the security, independence and sovereignty
of Syria and throughout its territory.
We hope that the Constitutional Committee will
resume a new round of negotiations this month or next
month, as the Special Envoy has previously stated. We
urge the relevant Syrian parties to exercise flexibility,
16/22

19/02/2020

seek common ground and engage constructively in
the efforts of the Committee without preconditions in
such a way as to lay the groundwork for progress in the
political process.
We also reaffirm the importance of the
political process under way to be accompanied by
confidence-building measures and progress in releasing
detainees and hostages so as to uphold political and
social harmony.
The brotherly Syrian people, including the
generation of the current conflict, that continue to
suffer the burden of war and deterioration at all levels
have the right to aspire to a life of security, peace
and tranquillity.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to renew
its support for the Special Envoy and his team. We
would also like to confirm once again that there can
be no military solution to the crisis in Syria. The only
solution is through a cease-fire, progress on the political
track, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015), under
Syrian leadership and ownership along with United
Nations sponsorship. That would happen through an
agreement among Syrian political and civil parties
on a new constitution that guarantees free and fair
elections, under United Nations supervision, to meet the
legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people for freedom
and dignity. Such a constitution would preserve the
unity, independence and territorial integrity of Syria,
and ensure security and stability in the region.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I
wish to thank Mr. Pedersen and Mr. Lowcock for
their briefings. The continued mobilization of the
United Nations as a whole, under the leadership of the
Secretary-General, is crucial.
France calls for a collective surge to bring to an
end the unprecedented humanitarian disaster we are
witnessing in Idlib. The appalling figures Mr. Lowcock
recalled moments ago speak for themselves. What
is unfolding as we speak is by far the most serious
humanitarian crisis since the Syrian conflict began.
Since 1 December, the new offensive by pro-regime
forces has killed nearly 400 civilian victims and
displaced nearly 900,000 people. Babies and children
are dying of cold in internally displaced person camps
on the Turkish border. The threat of bombs from the
regime and its allies is constant. Hospitals, schools and
internally displaced person camps have now become the
target of attack. After the sieges of Aleppo and Ghouta,
20-04312

19/02/2020

The situation in the Middle East

there no longer seems to be any limit to the suffering
the regime is ready to inflict on its own people.
France therefore reiterates its condemnation of the
bombing by the regime and its allies against civilians.
Even war has rules. Those rules are based on essential
principles of humanity: international humanitarian law
and respect for such law are not optional but universal
obligations. That also means guaranteeing safe and
unhindered access for cross-border aid to all people
in need.
The risk of a generalized escalation should not be
taken lightly. Everything must be done to avoid it. Any
further escalation would have disastrous humanitarian
consequences and help strengthen terrorist groups at
the expense of our security.
At this pivotal moment, it is our collective
responsibility to marshal our efforts to achieve a
lasting ceasefire in Idlib. Given the inability of Astana
guarantors to silence the guns, we must succeed in
taking collective action. To do so is the duty of the
Secretary-General and of the Security Council. I call
on the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General to work
to establish a lasting ceasefire in Idlib, in keeping with
the mandate entrusted to him in resolution 2254 (2015).
We call on him to present the Council with specific
proposals in that regard. The members of the Council
with direct influence on the Syrian regime must do
everything they can to immediately put an end to the
massacre under way in Idlib. The fight against terrorism
in no way justifies what is taking place.
Secondly, I wish to register France’s profound
concern at the total deadlock in the political process.
More than four months on since the inception of the
Constitutional Committee, the process is at a total
standstill. It is more urgent than ever that the United
Nations tackle the other subjects at the heart of
resolution 2254 (2015), since the adoption of a new
constitution alone will not put an end to the conflict
in Syria.
France condemns the systematic obstruction
perpetrated by the Syrian regime. The offensive in
Idlib leaves no doubt about its intentions: to take back
control of Syria by force, whatever the cost, with no
negotiation. That is lamentably the blind strategy the
regime has pursued since 2011, resulting in 6 million
refugees and 4 million internally displaced people.

S/PV. 8727

France remains determined to support the Special
Envoy in his efforts and urges him to make it clear to the
Security Council should he find himself no longer able
to advance the work of the Constitutional Committee.
The United Nations must also take full responsibility
for the discussion on detainees, following the extension
of the working group meetings on the subject in Geneva
on 17 and 18 February.
The parameters for a political settlement are well
known, having been defined in resolution 2254 (2015)
and the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex).
It is a question of putting in place a safe and neutral
environment, including through confidence-building
measures, including the release of detainees. It is
also a matter of preparing for the holding of free
and transparent elections, under United Nations
supervision, in which all Syrians can take part, both in
Syria and abroad.
Without a credible political settlement, France’s
position on reconstruction and sanctions will remain
unchanged. That is also the position of the European
Union. Russia and Iran alone will cover the costs of
rebuilding Syria.
France will also continue to mobilize in favour of
the fight against impunity by supporting the United
Nations investigative mechanisms, which is essential
for breaking the cycle of violence and creating the
conditions for a just and lasting peace.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate France’s call
on all those having influence over the authorities in
Damascus — Russia in particular — to work in favour
of a lasting political solution, in conjunction with the
members of the Security Council. The Council must
emerge from its paralysis: this is the essential condition
for effectively combating terrorism, facilitating the
return of refugees and achieving lasting peace in Syria.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Belgium.
First of all, I too would like to offer my condolences
to the families of the humanitarian workers killed in
Syria and pay tribute to their work and their courage.
The situation in Syria, particularly in Idlib, demands
the full attention of this Council. It is deteriorating by
the day and is becoming absolutely critical, as we heard
from both Mr. Pedersen and Mr. Lowcock. Let us be
clear. The humanitarian crisis that is unfolding before

20-0431217/22

S/PV.8727

The situation in the Middle East

our eyes and of which Mr. Lowcock has warned us
for months is above all the result of the political and
military choices of the Syrian Government and its allies.
I would reiterate once again: under no circumstances
can counter-terrorism efforts exempt parties from their
obligations under international humanitarian law. The
protection of civilians is a fundamental obligation of all
parties to the conflict.
The international dimension of the conflict is of
great concern. The risk of miscalculation resulting
from clashes among the various parties to the conflict
has increased in recent weeks. That poses a serious
threat to international peace and security. We call on
all parties to exercise maximum restraint and for an
immediate de-escalation.
As others before me have said, the current situation
on the ground unfortunately demonstrates that the
Astana format is not working. We therefore call on
the United Nations, in particular the Special Envoy,
to spare no effort to achieve an immediate and lasting
ceasefire. Ensuring the protection of civilians in Idlib
is a priority. Without a ceasefire, efforts to further
involve the Constitutional Committee are unlikely to
succeed. How can confidence be built when part of the
population is being indiscriminately bombed?
Without the political commitment of the Syrian
authorities, the cycle of violence will continue and
instability will continue to prevail in the region.
The only path to stability is a credible and inclusive
political solution, facilitated by the United Nations, in
accordance with resolution 2254 (2015).
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The representative of the United Kingdom has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I was mentioned in
the Russian intervention so I would like to respond. I
listen very carefully to what the Russian military say,
including in briefings to the Council. I am waiting for a
Russian military official to answer the question of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights:
how can anyone justify carrying out such indiscriminate
and inhumane attacks?
But I also want to again record something that
I have said here before. The Russian and Syrian
military who violate international humanitarian law
and bomb, or allow the bombing of, hospitals, medical
18/22

19/02/2020

facilities and civilians will one day be held personally
accountable before the law for those actions. That
is a very important point. They will not just be held
collectively responsible. One day they will be held
personally responsible.
The other thing that I wanted to say concerning
reconstruction is to support what the French
representative said. As the United Kingdom, we have
given some $2 billion to Syria in aid since the conflict
began. The reconstruction of Syria will be made
infinitely harder by the wanton destruction that the
Syrian and Russian Governments are carrying out now.
So it will be for Russian taxpayers, possibly assisted by
Chinese taxpayers, but it will be for Russian taxpayers
to put Syria back together again.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Falouh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): For the sixth time in 20 days, the Security
Council is meeting to consider the situation in my
country, the Syrian Arab Republic. For the third time in
20 days, the Council is listening to briefings by Special
Envoy Geir Pedersen and his deputy.
Some well-meaning individuals may believe that
these repeated meetings reflect a commitment to the
interests of Syria and the security and well-being of
its citizens. However, that is not at all the case. While
Member States of the Council are committed to the
principle of international law and to the provisions of
the Charter of the United Nations, which they uphold,
Governments of other Member States unfortunately
seek to repeatedly exploit this platform to offend
my Government and its allies, to make unfounded
allegations and to obstruct the measures taken by
the Syrian Government to fulfil its constitutional
responsibility towards protecting its citizens from
armed terrorist organizations. Some Member States
even seek to turn the Council into a platform for NATO,
thereby covering up acts of aggression that violate the
Charter and threaten international peace and security,
which it is incumbent on the Council to maintain.
My delegation followed very carefully the
briefing by Mr. Pedersen. We stress once again that
the political process must be led and owned by the
Syrians themselves and should be facilitated by the
United Nations without any external interference. We
also stress that all Member States inside and outside
20-04312

19/02/2020

The situation in the Middle East

the Council must respect the sovereignty of the Syrian
Arab Republic, its unity and its territorial integrity.
It is strange that when the Constitutional
Committee has been established and started work,
Western Governments have significantly intensified
their hostile actions and coercive economic measures
against my country. That defies common sense and
logic. It proves what we have often warned against.
Indeed, those Governments are seeking to prolong
the crisis in Syria, prevent its resolution and hinder
the efforts of the Syrian Government and its allies to
combat terrorism.
The Governments of such countries have supported
interference in the region through their agent, namely,
Erdoğan’s regime, which violates international
legitimacy, and encouraged it to undermine the
sovereignty of my country and to launch direct military
aggression against it in an attempt by that regime to
save its armed terrorist groups. That regime and its
operators have worked for years to recruit, finance, arm
and move those terrorist groups from all over the world
to my country through Turkish territory.
Those in the Council who defend the aggression of
the Turkish regime should remember that Idlib province
is a part of the Syrian Arab Republic controlled by
Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham, which is an organization on the
Security Council list of terrorist groups, as well as by
other terrorist entities affiliated with it. They should
also remember that the Astana agreements and the Sochi
de-escalation agreement on Idlib excluded terrorist
organizations from any ceasefire. In those agreements,
the Turkish guarantor undertook to withdraw terrorist
organizations, disarm them and prevent them from
shelling and waging aggression against neighbouring
regions. The agreements in no way allow terrorist
organizations to transform Idlib and the surrounding
areas into their stronghold, or to continue to take
our citizens living there as hostages and use them as
human shields.
The agreements stressed the right of the Syrian
Government and its allies to continue their fight
against terrorism. We will not hesitate to do so until
we liberate every inch of the territories of the Syrian
Arab Republic. What is most important is that Syria
is fighting terrorism and those who sponsor terrorism
on our territory, rather than on the territory of other
States. As the whole world has seen, the suffering of
the Syrian civilians in Idlib is caused by the Turkish

S/PV. 8727

regime, which in recent days has supplied huge amounts
of weapons and munitions to terrorists through the socalled humanitarian crossings. The Turkish regime
has also targeted populated areas and certain military
positions. It has provided military support to terrorists
who use Syrian civilians as human shields in order to
create a situation that enables them to continue to carry
out their terrorist schemes.
We have liberated parts of Aleppo and its rural areas
in the north and south from the terrorists, who had been
occupying them for many years. Just this morning, the
first civilian aircraft took off from Damascus airport
to Aleppo airport, with several journalists on board.
Millions of Syrians took to the streets, particularly
in Aleppo city, to express their joy at being liberated
from the armed terrorists groups that had shelled and
bombed them every single day, resulting in thousands
of martyrs and wounded people. It is strange that some
States in the Council ignore the crimes committed
by terrorists, others sometimes defend them as being
angels. I ask those members to take the angels back to
their own countries.
The Syrian State, the one most concerned about its
own citizens, needs help rather than being besieged and
having its image tarnished. Furthermore, thousands
of Syrians have started to return to their homes in
liberated areas of Aleppo, Idlib and Hama. We call
on all Syrians who had to leave their villages because
of the war against terrorism to return to their homes.
The Syrian State will guarantee their security and
protection and will ensure all the necessary conditions
for a normal life.
Those running terrorist organizations in Turkey
and in certain countries in Western Europe should
compel their terrorists to allow our citizens to go back
to their homes. Syria once again calls upon United
Nations agencies to ensure humanitarian assistance to
our citizens, rather than publishing communiqués and
providing briefings that do not reflect reality. We also
stress that those terrorist organizations are responsible
for all the destruction and the suffering of Syrians in
Idlib and elsewhere.
We once again express our disappointment about
certain United Nations agencies, particularly the
World Health Organization, that do not deliver medical
assistance through the Boukamal crossing point to
Syria. My delegation condemns the fact that the United
States occupation forces and their armed militias have

20-0431219/22

S/PV.8727

The situation in the Middle East

prevented staff of the Ministry of Health from delivering
medication to patients who suffer from leishmaniasis
along the eastern banks of the Euphrates River.
In conclusion, my delegation reiterates its call for
ending the practice of using the Security Council to
further particular agendas, which is contrary to the
Council’s role and its relevant resolutions, which all
stress the need for respecting the sovereignty, unity
and territorial integrity of Syria and its people. We also
reiterate that achieving a solution to the Syrian crisis
requires us to abolish terrorism and put an end to the
practice of Governments supporting terrorism and
stop their flagrant interference and aggression against
my country.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): At the outset, let me
extend our condolences to the families of the OXFAM
humanitarian workers who lost their lives today.
I would also like to thank Special Envoy
Pedersen and Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for
their briefings.
Two weeks ago the Security Council discussed
the growing risk of further escalation and the gravity
of the humanitarian tragedy unfolding in Syria (see
S/PV.8715). Since then, the crisis has only gotten worse.
As the Secretary-General emphasized yesterday, the
rapid deterioration of the humanitarian situation and
the tragic suffering of civilians have reached alarming
levels. Under the pretext of combating terrorism,
a relentless campaign of air strikes and ground
attacks continues.
The Syrian regime continues to violate international
humanitarian law and to indiscriminately target
civilians and civilian infrastructure, emptying out
entire cities and villages. Almost 1 million people have
been displaced over the past two months. Women and
children represent 80 per cent of the newly displaced
people. This is the biggest mass displacement since the
war in Syria began nine years ago.
Yesterday UNICEF reported that the last two
hospitals operating in the western part of Aleppo were
hit. One of them was a maternity hospital and the other
a children’s hospital. Four more hospitals were attacked
in the past 24 hours. This is unacceptable. The massmurderer in Damascus has killed more than 2,000
20/22

19/02/2020

civilians in Idlib since December 2019. Those actions
constitute war crimes and crimes against humanity.
People in Idlib are caught between violence, winter
conditions and food scarcity. The lack of adequate
shelter has resulted in hundreds of thousands of people
living in the open air in freezing temperatures and
sleeping on the streets with no cover. Existing camps
and settlements are insufficient. Shelter is critically
needed, along with new camps to address new waves of
displacement. We are working with the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to increase the
capacity of the cross-border mechanism. We are also
working with Germany to alleviate the need for shelter
in Idlib and to support the most vulnerable.
This is a major humanitarian tragedy, with serious
repercussions beyond Syria. The people of Syria feel
abandoned by the world. They expect the international
community to help them. They expect the Security
Council to raise its voice. The message that must come
out of this meeting is clear: the Syrian regime must stop
killing its own people. This is a test for the Security
Council. This is a test of our humanity. We cannot fail.
The regime also resumed its deliberate attacks on
Turkish forces. Five additional Turkish soldiers were
deliberately targeted last week and lost their lives. The
Turkish armed forces immediately retaliated in selfdefence. We will continue to respond by all necessary
means. As President Erdoğan announced, Turkey will
hit all targets that pose an immediate threat. We will
not withdraw our forces, and we will not abandon our
observation posts. It is the regime that should withdraw
from its current positions by the end of this month. I
would like to underline once again that Turkish forces
are in Idlib to stabilize the situation and preserve the
de-escalation zone status of the province. Our military
presence and reinforcements are fully in line with the
Sochi memorandum of September 2018.
The only way out of the biggest humanitarian
horror story of the twenty-first century is a lasting
ceasefire. We need, first, an immediate cessation of
hostilities; secondly, the full implementation of Sochi
memorandum on Idlib; and, thirdly, a return to the
status quo ante. That is the main message we have
been conveying to Russia at all levels, including, most
recently, in a series of inter-agency meetings in Ankara
and Moscow.
In our talks, Turkey reaffirmed its commitment
to ensuring the regime’s withdrawal to the Sochi
20-04312

19/02/2020

The situation in the Middle East

memorandum line. We emphasized our preparedness
to enforce that withdrawal through military means if
necessary. We stressed the need to de-escalate violence,
prevent violations and avoid further worsening of the
grave humanitarian situation. We will continue our
contacts with Russia, as guarantor of the regime, to
make sure that regime acts in compliance with existing
frameworks on Idlib.
Today’s meeting is meant to be about the political
situation in Syria. The fate of Idlib will also determine
the prospects for a real political solution. It has been
over four years since the Security Council unanimously
adopted resolution 2254 (2015), which sets out a clear
road map for a political solution to the Syrian conflict.
The establishment of the Constitutional Committee
has been the most concrete step taken so far towards
implementation of that road map. It took us over two
years to establish the Committee because the regime
was not interested in a political solution. Now the
regime is reverting to its usual tactics for stalling the
Committee’s work.
The tyrant in Damascus is aspiring to achieve a
Syria without people, a Syria without Syrians. He wants
to hold on to power with total disregard for human life.
We will not let that happen. Today Turkey provides care
and protection to more than 9 million Syrians, both in
Turkey and Syria. Let me underline — that is more than
the population of the so-called regime-controlled areas.
And here we are, in this Chamber again, listening
to the previous speaker’s delusional accusations.
I will again repeat that I will not honour him with a
response, since I do not consider him as my legitimate
counterpart. His regime has the blood of innocent
people on its hands and lost its legitimacy a long time
ago. His mere presence in the Council Chamber is an
assault on the millions of Syrians who have suffered
countless crimes at the hands of the regime.
This tragedy will not end before the people of
Syria have a legitimate Government that comes to
power through elections to be held in accordance with
resolution 2254 (2015) and which truly represents their
will and enjoys their full consent. Until then, Turkey
will continue to stand by the democratic aspirations
of the Syrian people and safeguard the protection of
civilians in Idlib and beyond.
Every passing day, we put vulnerable Syrian
people at the mercy of this murderous regime. Now is

S/PV. 8727

the time to act. The international community has the
responsibility to protect.
The President (spoke in French): The representative
of the Syrian Arab Republic has asked for the floor to
make a further statement. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Falouh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I begin by recalling a legal rule: someone
who has nothing to give cannot give it. How, then,
can the representative of the terrorist Erdoğan
regime — a murderous, criminal, aggressive and looting
regime — claim that they care about the interests of the
Syrian people?
The Erdoğan regime is a terrorist one, recognized
by the United Nations as such. Tens of thousands of
foreign terrorist fighters have entered Syria through
Turkish territories from more than 101 States. The
United Nations has said that tens of thousands of
them came from more than 100 States Members.
This is a murderous regime that, along with its agents
in Syria, namely, terrorist groups and Hayat Tahrir
Al-Sham — Jabhat Al-Nusra — has committed the
most heinous crimes against Syrians. It is an aggressive
regime that has attacked and invaded Syrian territories.
It is a regime that steals, having looted factories in
Aleppo with the help of its terrorist groups and pillaged
the natural resources of Syria.
I would like to conclude by an Arab proverb, which
says that he who is not ashamed can do whatever he
wants. This applies to the Erdoğan regime and its
representative — this terrorist, murderous, aggressive
and looting regime.
The President (spoke in French): The representative
of Turkey has asked for the floor to make a further
statement. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): I will be very short.
Again, I will emphasize that the previous speaker does
not represent Syrians. He represents only a very bloody
regime that is waging a war against its own people.
They do not deserve to be seated behind the Syrian
name plate in this Chamber. Their continued presence
behind the name plate is just a political aberration. It
does not make them the legitimate representatives of
the Syrian people. As I said, more Syrians are under
our care than under theirs.
The President (spoke in French): The representative
of the Syrian Arab Republic has asked for the floor to
make a further statement. I now give him the floor.

20-0431221/22

S/PV.8727

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Falouh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I take the floor to say that the delegation
of the Syrian Arab Republic does not acquire its
legitimacy from a terrorist, murderous, criminal and
aggressive regime.
The President (spoke in French): The representative
of Turkey has asked for the floor to make a further
statement. I would like this exchange to end after this
statement. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): Yes, Mr. President, but I
did not start this exchange, so I will end when they end.

22/22

19/02/2020

I will just say that I still regret that the previous
speaker can exploit his presence in the Chamber by
taking the floor and repeating all the delusions he has
been repeating for the past nine years in the Security
Council. I will not respond to him.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
further speakers inscribed on the list. I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

20-04312
