OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIFTH

YEAR

2225”

MEETING:

-

4 JUNE 1980

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2225)

... .. .. .. ... ... .. .. ... .. ... ... .. ... ..

1

.... ... .. ... .. .. .... .. .. .. ..

1

Expression of thanks to the retiring President

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*..............................

1

The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 29 May 1980 from the Charge d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Morocco to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/13969) . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*.........................

1

SjPV.2225

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2225th MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 4 June 1980, at 3.30 p.m.
President:

Mr. Ole ALGARD (Norway).

Presenf:
The representatives of the following
States: Bangladesh, China, France, German Democratic Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway,
Philippines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Zambia.
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2225)

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 29 May 1980 from the Charge
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of.
Morocco to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/13969)
The meeting

was called to order at 4 p.m.

Expression of thanks to the retiring

President

1. The PRESIDENT: As this is the first meeting of
the Security Council in the month of June, I should
like, on behalf of the Council, to express to Mr. IdC
Oumarou, representative of the Niger, appreciation of
his services as President of the Council for the month
of May. I should like to pay a tribute to him for the
diplomatic skill, tact and courtesy with which he guided
our work last month.
Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 29 May 1980 from the Charg6 d’affafres a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Morocco to
the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Sizcurity Council (S/13969)

vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Clark (Nigeria), Chairman of the Special Committee
against
Apartheid, took a place at the Council table, and
Mr. Loho (Mozambique)
took the place reserved for
him at the side of the Council chamber.

3. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform members of the Council that I have received a letter dated
4 June 1980 from the representatives of the Niger,
Tunisia and Zambia [S/13981], which reads as
foilows:
“We have the honour to request that the Security
Council extend invitations under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Johnstone
Makatini, representative of the African National
Congress of South Africa and to Mr. Henry Isaacs,
representative of the Pan Africanist Congress of
Azania, to participate in the Council’s consideration
of the item entitled ‘The question of South Africa’.”
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council
agrees to grant this request.
It was so decided.

4. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council is
meeting today in response to a letter dated 29 May
1980 from the Chargi d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Morocco addressed to the President of the
Security Council [S/13969].
5. The first speaker is the representative of Mozambique, who wishes to make a statement in his capacity
as’ Chairman for the month of June of the Group of
African States at the United Nations. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

6. Mr. LOB0 (Mozambique): Mr. President, on
2. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform the behalf of the Group of African States, I should like to
members of the Council that I have received letters congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
froni the representatives of Mozambique and Nigeria
of the Council for the ‘month of June. My Group is
in which they request to- be invited to participate in quite sure that under your wise leadership and with
the discussion of the item on the agenda. In accord- the good will and honest contribution of your colance with the usual practice, I propose, with the leagues, the Council will be able to respond decisively
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives - and. without ambiguity to the explosive situation in
to participate in the discussion without the right to South Africa.

7. On behalf of the Group, I should like to take this
opportunity to congratulate and pay a tribute to a
member of the African family who is seated beside
you, Mr. Ide Oumarou, representative of the Niger,
for the clarity and wisdom with which he guided the
work of the Council during the month of May.

of South Africa is neither new nor of an exceptional
nature. It is as if the right arm helped the left arm,
a part of the same body. Although the rest of the body
may appear to be healthy, we cannot afford to ignore
the terrible pain of an aching foot even though it is at
the extremity of the body. When the foot is sore, the
entire body must accompany the sore foot to the
hospital. The body I refer to is Africa, and we as the
body bring our sore foot to the Council in search of
an immediate and adequate solution.

8. The African Group requested the calling of an
emergency meeting of the Council because there is an
alarming and explosive situation developing in a part of
our continent-specifically,
in South Africa. The
cause of this situation, which since the beginning of
this year has been progressively deteriorating, is we!!
known to you, Mr. President, to each and every one
of your colleagues and especially to us Africans. It
is a thorn in our side, with which we have been forced
to live for the last three decades, namely, apartheid,
the policy of the racist minority in South Africa. It
is true that it seems as if everybody knows what is
going on in South Africa, but from the way the wind
has been blowing, recently nobody can tell what kind
of storm is brewing or what its magnitude will be. The
presentiment we have is that something very explosive
will result from the prevailing situation in South
Africa if appropriate steps are not taken in time, and
that time is now. To speak of the explosive situation
that prevails today in South Africa is to speak of the
misery, indiscriminate arrests, human degradation,
humiliation, oppression and repression imposed daily
upon the people of South Africa by the inhumane
policies of upartheid.

13. At the present moment, the situation in Africa
is such that now, more decisively than ever before, the
South African people have risen up against the
minority and racist regime of South Africa because
they have become aware of the fact that the present
conditions in South Africa are more favourable than
ever to their cause. The victory of the people of
Zimbabwe extended the liberated zone in southern
Africa into the corridors of apartheid and came to
reinforce the correlation of forces in favour of liberty,
peace, justice and democracy.
14. At this stage, on behalf of the African Group,
I wish to salute the independence of Zimbabwe,
a victory for a!! Africa and for a!! peace-loving peopies of the world. When the people of Zimbabwe and
others in the region achieved their glorious victory
and historic independence, the people of Africa in
genera! and of southern Africa in particular became
another example of courage to reactivate the struggle
against any type of oppression. The independence of
Zimbabwe added fuel to the fire already burning
strongly within the struggles for freedom and dignity
waged by others in southern Africa, namely, the
Namibian and South African peoples.

9. After their numerous attempts to bring about
change through peaceful means and after being confronted by such violence and brutality, the people of
South Africa are left with no other choice than that
which has been forced upon them. They are being
forced to resort to other means of attaining their
legitimate rights as human beings, which will enable
them completely to destroy the deplorable policies of

IS. We fee! that the South African Government
should have !eamt a lesson from what has happened
in Zimbabwe and should look at Zimbabwe’s independence as another piece of evidence in the case
which proves that it has never been possible to stop
the people from achieving their legitimate place in
society as human beings.

apartheid.

10. The recent boycotts of classes by students
demanding an end to discrimination in schools are not
isolated acts, as were the peaceful demonstrations that
took place in Sharpeviile in 1960, in Soweto in 1976
and in other instances throughout South Africa’s
history. Although a!! those protests were peaceful
ones, they were a!! met by the racist police with
firearms<onfrontations
that inevitably resulted in
the murder of scores of defenceless civilians and the
assassination of young schoolchildren.

16. The policies of apartheid and of territorial
fragmentation through the bantustanization of South
African territory constitute a gigantic assault on the
most elementary rights, the liberty and the human
dignity of the people of South Africa.
17. Everybody in the world agrees that apartheid
is a crime against humanity, so Africa would like to
see the illegal minority racist regime of South Africa
strongly condemned for its criminal policies and
actions. The international community can secure the
elimination of apartheid by giving full support to the
national liberation movement of South Africa, the
authentic representative of the South African people,
in its just struggle for freedom.

ii. The long struggle of the people of South Africa
for dignity and human respect deserves the admiration
of us a!! and demands our concrete and consistent
support, so that the degrading system of apartheid
may be eliminated once and for a!!.
12. As the Council knows only too we!!, Africa totally
supports the struggle of the people of South Africa for
their human dignity. Africa’s stand on the question

18. The international community can secure the
elimination of tension in Africa by discouraging any
2

military or nuclear collaboration with South Africa,
since it constitutes a threat to international peace and
security.

people, which, on the day of my arrival in Oslo,
were celebrating the thirty-fifth anniversary of their
liberation from Nazi occupation, I see every reason
to hope that this meeting will bring solace to the victims of the upcrrthcid system in South Africa.

19. Recently, we have had many examples of the fact
that the South African rt?gime has not only been leading
a massive and hostile campaign against the neighbouring countries but also systematically violating
their airspace and territory in a deliberate effort to
provoke an armed confrontation with its defence
forces.

27. After the landmark student uprising in Soweto
in June 1976, the racist regime in South Africa established an official Commission of Inquiry, under the
chairmanship of Mr. Justice Cillie, Chief Judge of the
Transvaal, to investigate its causesand circumstances.
Both the evidence before it and the Commission’s
own conclusions revealed that the underlying discontent of the 19 million Africans in South Africa ran
very deep and that the source of their problems were
the upartheid policies, laws and practices of the
Government of South Africa.

20. Africa has never indiscriminately incited armed
struggle in any decolonization process. It has been the
very history of each individual colonial Power that has
caused the people to revolt. In this case, it is South
Africa itself which is causing the publicized unrest
and uprisings within the country.

28. Earlier on after the Rivonia trial in 1964, the
then Archbishop of Canterbury, A. M. Ramsey, said:

21. The international community can prevent the
situation in South Africa from exploding by persuading
the racists to face the. realities of the continent. South
Africa should be made to accept that what is happening
is the result of its own policy--apartheid. South
Africa should not be allowed to export its internal
conflicts to the neighbouring countries.

“The men were guilty of sabotage and other
offences against the law as it exists, but their actions
were the outcome of conscience, and wherever in
the world there is respect for conscience and hatred
of the policy ofuparrhid
there will be understanding
of Mr. Mandela’s words that he acted from ‘a calm
and sober assessment of the situation after many
years of oppression and tyranny of my people by
the Whites’. If he is guilty before the existing law,
the guilt before heaven belongs to the policy which
the law is designed to enforce. The ideal and practice
of apartheid is a denial of God’s law of the relation
of man to man as, irrespective of colour, created in
the image of God.“’

22. In view of the deplorable situation in South
Africa,. we think that it is time for appropriate measures to be taken by the Security Council to end all the
sufferings of the South African people. We consider
the present situation intolerable. The repression and
terror must cease. The massive and indiscriminate
detentions must end, and all the political prisoners,
including Nelson Mandela, must be freed.
23. For all diehard racist minority cliques in South
Africa, the entire continent of Africa has a short and
infallible message: whether or not they agree, change
will come in their lifetime as it did to Ian Smith.

29. The painful part of the South African tragedy is
that the signals and signs of its impending doom have
always been known to the Government of that country.
But its responses have always been equally crude,
heavy-handed, negative and unimaginative. After
the Sharpeville massacre of 21 March 1960, when the
South African police cold-bloodedly killed 69 Africans
and wounded some 186 others engaged in a peaceful
demonstration against the pass laws, the Government
quickly proceeded to ban all democratic forms of
protest by the African population; all meetings of
Africans were prohibited. The national liberation
movement, comprising the African National Congress
(ANC) and the Pan Africanist Congress of Azania
(PAC), was banned. A state of national emergency
was declared. More than 11,000 people, including
leaders of ANC and PAC, were detained, banished or
imprisoned. Then followed a succession of iniquitous
security laws. The General Laws Amendment Act
of 1961literally stripped the African population, which
makes up 75 per cent of the Republic’s population,
of their individual rights and liberties. The Terrorism Act of 1967, providing for the indefinite detention of prisoners, completed the picture of the
Draconian regulations which legitimized political
violence in South Africa.

24. To conclude: we think that it is the duty of the
Council to follow closely the evolution of events in
South Africa.
25. The PRESIDENT: I call now on the representative of Nigeria, who- will be speaking also as the
Chairman of the Special Committee against Apanheid.
26. Mr. CLARK (Nigeria): May I offer you, Mr. President, my warmest congratulations on your assumption of the high ofice of President of the Security
Council. I also sincerely want to thank you and the
other members of the Council for giving me this opportunity to participate in the present debate on the
pitiful situation in South Africa. Having just returned
from your idyllic country with its beautiful, heroic
people and sensitive understanding of the tremendous tragedy that is unfolding in South Africa, I think
it of capital importance that this meeting should be
taking place under your able leadership. Given your
own personal qualities of statesmanship and unwavering commitment to the principles of liberty,
justice and democracy, so characteristic of your
3

30. After the Soweto uprising, in which some
1,000 African schoolchildren and civilians were killed
and thousands of others injured by the South African
police, the reaction of the South African Government
was immediate and predictable. That Government
instituted a massive security clamp-down. The police
detained some 2,430 Africans under various security
laws. The strength of the police force was increased
to roughly 35,000, with a corresponding increase of
the police reserve to 18,000. Security laws were further
tightened. Bannings and detention of Africans became
a widespread daily occurrence. The South African
Government also introduced its doctrine of “total
national strategy”, which paved the way for its many
aggressive attacks against the front-line States, armed
interference in the internal affairs of the then British
Crown Colony of Southern Rhodesia, the illegal
occupation of Namibia and the phenomenal increase
in its defence spending from 300 million, rand in the
early 1970s to over 2,000 million rand by 1979.

Africa in defence of human dignity and decency?
Must we continue to remain silent when the South
African Minister of Police, Mr. Le Grange, says that
the African schooIchi!dren must accept their role of
semi-slavery, for which the South African educational
system fits them, or die?
33. Yesterday we heard of the well co-ordinated
attacks two days ago on three major South African oil
installations by supporters of ANC. That incident
cannot but be a most serious setback for the Govemment of South Africa, since. it had earlier placed all
major installations, including oil-storage depots, dams,
power stations, and so on, under wartime security
conditions. It should undermine that Government’s
overbearing confidence in itself. But the Council
should be more interested in the message which the
incident has for the future of the white minority rule
and regime of oppression in South Africa.
34. The entire edifice of apartheid is tottering. It is
crumb!ing not only from the uprising of the schoolchildren. The political consciousness of the average
black South African is rising. He is revolting against
a system under which the white 16 per cent of the
population wields all the powers of the State, enjoys
all the wealth of the country and vows never to give
equality orjustice to its 21 million compatriots who are
regarded as black Africans. The average black South
African is questioning why he should be content to
lead his life of semi-imprisonment in work hostels,
away from his wife and family, a constant victim of
the pass laws which circumscribe his entire life. In
1979, according to official South African statistics,
some 120,000 Africans were arrested under the pass
laws. In other words, some I2 Africans just have to
be arrested evem hour of the. day because those. laws
regulate their very movement to or from work or play,
and every condition of their domicile.

31. In South Africa, Africans are not allowed to
protest against any ill treatment suffered at the hands
of the Government; they are expected only to die in
silence. But the African schoolchildren have refused to
die in silence. In the past six weeks, African schoolchildren aged 7 to 18 have abandoned classes in open
protest against their racially segregated and inferior
education, which denies them free and progressive
schooling fit for full-fledged citizens and which equips
them only to serve their white compatriots. They are
being attacked by the South African police and army
with automatic weapons. Many of those children have
been killed; others have been maimed. But those
children are resisting, fighting back with stones and
often with bare hands against the South African armed
forces, which are equipped with the most sophisticated
arms and weapons that Western technology can
devise.

35. The response to Percy Qoboza’s appeal for the
release of Nelson Mandela and other political prisoners has been overwhelming. it is not an appeal
based onhumanitarian considerations alone., although
it is.true that-many of the political prisoners have been
in Robben Island for over 16 years. But the appeal
has won tremendous support from all thinking men in
South Africa across racial lines because political
change just has to come. A new society hasto be born
in South Africa. There cannot be liberation without a
liberation movement and liberation movements need
their leaders. The ANC and PAC movements may be
banned in South Africa, but. their truth and all they
represent are marching on inside South Africa. I want
to call upon the Council to support energetically the
campaign to free Mandela and the other political
prisoners. Through him and other men bie him,
South Africa may be saved before it is too late.

32. I hope and, indeed, expect that the Security
Council will speak out and condemn in clear, specific
.terms the current brutalities being committed against
schoolchildren by the South African authorities.
Otherwise, people of conscience everywhere are
bound to ask how international and; indeed, human
relations have become so brutalized that no Govemment or even the Council now really cares about
children being murdered or maimed as part of.official
policy. Why was the murder of African children by
the former Emperor Bokassa so repugnant and universally condemned, but not the murder of African
children by the whites in South Africa? Must the
Security Council continue to remain silent while
children are defending with their bare hands in the
streets of Bloemfontein, Cape Town and Durban the
universal truths of freedom, justice, liberty and human
dignity against a pitiless war machine) fitted with
nuclear weapons, rockets and other of the most
modem weapons? I repeat that more than 600 African
schoolchildren were killed in 1976 during a similar
protest. How many more do we want to die in South

36. The mood in South Africa is dangerous. The pass
laws are being tightened. The Africans are finding
political protests murderous. Young white South
4

Africans are being pressed into national military service. Young black men are taking to the streets to
boycott the schools. There are increasing reports of
guerrilla activities. White citizens, forgetting the
lessons of Zimbabwe, are arming themselves. Where
will all this lead? Some 15,000 to 20,000 white South
Africans emigrate every year, out of fear. They are
mainly professionals: doctors, lawyers, engineers,
architects.and teachers. Into South Africa goes excess
semi-skilled labour from Europe, which adds to the
bitterness and frustration of the 21 million South
Africans, who cannot be trained and who are denied
employment because of the new white immigrants.
I have asked the International Labour Organisation to
do something about this terrible situation and to assist
in preventing further emigration to South Africa from
Europe and America.

who see unspeakable catastrophe ahead for South
Africa and counsel restraint and change.
Apurthd
cannot be reformed. It must be
abolished. In the last five years or so, when the
Western mass media, bamboozled by South Africa’s
$21 million effort to win friends and influence people
in the West, were reporting the prosperity of South
Africa with the rise of gold prices, or the misleading
statistics on improvement of black wages, the South
African Government was passing on the burdens of
an economic crisis to the blacks. Black unemployment
has risen to an estimated 2 million in the townships.
There has been no end to racial discrimination, nor
any change in the philosophy ofapurzhd.
The student
revolt, therefore, coincides with trade-union struggles
which are brutally repressed; with bus boycotts
against rises in fares; with protests against rises in
rents in African townships, and so on.

40.

37. In 1976, Hector Peterson, a 13-year-old African
schoolboy was the first martyr of Soweto. I fear that
a second Soweto is in the making. Already, Bernard
Fortuin, a 14-year-old “Coloured”
boy, whose
relatives may be sitting in the inner recesses of the
Pretoria Government or in the Broederbond-because,
ironically, he is descended directly from the Boershas become the martyr of the new student revolt of
May 1980. The youth in South Africa have lost their
fear of the police’s batons or bullets. The Government
has no sense of history. It has not kamed the lessons
of the wars of national liberation of Algeria, of Angola,
of Guinea-Bissau, of Kenya, of Mozambique and,
recently, of Zimbabwe: that repression only hardens
resistance and swells the ranks of freedom fighters;
that there are no insurmountable barriers to the
expansion of the frontiers of African emancipation;
that there is an inevitability in the African peoples’
will to be free, a will now much stronger than the
British Maxim guns at Fashoda.

41. There is a maior difference between 1976 and
1980. The intervening period has seen a great advance
in the activities of freedom fighters, mainly the children
of Soweto. The national liberation movement, which
has long been wedded to non-violence, has decided
that the people cannot allow the tigime to kill with
impunity. There have been many attacks on police
stations and other targets, culminating in the attack on
the SASOL oil-storage facilities on 2 June. The world
ignored clear signals before the tragedies of Sharpeville and Soweto, and then adopted resolutions in the
United Nations which proved toothless. The world
cannot afford to ignore the clear warnings at this time,
because the prospects are even more grim and more
serious.
42. After Zimbabwe, South Africa was confronted
with an urgent and inescapable choice: peaceful
progress to majority rule and reconciliation, or tragic
conflict. Western leaders have often recognized the
danger of a catastrophe in South Africa and in southern
Africa, but have hesitated to take effective action to
avert it. In 1977, it may be recalled, President Jimmy
Carter of the United States warned at the United
Nations that a gathering racial storm threatened
southern Africa. He pledged that the United States
would work to help attain majority rule in the region
by peaceful means.

38. Bishop Desmond Tutu, Secretary-General of the
South African Council of Churches, was arrested
along with 52 other black and white leading churchmen
on 26 May 1980 because they were demonstrating
peacefully in support of the schoolchildren of South
Africa. He and his wife will appear for trial on 1 July,
the twenty-fifth anniversary of their wedding. His passport was withdrawn by the South African authorities
last Marchlecause he refused to withdraw a statement which he had made while on a visit to Denmark
that importation of coal by Danish authorities was
contributing to the survival of the system of apartheid
in his country. We all know what the outcome of his
appearance before a South African kangaroo court
will be. But he is at peace with himself. As he said,
“One has to arrive at a day when one decides whether
to obey man or God.”

43. The situation in South Africa now presents a
challenge crying out for a solution. The United Nations
has repeatedly proclaimed the way to a peaceful
solution. It may be recalled that as early as December
1963 the Security Council requested the SecretaryGenera1 to establish a group of experts
“to examine methods of resolvinrz the oresent
situation in South Africa through fulL peaceful and
orderly application of human rights and fundamental
freedoms to all inhabitants of the territory as a
whole, regardless of race, colour or creed” [resolu-

39. Prime Minister P. W. Botha of South Africa has
threatened to use maximum force to smother the
current ferment in South Africa. Naturally, he
means the intensification of cruel repression against
the schoolchildren, churchmen and other civic leaders

rim
5

182 (1963)].

The group of experts, led by Mrs. Alva Myrdal of
Sweden, proposed a genuine national convention fully
representative of all the people of South Africa, and
the release of all the political prisoners as an indispensable prerequisite for such a convention. It also
expressed the view that if South Africa rejected the
proposal-as it did in 1964the Council “would be
left with no effective peaceful means for assisting to
resolve the situation, except to apply economic sanctions” [S/5658 of 20 April 1964, annex, para. 1211.
44. It is quite clear that a peaceful solution can be
attained only by effective international action. But the
Western Powers have constantly resisted such action.
The only concrete measure adopted by the Security
Council was a mandatory arms embargo against South
Africa i-r 1977. But it is alarming to find that countries
firmly committed to the embargo have not adopted
effective legislative and other measures-thereby
facilitating gun-running by corporations and individuals in their respective countries.

the United States or the Fluor Corporation of California will not continue to contribute to the murder of
little children in South Africa in the interest of earning
obscene profits.
49. The Council must also realize that an oil embargo is the inverse side of the coin of arms embargo.
Consequently, it should impose an oil embargo against
South Africa. In the meantime, it must take adequate
measures to stop illegal transport of oil from OPEC
countries to South Africa to fuel the military and police
vehicles which are used for the murder of children
and aggression against neighbouring States. In anticipation of the Council’s decision. Nigeria will confiscate any ship, tanker or aircraft within its territorial
waters or airspace found to be violating the OPEC
oil embargo against South Africa. The crews of such
ships, tankers or aircraft will be penalized mercilessly
by the Nigerian authorities when caught.
50. Lastly, the Council must take action in response
to repeated urgings of the General Assembly for an end
to new investments in and trade with South Africa.

45. The members of the Organization of Petroleum
Exporting Countries (OPEC) and other major oilproducing countries-notably Mexico and, of course,
Mr. President, your own great country, Norwayhave all decided on an oil embargo against South
Africa. But tankers--even from countries voting for
General Assembly resolutions on an oil embargo-are
clandestinely supplying oil to South Africa. South
Africa has been enabled to acquire nuclear capability.
One wonders whether there is a gigantic conspiracy to
shore up the Pretoria regime for a war against Africa.

51. Time is running out. For those who live on profits
and dividends from. their investments in: the cheap
African labour and abundant natural. resources of
South Africa, time for the immediate abolition of the
apartheid
system may not be a critical factor. But
their investments and capital will be among the first
casualties of the liberation war, the beginnings of
which we are now witnessing. Those Governments
which count on South African contributions to their
war plans and strategic considerations may fail to see
that they have already lost any war in which only
South Africa is their ally in the continent of Africa.

46. The Council must express revulsion at the killing
of children in South Africa and call on world public
opinion to exert its influence. But that hardly meets
the responsibilities of the Council under the Charter.

52. Perhaps this is the point at which to recall that
Mr. Hendrik Verwoerd, who was a major intellectual
architect of the apartheid doctrine of South Africa,
had his post-graduate education in Hitler’s Germany.
Vorster and Botha were his proteges. FromHitler they
learned how God himself anointed the whites of South
Africa as a master race. From Goebbels they learned
the technique of making the obscene appear credible.

47. The Council must demand the immediate release
of Nelson Mandela and all political prisoners; it must
call for an end to all repression; it must call for the
full participation of the genuine leaders of the
oppressed people in determining the future of South
Africa, and the establishment of a democratic govemment based on majority rule; it must call on all States
to exert all their influence towards that end; it must
call on all States to implement strictly the arms
embargo against South Africa, and to stop all nuclear
collaboration with that regime.

53. South Africa continues to occupy Namibia in
flagrant defiance of the United Nations and the International Court of Justice. Yet, in its negotiations-with
the Secretary-General and the five Western countries,
the South African Government professes that it has a
sacred duty to protect the Namibian people- against
the.South West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO)
and the rest of mankind. The South African Government proceeds to export apartheid to Namibia and
calls it homeland administration. South Africa lures
Western countries into purchasing uranium from
Namibia and terms this illegal transaction a contribution to Western security. South Africa arrests
SWAP0 freedom fighters in the name of saving
South Africa from communism..

48. The Council must ask the Committee established
under resolution 421(1977) to make proposals urgently
for the reinforcement and effective monitoring of the
arms embargo, including the banning of all arms
exports from South Africa, the ending of all licences
for the manufacture of arms in South Africa, the
prohibition of all sales of equipment to the South
African military and police and the prohibition of the
export of all dual-purpose equipment, such as radar,
to South Africa. Thus companies like Plessey of the
United Kingdom, the Space Research Corporation of
6

I

54. In a recent letter to the Secretary-General
[S/13935], the racist regime of South Africa now makes
its stalling tactics more ludicrous. For instance, it has
introduced novel anomalies into the negotiations concerning the concept of the demilitarized zone which the
late President Neto of Angola had proposed to break
the deadlock over the Security Council plan for
Namibia. South Africa wants to make acceptance of
the plan conditional on the United Nations treating
with the traitorous band of UNITA [Nurional Union
for the Total Independence
of Angola], and on the
Secretary-General disavowing the resolutions of the
United Nations regarding the status and the recognition of SWAPG. I think the time has come for the
world community to stop playing games with South
Africa over Namibia.

59. A rising tide of black resistance in South Africa,
political developments in the African subcontinent,
where in less than a decade there have emerged three
independent African States governed by nationalists
who had taken up arms to struggle against and ultimately defeat colonialism-Angola, Mozambique and
Zimbabwe, all expressing themselves in favour of
socialist models of development-and mounting international pressure have left the white minority in South
Africa beleaguered. International pressure has been
precipitated not only by the stubborn refusal of the
white minority to give blacks, who outnumber whites
by almost six to one, a share in the decision-making
process in the country but also by the intransigence of
that minority on the question of Namibia, the Territory in which it is in illegal occupation.

55. It must be recalled that the Sharpeville uprising
took place in 1960. Although it was a spontaneous
uprising against the pass laws, its organic links with
the attainment of independence by some 20 African
countries in that year cannot be easily dismissed.
Then came Soweto in 1976. Again, it was soon after
the defeat of Portuguese colonialism in Angola and
Mozambique. Now comes the independence of
Zimbabwe. Its impact on the internal situation in
South Africa has been direct, immediate and predictable. I hope that the Council will justify the
trust we all repose in it for the maintenance of international peace and security by pointing a new direction
for change and majority rule in South Africa, for the
Council’s credibility is at stake.

60. It has long been recognized that in South Africa
internal, regional and international factors are interwoven. In 1960, for example, the black majority
responded to the Positive Action Campaign launched
by PAC and in March thousands of blacks offered
themselves up for arrest at police stations in various
parts of the country for having defied the iniquitous
pass laws, under which all Africans above the age of
16 years have to carry on their persons at all times a
document known as a “pass”. Failure to produce such
a “pass” on demand results in immediate arrest.
Racist police responded to this non-violent protest by
killing 69 African men, women and children and
wounding 186.

56. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is Mr. Henry
Isaacs, to whom the Council has extended an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

61. The Sharpeville massacre had profound and farreaching consequences for the South African regime.
First, the white establishment suffered an acute “crisis
of confidence”. The pass laws were temporarily
suspended, a white businessman, David Pratt, made an
attempt on the life of the then Prime Minister,
Mr. Verwoerd; Paul Sauer, who acted as Prime
Minister for the wounded Verwoerd, adopted a conciliatory attitude in a public address when he suggested
that an old order had passed away. Secondly, in so far
as blacks were concerned, the brutal reaction of the
South African police demonstrated the futility of
non-violence as a strategy for political and social
change. Thereafter, PAC embarked upon a course of
armed struggle as the principal form of struggle for the
seizure of political power. Thirdly, South Africa
came under sustained criticism and condemnation at
the United Nations and other international forums.
One commentator writes:

57. Mr. ISAACS: Mr. President, on behalf of the
Pan Africanist Congress, I wish to register our con.gratulations to you on your assumption of the high
office of President of the Security Council. We also
wish to express our gratitude for this invitation to
participate in the deliberations which focus upon the
present situation in South Africa.
58. The accession to power of a popularly elected
Government in Zimbabwe after the electoral success
of the Zimbabwe African National Union, under the
leadership of Robert Mugabe, has knocked away a
further pillar of white supremacy in southern Africa,
leaving South Africa as the last bastion of white
minority domination in Africa. Commenting on the
independence of Zimbabwe one magazine observed:

“In some ways, the Sharpeville massacre seemed
to have more profound effects beyond the country’s
borders than in South Africa itself. Already the
target of European and American liberal criticism
and of the Afro-Asian bloc, on account of its policy
of apartheid, the South African Government now
found itself even more unpopular. Following
Sharpeville, there were repercussions on the stock
exchanges of the world, and for a time overseas
investments in South Africa practically ceased.**

“The process which started in the 1960s with
Britain’s wholesale withdrawal from its African
co!onies and accelerated in the 1970s with the
collapse of Portugal’s African empire was at last
complete. South Africa’s 4.5 million whites now
stand alone as the last bastion of white supremacy
on an otherwise black continent.”
7

62. South Africa was increasingly isolated on the
continent and internationally. The Sharpeville massacre occurred at a time when the African countries
to the north were freeing themselves from the yoke of
colonial exploitation and oppression. The independence movement on the continent inspired blacks in
Azania; on the other hand, upon independence, the
new countries of Africa led the campaign to isolate
Pretoria. For example, South Africa’s expulsion from
the Commonwealth and from numerous international
organizations was largely as a result of the initiatives
of the newly independent African countries. At the
same time, Africa provided material support for the
national liberation movement from Azania through the
Liberation Committee established by the Organization
of African Unity.

international censure and condemnation. But perhaps
the most important consequence, in so far as the
Azanian masses are concerned, is that the Soweto
massacre has terminated the debate about the legitimacy of armed struggle as the only means- to overthrow upurtheid colonialism.
66. Since the Soweto uprising of June 1976,there has
been a rising tide of black resistance in Azania,
evidenced in part by the increase in the number of
political trials. The political trials have been the subject of a study by Glenn Moss, who, in his booklet,
Sourh Ajirirun Politicui Trials: 1976-1979, states:
“the years since 1976 have seen a new spate of
political trials which have placed more inmates in
South Africa’s political prisons than any comparable
period since the notorious trials of the early 1960s”.

63. While there was panic among foreign investors,
as a result of which there was a massive withdrawal of
capital-in 1960 alone some f48 million left the country-and a temporary cessation of investments which
brought the South African economy to the brink of
collapse, after the repressive measures adopted by the
racist regime to crush the black resistance, there was
a new and certainly greater confidence in the “stability” of the apartheid regime and a rush by foreign
economic interests to invest in apartheid. A consortium of United States banks, led by Citibank, Chase
Manhattan and others, demonstrated their confidence
in apartheid by making available to the Pretoria regime
massive loans at very low interest rates.

67. The evidence provided by the trials fully justifies
Moss’s own conclusions that conflict pervades South
African society as the ruling class attempts to maintain its cohesion and that only a thorough restructuring
of all aspects of the society can remove the root causes
of a conflict which is taking on the proportions of a
low-intensity civil war. To quote Moss directly:
“ . . . in the wake of the rebellion sparked off by
the black youth of Soweto in June 1976, the level
and intensity of conflict forming the basis of South
African society has grown eitormously . The nature of
that conflict, and its very quantitative size, sug
gests that it is structural in type. By this I mean that
it is not a temporary aberration, or something
incidental to the fabric of society. Rather, conflict
forms a very part of the structure of society in South
Africa. As the ruling cIass attempts to maintain and
reproduce that society, so the conflict itself is maintained and reproduced. In other words, only a
thorough restructuring of all aspects of South
African society-and that includes the economy, the
ruling political. structures and practices, ideology
and culture-can remove the root causes of the
conflict, which is taking on the proportions of lowintensity civil war.”

64. It-is largely as a result of the economic support
that the regime receives from the Western countries in
the form of loans and investments in the private and
public sectors of the South African economy that the
regime has been able not only to pursue its policies of
repression against the Azanian people so ruthlessly
but also to defy international opinion and the resolutions of the United Nations with impunity. Economic
investment in apurtheid
has necessitated diplomatic
and political protection of the Pretoria regime whenever the demand has been made for the imposition of
mandatory economic sanctions.
65. The same interplay between internal, regional
and international factors was again discernible in June
1976, when South African police fired upon crowds
of unarmed blacks who were protesting against a
decision by Pretoria that certain subjects should be
taught in the medium of the Afrikaans language, which
is regarded by blacks as the language of oppression.
The new mood of defiance amongst blacks that was
so evident during the Soweto uprising had been
partially inspired by the successes of the brotherly
peoples of Mozambique and Angola, which had
gained their freedom after successful armed struggles
against Portuguese colonialism. The Soweto massacre again had the effect of provoking an intense
debate within the white establishment about apartheid
and the most effective means of maintaining white
supremacy. Again, the Soweto shootings provoked

The truth of Moss’s conclusion can be seen in the
present conflict in South Africa, where again black
students have been in the forefront. of resistance to
upurtheid and have been able to sustain their resistance for a surprisingly long time, considering the
repressive conditions prevailing in that country.
68. Black resistance to apartheid colonialism tias
intensified during the past month despite the efforts
of the.Pretoriaregime to crush.@pposition to its racial
policies through the use of Draconian legislation to
imprison and detain black leaders and activists.
During the past 10 days there- has been an escalation
of the strike by black students protesting against-the
inferior system of education provided for blacks by
the regime. There has also been a strike by black
8

workers in the textile industry in Durban, a strike by
black workers in the meat industry in the western
Cape, and, on 26 May, a protest march by black and
white clergymen as a result of which 53 persons were
arrested and charged under the Riotous Assemblies
Act.
69. The student strikes began in April of this year
with a boycott of classes by so-called coloured students in the western Cape who were protesting against
the inferior system of education for blacks. Although
the requirement that certain subjects be taught in the
medium of the Afrikaans language had been rescinded
after the Soweto revolt of 16 June 1976, the disparity
between Government expenditure on black education
and that on white education and the disparity between
salaries for black teachers and those for white teachers
remains, as does the serious overcrowding in black
schools. The Coloured students were joined by socalled African and Indian students as well as by white
students at several English-language
universities.
Within a few days, the strikes spread to other parts
of the country and soon engulfed the Transvaal, the
Kwa Zulu bantustan, the Orange Free State and the
eastern Cape. In Port Elizabeth, in the eastern Cape,
on 14 May 1980, one man was stoned to death by the
protesting students after a group of nine armed men
attempted to persuade them to return to classes. On
21 May, police fired on crowds of black protesters in
the townships of Batho and Manguang surrounding
Bloemfontein,
the South African capital in the heart of
“Afrikanerdom”.
One man was killed and two women
were injured during the police shooting. On 24 May,
police violently dispersed a crowd of approximately
3,000 black students who had staged a sit-in at two
supermarkets in Cape Town.
70. The media have deliberately
played down the
extent and intensity of the latest wave of black resistance in Azania. The impression is continually conveyed that the strikes have been petering out, and that
this has been due to the conciliatory
attitude of the
Prime Minister, P. W. Botha. The available evidence,
however, suggests that the unrest has been escalating.
71. The students’ strikes have been compounded by
workers’ strikes in the western Cape and Natal. Black
workers in the meat industry in the western Cape
have been on strike since 21 May, following the
dismissal of 800 workers who had staged a strike in
solidarity with other black workers. Fifteen hundred
workers in the textile industry have been on strike
since 22 May, demanding higher wages. Both strikes
have the potential to develop into national strikes
because of the organization
of workers into trade
unions in the two industries.
72. On 26 May, South African police arrested 53 persons, 20 of them clergymen, including the Anglican
Archbishop
of Johannesburg,
the Reverend
Tim
Bavin, and the Assistant Archbishop,
the Reverend
Bishop Desmond Tutu. The clergymen were protesting

against the detention
of another cleric who had
expressed his support for the student activities. All
of them face charges under the so-called Riotous
Assemblies Act, which has been in force since the
national uprising of 1976.
73. The reaction of the Botha regime has been
characterized by a systematic campaign of repression,
comprising banning, banishment and detention without
trial. Hundreds of students and community
leaders
have been detained over the past few weeks. Among
those who have been detained are the following:
Mr. Curtis Nkondo, former President of the Azanian
People’s Organization,
who was subsequently served
with a five-year banning order upon his release;
Mr. Achmet Kassiem, a teacher and former Robben
Island political prisoner, who has been living under
restriction in the Cape; Mr. Trevor Wentzel, a member of the Azanian People’s Organization; Mr. Michael
Sedgwick, a member of the Churches’ Urban Planning
Commission;
Ms. Edna van Harte, a researcher with
the Institute ,for Social Development
at the black
of the Western
Cape;
Professor
University
G. J. Gerwel, Professor of Afrikaans at the black
University
of the Western
Cape; Mr. Neville
Alexander,
a former Robben Island prisoner,
at
present with the South African Committee for Higher
Education;
Mrs. Theresa Solomon, wife of Marcus
Solomon, a former Robben Island prisoner; Johnny
Issel, a former SAS0 leader, and community
organizer in the Western Cape; Rommel Roberts, a community leader in the western Cape. Hundreds of
students have also been detained in various parts of
the country.
74. What is very clear is that the Government is not
prepared to heed the warnings of credible and popularly elected black leaders like Bishop Desmond Tutu
and Mr. Nthato Motlana, who have been expressing
concern about the tension within the black ghettoes
and warning of the dangers of a repetition of the
violence which rocked the country in 1976 and 1977.
75. In conclusion,
PAC wishes to concur in the
demands upon the Security Council that have been
made by Ambassador Clark of Nigeria: specifically,
first, that the Security Council should demand the
unconditional
release of all political
prisoners in
Azania, and, secondly,
that the Council should
seriously consider the imposition
of mandatory
economic sanctions against the white racist regime.
In this respect, we wish to refute the arguments that
have been advanced by those who maintain that it is
essential for economic contact to be maintained with
Pretoria because that is one of the best ways of
influencing that regime. The fallacy of that argument
can be seen in the fact that between the years 1960
and 1970, which were the years of unprecedented
economic
growth,
there was a corresponding
increase in repression, so that something like 94 new
laws were passed during that period, including the socalled Terrorism
Act and various other laws that

have been used against black opponents of the regime.
The campaign for the total isolation of the regime,
politically,
economically
and diplomatically,
must be
maintained and strengthened.

since it has been universally recognized that the system
of upartheid against which the people are struggling
is in fact a crime against humanity.
The meeting

76. In conclusion, we wish to state very clearly that
we fully recognize that the task of liberation
is
one which has to be borne by the oppressed people
themselves; it is a task which we have never shirked,
nor will we shirk it in the future. But in the circumstances the international
community
has a duty to
support the just struggles of the people of Azania,

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

rose at 5.10 p.m.

NOTE
’ Official Records of the General Assembly, Nineteenth Session,
Annexes, annex No. 12, document Al5825jAdd.1, para. 95.

00306

83-61462-September

19862,050
