S/PV.9214

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9214th meeting

Friday, 9 December 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Kamboj. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(India)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mrs. Jaraud-Darnault
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mr. Mythen
Ms. Kinyungu
Mr. Ochoa Martínez
Ms. Heimerback
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mr. Abushahab
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
General issues relating to sanctions

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-73436 (E)
*2273436*

S/PV.9214

General issues relating to sanctions

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
General issues relating to sanctions
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Australia, Austria, the Bahamas,
Belgium, Bulgaria Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia,
Denmark, the Dominican Republic, Estonia, Fiji,
Finland, Germany, Greece, Iceland, Italy, Latvia,
Lesotho, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall
Islands, New Zealand, Portugal, Romania, Samoa, San
Marino, Slovenia, Spain, Switzerland and Ukraine to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2022/925, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Albania, Australia, Austria, the
Bahamas, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, the Dominican Republic,
Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Germany, Greece,
Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lesotho, Liechtenstein,
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, New Zealand,
Norway, Portugal, Romania, Samoa, San Marino,
Slovenia, Spain, Switzerland, Ukraine, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States of America.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements before the voting.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): As this if my first time in the Chamber since
you took over as President, Madam, I would like to
welcome your presidency. We look forward to working
with you. I also want to take the opportunity to thank
our colleagues from Ghana for their presidency over the
previous month.
The United States is proud to introduce,
together with Ireland, this landmark draft resolution
(S/2022/925), which will save lives. As the world’s
leading global humanitarian donor, the United States
has always understood the centrality of humanitarian
2/8

09/12/2022

access for aid delivery. Our partners operate in
dangerous environments, and they face serious risks.
We hope the members of the Security Council will
vote in favour of this draft resolution, because we must
all do everything in our power to help humanitarian
partners reach the world’s most vulnerable, regardless
of where they live, who they live with and who controls
their territory.
The United States decided to pursue this initiative
after extensive thought and deliberation. We made
a point to proactively reach out and listen to the
United Nations and the non-governmental organization
community. We heard about the challenges they face
and how we, as the international community, can best
support their life-saving efforts. They told us that the
second-order impacts of some United Nations sanctions
were creating an impediment to humanitarian assistance
in the field.
To be clear, this is not related to the merits of
the sanctions themselves. The Council has reached
consensus repeatedly in upholding United Nations
sanctions as an effective foreign policy tool to constrain
bad actors, terrorists and human rights abusers. Our
goal is always to stop terrorists and human rights
abusers by using a legitimate tool to maintain peace
and security, but still allow life-saving humanitarian
efforts to continue for those in need.
Bilaterally, in response to the concerns of the
humanitarian community, the United States has already
stepped up. The United States Department of the
Treasury has issued licenses to facilitate humanitarian
aid and the provision of food and medicine. We reached
out directly to banks to explain how humanitarian
activities would be carved out from individual sanctions
regimes when applicable. And we have offered letters
to further clarify our position.
The humanitarian community told us that those
efforts have been incredibly helpful. And we know we
have more work to do on this front. But the humanitarian
community also shared that United Nations sanctions
still need to be addressed to ensure that unintentional,
second-order impacts do not impede their work. They
asked for a clear, standard carveout of humanitarian
assistance and activities to meet basic human needs
for all United Nations sanctions regimes. And that is
exactly what we are voting on today.
This draft resolution is impartial. It makes sense.
And it will save innocent lives all around the world.
22-73436

09/12/2022

General issues relating to sanctions

It is what the humanitarian community has asked
us for. And I urge members to vote in favour and to
support this life-saving, landmark commitment to
humanitarian work.
The President: I shall put the draft resolution to
the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Albania, Brazil, China, France, Gabon, Ghana,
Ireland, Kenya, Mexico, Norway, Russian Federation, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America
Against:
None
Abstaining:
India
The President: The draft resolution received
14 votes in favour, none against and one abstention. The draft resolution has been adopted as
resolution 2664 (2022).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Mr. Mythen (Ireland): Ireland welcomes the
adoption of resolution 2664 (2022), which introduces a
horizontal humanitarian carveout to Security Council
sanctions regimes. This is a landmark resolution. As
co-penholder with the United States, we took time over
its negotiation. We are conscious that its effect on the
United Nations sanctions landscape will be significant.
With this resolution, we diminish the unintended
consequences of sanctions without diminishing
United Nations sanctions themselves. The protection
of the humanitarian space is an overarching priority
for Ireland, and this vote is therefore of particular
significance. From our extensive outreach, it is clear
that Council members share the desire to mitigate
any inadvertent effects that sanctions might have on
humanitarian activity.
More than 300 million people will require
humanitarian aid next year to survive. More than
800 million people worldwide do not have enough
food to eat. The resolution safeguards humanitarian
action to assist them in contexts in which the Council
has also had to impose sanctions. It demonstrates that

S/PV.9214

the Council can still take action to respond to those in
greatest need. It is clear that the use of sanctions has
faced criticism in recent years. A key factor in that has
been reports from humanitarian actors that sanctions
can impede their work. Although it was never the
Council’s intention, the reality is that the imposition
of United Nations sanctions does not always coexist
harmoniously with the need to ensure that legitimate
humanitarian activity is uninterrupted.
Today’s
vote
marks
a
turning
point.
Resolution 2664 (2022) exempts humanitarian
assistance and other activities that support basic human
needs from the scope of asset-freezing measures
imposed by United Nations sanctions. That provides
certainty and clarity for humanitarian actors, donors
and implementing partners alike by confirming in one
horizontal resolution that the provision of humanitarian
aid is permitted. The resolution, while significant, is
not a panacea. It may take some time for its effects to
be implemented by States and executed by all relevant
stakeholders. More broadly, there remains work to do on
other aspects of United Nations sanctions, such as due
process. We look forward to supporting the Council’s
work in that regard moving forward, including as
a member of the Group of Like-Minded States on
Targeted Sanctions.
However, for today, we can rest assured that
the Council has taken decisive action in response to
appeals by humanitarians worldwide. The resolution
will have a tangible, positive impact for those working
in some of the most challenging environments across
the globe, who can now continue helping the world’s
most vulnerable with the knowledge that even where
United Nations sanctions are in effect, their activities
are permitted.
Lastly, we want to thank all Council members
for their engagement on this important file and the
humanitarian community for its long-term advocacy
and technical support for this effort. We also thank
the more than 40 Member States that sponsored the
resolution, demonstrating that the commitment to
protecting the humanitarian space is a global concern.
And we recognize the Secretariat for its support.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
The United Kingdom congratulates the United States
and Ireland on the Council’s adoption of resolution 2664
(2022) today. We have been unequivocal in our support
throughout the development of the resolution. As

22-734363/8

S/PV.9214

General issues relating to sanctions

humanitarian week at the United Nations draws to a
close and humanitarian needs around the world are
soaring, I am proud that the Security Council is working
together to support vital humanitarian aid delivery
around the world.
Sanctions are a core part of the Council’s toolkit.
In line with the Charter of the United Nations, they are
rightly used to address threats to international peace
and security. Whether the problem is violent gangs in
Haiti or extremist groups such as Al-Shabaab and AlQaida, we have used sanctions to stop weapons flows
and tackle terrorism. The resolution will provide that
certain activities necessary for humanitarian assistance
or in support of basic human needs, when carried out by
specified organizations, do not violate United Nations
asset freezes. The resolution will help save lives by
providing clarity, to help ensure that humanitarian
providers and their service providers can continue to
help the most vulnerable. It will support getting aid to
those in need more effectively. The United Kingdom
is pleased to have voted in favour and to have been a
sponsor of resolution 2664 (2022).
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I would like to
thank Ireland and the United States for this important
initiative, which we were glad to sponsor. Brazil’s vote
in favour of resolution 2664 (2022) is an expression of
its recognition that today we adopted a resolution that
may contribute substantially to the work of the Security
Council. We have come a long way since 1966, when the
Security Council started establishing sanctions regimes.
Along the way, some mistakes were made. We have
seen how ill-devised sanctions can disproportionately
affect vulnerable populations, worsen food insecurity,
increase inflation and hinder neutral, impartial,
independent and humane humanitarian assistance.
Although sanctions may be an important tool for the
maintenance of international peace and security, we
have noticed how their misuse can stoke tensions rather
than defuse them. We have also witnessed how they
can spare those whom they were originally intended
to target, while unintentionally punishing those who
should be protected — innocent civilians, women and
children in the throes of conflict. It was high time
to improve the way in which the Security Council
makes use of its coercive power to address threats to
international peace and security.
Brazil is proud to be a member of the Security
Council at this moment when it decides to take action
to help those in need. The resolution will enable
4/8

09/12/2022

humanitarian providers to carry out their essential
activities in more predictable conditions. Above all,
it will benefit millions of civilians who have had the
misfortune to live under sanctions regimes, twice
punished by them and by the action of the designated
entities and individuals. Furthermore, the resolution
is in line with recent developments in international
jurisprudence. The International Court of Justice
recently made the case for the need to safeguard
humanitarian needs even in circumstances when
sanctions are in place.
I also note that the resolution takes into account
legitimate security concerns that Member States
voiced during the negotiations. It strikes a fine balance
between the need for sanctions to be put in force to
prevent and combat threats, on the one hand, and on the
other, the duty of the international community to protect
civilians whose well-being should be the ultimate goal
of the Security Council in discharging its mandate to
maintain international peace and security.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): Norway voted in
favour of and co-sponsored resolution 2664 (2022), and
we would like to express our appreciation to Ireland
and the United States for proposing it.
The humanitarian community has consistently
documented and called attention to the unintended
negative consequences of sanctions for principled
humanitarian action and the consequent human costs
for people in need of humanitarian assistance and
protection. We therefore wholeheartedly support
the resolution. Norway attaches great importance to
ensuring that sanctions are well designed, and we have
consistently advocated broad humanitarian exemptions.
We are pleased that the practices of the Security Council
have developed on such issues in the past few years.
The carveout will, in our view, be effective, as it
covers all sanctions regimes and is clear in terms of
the actors and activities that it covers. We trust that
it will provide the necessary clarity to all relevant
actors, from Member States to humanitarian actors,
as well as providers from the private and financial
sectors that humanitarian actors need to rely on. It is
crucial that Member States now take the necessary
steps to implement the exception in their domestic legal
systems. Implementing the resolution will help save
lives and alleviate the suffering of people affected by
armed conflict.
22-73436

09/12/2022

General issues relating to sanctions

Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation voted in favour of
resolution 2664 (2022) on humanitarian exemptions
to asset freezes for the purpose of extending
humanitarian assistance.
Security Council sanctions are one of the strongest
forms of reacting to threats to peace, and they need to
be applied very carefully. They need to be impeccably
justified and nuanced. It is unacceptable to use them
as a means of punishment. They need to reflect the
situation in countries on which sanctions are imposed
and be in line with relevant political process. However,
it is unfortunately not always the case that the Council
respects these guidelines, which has to do, in many
instances in recent decades, and at the instigation of
Western States, with the Security Council’s fondness
for the use of sanctions instruments. According to
our analysis, many of the sanctions regimes in place
today — in the Sudan, in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, in the Central African Republic, in South
Sudan and in Somalia — are out of sync with the actual
situations on the ground, and they impede the national
Governments’ plans for State-building and their
countries’ socioeconomic development.
We regret that the issue of humanitarian exemptions
has, as a matter of principle, become such a topical issue.
Ideally, a Security Council restriction should not affect
humanitarian assistance, which needs to be conducted
in line with United Nations humanitarian principles
and in coordination with legitimate Governments. But
in practice that is far from being the case.
We have consistently spoken in favour of adopting a
comprehensive approach to this issue and if we have to
make a decision about humanitarian exemptions, then
we think it is imperative to make sure that they function
smoothly and are free of any kind of a politicized stance
by an individual State. A very good example for us of
a timely measure undertaken by the Security Council
in this regard is resolution 2615 (2021), which provided
for the extension without delay of humanitarian
assistance to Afghanistan using all possible channels
and containing no sanctions restrictions.
We have called upon our peers on many an
occasion to think about ways of minimizing the broad
interpretations of sanctions provisions, including
through clarifying the terminology. We have also
called on them to conduct an impartial evaluation
of the humanitarian consequences of international

S/PV.9214

restrictions. Our ideas have been voiced in detail at key
international forums, including within the framework
of the debate on sanctions during of our Security
Council presidency in February 2022 (see S/PV.8962).
We are pleased that these many calls of ours were
finally heeded by those who, for many years now and
under various pretexts, kept postponing the resolution
of this issue. We in turn have been very constructive
in our approach to the negotiating process from
the beginning, and the resolution we adopted today
now includes provisions we proposed in relation to
assessing the potential humanitarian consequences
prior to the Security Council taking a decision about
imposing a sanctions regime; the readiness to conduct
a review to correct or stop sanctions regimes where
it becomes necessary to do so; and emphasizing the
fact that sanctions are temporary in nature. Today’s
resolution also contains a request to the SecretaryGeneral to prepare a written report about unintended
adverse humanitarian consequences of Security
Council sanctions.
As regards the use of humanitarian exemptions
under the sanctions regime imposed by the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities, our thinking was that it is very important to
ensure that the 1267 Committee conducts monitoring
with the help of the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team in order to make sure that the
assistance does not end up in the hands of terrorists or
unchecked organizations on the ground.
At the same time, the resolution does not cover the
issue of so-called secondary unilateral restrictions,
which are introduced on top of sanctions imposed by the
Council. These sanctions are a very serious impediment
to the full functioning of humanitarian exemptions.
Under the threat of ending up with very severe national
or even extraterritorial restrictions, agencies decline
signing contracts to purchase humanitarian assistance
that is allowed by the Security Council or to transport
it. Difficulties also arise as to cargo insurance, and
banks are saying that it is impossible for them to
conduct transactions.
These problems are very clearly seen in the
example of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. The secondary sanctions imposed by major

22-734365/8

S/PV.9214

General issues relating to sanctions

Western countries create an atmosphere of toxicity
around Pyongyang and impede their willingness to
cooperate in areas that are not subject to international
restrictions. The fact that this issue is not at all resolved
in resolution 2664 (2022) , and that the resolution had to
be adopted today, is a major drawback. It is yet another
example of hypocrisy and the cost of that hypocrisy,
namely, the well-being and lives of a large number of
people. We are not surprised by that, however, given the
national policy of the sponsors of the resolution.
We in turn think that Security Council sanctions
are the only legitimate kind of sanctions. The use of
unilateral coercive measures by individual countries
or groups of countries are, in our view, an intrusion
on Council prerogatives and undermine the norms and
institutions of international law.
The extraterritorial effect of sanctions contravenes
basic norms of international law, but what can we say in
this context if the Western countries, in their frenzied
fondness for sanctions against Russia, including on
agricultural products and fertilizers, are ready to
destabilize world markets for food and energy resources
and break all kinds of supply chains? We will not only
continue paying attention to the issue of unilateral
illegitimate measures, but we will keep on seeking to
expand the number of countries that are against them,
because this situation compounds the difficulties
experienced in many countries.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that the
area covered by resolution 2664 (2022) is fairly limited.
The resolution does not resolve many of the issues that
exist when it comes to Security Council sanctions, but if
it can help humanitarians in certain countries to be more
effective in providing assistance to the most vulnerable
people, that already in itself is a worthwhile result.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Sanctions are a unique tool granted to the Security
Council by the United Nations Charter. China has
always maintained that the Council should approach the
issue of sanctions in a prudent and responsible manner
and avoid abuses that could have negative humanitarian
implications. In February, at the Security Council open
meeting on sanctions (see S/PV.8962), China proposed
that the Security Council should establish a standing
exemption mechanism for certain humanitarian
agencies and humanitarian assistance. The proposal
was widely supported by many countries.
6/8

09/12/2022

We are pleased to see that Ireland and the United
States responded to the appeals and demands of
all parties and introduced today’s resolution on
humanitarian exemptions. China supports the Security
Council’s action to improve the sanctions regime by
actively participating in consultations and promoting
the improvement of the draft. We just voted in favour
of the resolution.
Resolution 2664 (2022) clarifies the relationship
between humanitarian assistance and sanctions and
dispels the concerns and worries of the providers of
assistance. We hope that States Members of the United
Nations and international humanitarian agencies will
actively implement the humanitarian exemptions
provided for in the resolution and prevent an expanded
interpretation or excessive implementation of sanctions.
We also hope that the international community,
especially developed countries, scale up humanitarian
assistance and provide more substantive support for
humanitarian operations.
At the same time, the international community
should pay great attention to the negative impact
of unilateral sanctions on humanitarian operations.
Undeniably, the greatest legal and political risks faced
by humanitarian agencies do not come from Security
Council sanctions, but from increasing unilateral
sanctions and the long-arm jurisdiction of some
countries. In reality, they often trigger great chaos and
disastrous situations and thereby create or exacerbate
humanitarian crises. We hope that the countries
concerned will uphold the spirit of humanity embodied
in the just-adopted resolution 2664 (2022) and stop
imposing unilateral sanctions outside of the Council’s
sanctions framework as soon as possible.
In conclusion, I would like to stress that the
Security Council should establish clear and feasible exit
arrangements for the existing sanctions mechanisms,
conduct regular reviews and adjust or lift sanctions
in a timely manner. The humanitarian exemption
resolution just adopted by the Security Council
must not lead to the perpetuation and permanent
adjustment of some sanctions mechanisms that should
have been adjusted long ago. China will work with
all members of the Security Council to continue to
promote the improvement of sanctions mechanisms in
a responsible manner so as to minimize the negative
impact of sanctions on humanitarian activities and
people’s livelihoods.
22-73436

09/12/2022

General issues relating to sanctions

Ms. Dautllari (Albania): Let me begin by expressing
my delegation’s appreciation for the leadership of
the co-penholders, the United States of America and
Ireland, as well as the constructive engagement of other
members of the Security Council.
Albania voted in favour of, and co-sponsored,
resolution 2664 (2022) today. We welcome its adoption.
It is a milestone development of the Council in making
the sanctions regime more effective by minimizing
its potential unintended consequences and by
strengthening its legitimacy.
Today’s adoption is a clear example of how the
Security Council can be responsive to the concerns and
issues raised by State and non-State representatives
with regard to the undesired effects that different
sanctions regimes may have on the provision of
humanitarian assistance.
While reiterating our position that sanctions are an
important tool under the Charter of the United Nations
in maintaining and restoring international peace
and security, we are very pleased that the Council
demonstrated today that it is able not only to listen to
such expressions of concern, but also act upon them by
demonstrating its commitment that the implementation
of all measures imposed by the Council be consistent
with international human rights law and international
humanitarian law.
We are confident that today’s resolution will not
only provide humanitarian actors the necessary clarity
to effectively execute their humanitarian operations,
but will also demonstrate the ability of the Security
Council to act swiftly and effectively.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates): The
United Arab Emirates joined the Security Council with
a commitment to support humanitarian efforts. During
the past 11 months, we have worked in support of
humanitarian exemptions to several sanctions regimes.
The United Arab Emirates is therefore pleased that
today’s landmark humanitarian resolution 2664 (2022)
was adopted.
We thank Ireland and the United States of America,
as well as all our colleagues on the Council, for the
work undertaken and the outcome achieved. As
humanitarian needs rise around the world, we must do
all that we can to enable aid to reach people in need,
while ensuring that the appropriate safeguards are in
place to prevent any possible misuse of humanitarian

S/PV.9214

assistance. Today’s resolution is an important step
towards ensuring that legitimate humanitarian aid is
not inhibited by sanctions measures.
Supporting humanitarian causes is part of the
national ethos of the United Arab Emirates. Our
humanitarian aid comes from the Government, as well
as our country’s many charitable organizations. The
United Arab Emirates works closely with the United
Nations humanitarian agencies, the Emirates Red
Crescent, our own national non-profit groups and local
organizations doing valuable humanitarian work.
While we are pleased that the resolution covers
many different forms of aid delivery, including the
critical work done by the United Nations and national
Red Cross and Red Crescent societies, we recognize
that, across the globe, food, medical and other aid is
delivered by different actors and by different means.
Although most aid providers are covered by this
resolution, some genuine humanitarian organizations
may be left out.
While we recognize this resolution as a milestone
in the Security Council’s support for people in need
of humanitarian assistance, we nevertheless see some
potential for overcompliance. We therefore believe that
it is important to regularly review how the resolution
is being implemented on the ground and adjust it
as needed. The goal is to ensure that all parts and
partners of the humanitarian system are not impeded
by sanctions measures and that this resolution’s
safeguards remain fit for purpose. Going forward, our
collective responsibility will be to shepherd the full
implementation of resolution 2664 (2022), including
by providing guidance to Member States, the private
sector and other actors.
The United Arab Emirates will continue to support
the ability of humanitarian organizations to do their
life-saving work throughout our term on the Security
Council and beyond.
The President: I shall now make a statement as the
representative of India.
The measures imposed by the Security Council
under Article 41 of the Charter of the United Nations
are provisional in nature and not permanent. The
sanctions regimes cannot be an end in themselves.
In their implementation, sanctions regimes must
ensure that they have the intended impact and do not
further exacerbate the suffering of the populations

22-734367/8

S/PV.9214

General issues relating to sanctions

at the receiving end. Neither can the legitimate trade
and economic activities of the State concerned and
its regional partners be ignored. In addition, the
unintended consequences of sanctions measures,
including the humanitarian consequences, increasingly
emphasized by Member States and other stakeholders,
require effective redress.
In that context, India engaged constructively in the
negotiations on resolution 2664 (2022). The resolution
provides a carveout from sanctions in support of the
timely delivery of humanitarian assistance or to support
other activities meeting basic human needs. The
resolution is also intended to ensure the much-needed
predictability and safeguards to humanitarian agencies.
However, India will call for caution and due
diligence to be exercised in extending humanitarian
assistance to proscribed entities under the regime
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) that
continue to thrive, with full State hospitality, in
territories universally acknowledged as terrorist havens
by the international community.
Our concerns emanate from proven instances
of terrorist groups taking full advantage of such
humanitarian carveouts and making a mockery of
sanctions regimes, including that of the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) 1989 (2011)
and 2253 (2015), concerning Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities. There
have also been several cases of terrorist groups in our

8/8

09/12/2022

neighbourhood, including those listed by the Security
Council, reincarnating themselves as humanitarian
organizations and civil-society groups precisely to
evade such sanctions. Those terrorist organizations use
the umbrella of the humanitarian assistance space to
raise funds and recruit fighters.
As we said during the negotiations, we reiterate
that, under no circumstances, should the garb of
humanitarian cover intended to be provided by those
exemptions be misused by proscribed terrorist groups to
expand their terror activities in the region and beyond.
More important, such exemptions must not facilitate
the mainstreaming of terror entities in the political
space in our region. Due diligence and extreme caution
in the implementation of this resolution is therefore an
absolute must.
For that very reason, India sought in the text of
the resolution a proactive role for the 1267 Monitoring
Team, coupled with robust reporting standards and
mechanisms. We regret that those specific concerns
were not fully addressed in the final text adopted today.
We hope that that shortcoming will be corrected in the
future, as and when we review the implementation and
feedback from the Monitoring Team on this resolution.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 10.40 a.m.

22-73436
