United Nations

S/PV.6604

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6604th meeting
Tuesday, 30 August 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(India)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Dunlop
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Briens
Mr. Messone
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Salam
Mr. Onowu
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Sangqu
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999)
and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2011/514)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-48292 (E)

*1148292*

S/PV.6604

the Council on 28 July on the situation in northern
Kosovo. While the situation has improved somewhat
since then, it remains tense and unpredictable.

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998),
1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (S/2011/514)
The President: Under rule 37 of the Security
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Serbia to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Vuk Jeremić, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Serbia.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Security
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
Mr. Farid Zarif, Acting Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo, to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Enver Hoxhaj.
It is so decided.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2011/514, containing the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo.
I shall now give the floor to Mr. Farid Zarif.
Mr. Zarif: The report before the Council
(S/2011/514) details the activities of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) from 16 April to 15 July 2011. As the
Council is aware, in the days following the end of the
reporting period — on 25 July, to be exact — an
attempt by the Kosovo authorities to take control of
Gates 1 and 31 on the administrative boundary line led
former Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations Alain Le Roy to brief a closed session of

2

The report before the Council paints a hopeful
picture of the dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade
as of the end of the reporting period. However, the
situation changed in the days immediately thereafter,
beginning with the postponement of the sixth session
of the Pristina-Belgrade dialogue due, inter alia, to
continuing disagreements between the parties on the
issue of Kosovo customs stamps. On 20 July, Pristina
announced the imposition of what it described as
“reciprocal measures” on Serbian goods, effectively
putting them under an embargo.
On 25 July, with no advance warning or
coordination with the international presences, the
Kosovo authorities attempted to deploy members of the
Kosovo Special Police Unit (ROSU) to the two
northern boundary crossing points where Kosovo
customs have not been able to operate. The Kosovo
Prime Minister, Mr. Hashim Thaçi, explained that the
purpose of such action was to establish the rule of law,
including Kosovo customs controls at the northern
gates, as well as to enforce the embargo on goods
coming from Serbia.
I will briefly recap the events that followed.
ROSU succeeded in reaching Gate 31, where one
officer was wounded as a result of an improvised
explosive device, but it was unable to deploy at Gate 1
due to roadblocks set up by northern Kosovo Serbs
soon after the operation started. Due to the presence of
those roadblocks, ROSU was unable either to move
ahead or to retreat. The Kosovo Force (KFOR)
responded by deploying eight of its 15 companies to
northern Kosovo and, on 26 July, the KFOR
Commander facilitated an agreement on the withdrawal
of all ROSU units from northern Kosovo. A gunfight
erupted during the ROSU movement that resulted in
the death of a ROSU officer.
In a separate incident, the facilities at Gate 1
were torched by masked perpetrators. Both incidents
are currently the subject of a priority criminal
investigation that is being conducted by the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX). The
torching of Gate 1 led KFOR to declare both gates
military protected zones, under the control of KFOR
troops.

11-48292

S/PV.6604

Following further mediation by the KFOR
Commander, a common understanding emerged that,
inter alia, KFOR will be responsible for the gates at
least until 15 September. That understanding is
intended to manage the situation until Belgrade and
Pristina resume the European Union-facilitated
dialogue in Brussels, currently scheduled for
2 September.

public discourse only exacerbates the deep-seated
mistrust and animosity that still exist between the
majority population and the Kosovo Serb minority,
particularly in the North. There is a pressing need for
leaders on both sides to speak the language of peaceful
coexistence and reconciliation and to accompany their
words with concrete actions. UNMIK has been
conveying this message clearly and widely.

It is hoped that, when the dialogue resumes, the
parties will resolve their long-standing commercial
dispute and find a mutually agreeable way forward. In
the meantime, EULEX has increased police patrols in
northern Kosovo, especially in multi-ethnic areas, and
maintains a strong presence at the Mitrovicë/Mitrovica
District Court, which remains a symbol of discord and
contention.

Fractured inter-community relations seriously
risk undermining the considerable investments made
by the international community towards advancing
Kosovo’s overall institutional, economic and social
development. UNMIK, as well as United Nations
funds, agencies and programmes, which we refer to as
the “United Nations Kosovo team”, and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
are taking concrete steps to increase reconciliation
efforts. Our staff in northern Kosovo are working daily
with the communities to clarify misunderstandings,
allay anxieties, and mediate, as necessary, including
between the communities and other members of the
international community. We also continue to liaise
with the political leadership in both Prístina and
Belgrade with a view to maintaining the confidence of
all sides.

Although the situation was contained and further
loss of life prevented, we should note that the events
that took place in northern Kosovo last month were the
most serious security incidents since the violence in
2008, which claimed the life of an international police
officer and resulted in scores of injuries. They serve as
a stark reminder that the issues underlying such
incidents remain unresolved and constitute a serious
threat to Kosovo’s peace and stability. It remains
essential, therefore, that all sides refrain from any
unilateral action that could escalate existing tensions.
We must all work together to avoid any further
deterioration of the situation and allow progress to be
made through dialogue, as expected of responsible and
trustworthy interlocutors. The leadership in both
Pristina and Belgrade has a responsibility to set a
public example and to demonstrate, in practical terms,
their confidence in the dialogue as a means of
resolving disputes, as opposed to unilateral action.
While tensions in the North, thankfully, did not
spill over into the rest of Kosovo, we nevertheless saw
an increase in cases of intimidation of Kosovo Serbs
and attacks on their property in communities south of
the Ibër/Ibar River. We are of the belief that the recent
troubles must be a wake-up call to all that rebuilding
trust and promoting inter-community cooperation and
understanding cannot be further postponed. During the
crisis, the language and tone of the messages
originating both from those speaking for Pristina and
from those speaking on behalf of Belgrade were too
often messages of domination and division, and too
seldom of cooperation and inclusion. This kind of

11-48292

The United Nations Kosovo team’s current
common plan is focused on the themes of inclusion,
participation and accountability, takes advantage of the
United Nations Kosovo team’s quality as a neutral
partner, and works with Government structures as well
as civil society, both north and south of the Ibër/Ibar
River. In this regard, I wish to note that the United
Nations Kosovo team has suffered a decrease in its
funding of approximately 40 per cent. At the same
time, interventions by the major donors do not focus on
either
conflict
prevention
or
reconciliation.
Consequently, I would appeal to the international
community to continue to support the work the United
Nations Kosovo team is doing to rebuild trust and
foster reconciliation.
Before moving on to other issues, I wish to
highlight another matter that concerns northern
Kosovo, and which is threatening the livelihood of
some 3,500 employees and their families and risking
further damage to the relationship between the Kosovo
authorities and the Kosovo Serb community in the
North.

3

S/PV.6604

UNMIK has learned that the Kosovo Tax
Administration has seized bank accounts belonging to
the socially owned enterprise Trepça, a mining
company that is the single largest employer in northern
Kosovo.
The
reason
alleged,
but
entirely
unsubstantiated by the Tax Administration, is that there
are tax liabilities owed by Trepça. Whatever the
reason, however, the action by the Tax Administration
is in clear violation of applicable laws and procedures.
Consequently, UNMIK has addressed the relevant
court, requesting an immediate reversal of this seizure
of bank accounts and the return of all monies seized.
We are also concerned that the effects of this
action could be perceived by the population of northern
Kosovo as a deliberate attempt to target their wellbeing at a time when it is imperative that the Kosovo
authorities clearly and credibly convey their stated
concern for the welfare of all those who inhabit the
territory of Kosovo — North and South.
A loud and clear expression of that concern may
also allow us to see greater progress in the area of
returns, which, as reported by the Secretary-General,
remains very slow. According to figures released by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, the total number of voluntary returns to
Kosovo between April and July was 333, of whom all
but eight are members of minority communities. As we
have repeatedly reported, returns are impeded both by
the lack of economic prospects for returnees and by the
lack of reconciliation, on which the issue of the
missing persons bears heavily.
Today, 30 August, marks the International Day of
the Disappeared. Regrettably, during the reporting
period there was no significant progress to report in the
clarification of the fates of local missing persons. The
number of those still missing from the Kosovo conflict
and its immediate aftermath still stands at over 1,800. I
therefore renew the call on all those who can help to
clarify the fates of the missing to pass on relevant
information to the International Committee of the Red
Cross so that the surviving family members can learn
about the fates of their loved ones and achieve closure.
I would like to update the Council on two issues.
The first is UNMIK’s facilitation of external relations,
starting with the Central European Free Trade
Agreement (CEFTA). As I mentioned at the outset, on
20 July the Kosovo authorities imposed an embargo on
shipments of goods bearing stamps of the Serbian tax

4

and customs administration. While Belgrade has
initiated a dispute resolution procedure to address the
issue under CEFTA, a consensus has been facilitated
between Belgrade and Pristina that they will deal with
the matter in the next dialogue session. In consultation
with Belgrade, Pristina and all relevant stakeholders,
UNMIK is ensuring coordination between the dialogue
process and the CEFTA procedure. The common,
acknowledged goal is a swift and successful resolution
of the issue.
While the issue of UNMIK’s facilitation of
Kosovo’s external relations remains a delicate issue for
Pristina, we have noted a more pragmatic approach to
the matter by the Kosovo authorities and, in this
context, we particularly welcome Pristina’s decision to
resume participation in meetings of the Sarajevo-based
Regional Cooperation Council.
Finally, I wish to update the Council on the steps
taken by EULEX to investigate the allegations
contained in Council of Europe Special Rapporteur
Marty’s report on inhuman treatment of people and
illicit trafficking in human organs in Kosovo. EULEX
has informed us that the members of the special
investigative task force that will conduct an
investigation into the issue have been recruited, that
facilities and equipment in Brussels have been secured,
and that the task force is expected to begin its work in
September.
In closing, on behalf of all UNMIK staff, I wish
to thank the Council for its continued support and to
reiterate our assurance that we will continue to
implement the mandate with which it have entrusted
us.
The President: I thank Mr. Zarif for his briefing.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Vuk
Jeremić, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia.
Mr. Jeremić (Serbia): I thank you, Sir, for
convening this meeting of the Security Council on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), pursuant to resolution 1244 (1999).
At the outset, on behalf of the Republic of Serbia
I would like to offer my deepest condolences to all
those affected by Friday’s terrorist attack on United
Nations House in the Nigerian capital of Abuja. We
share the revulsion and condemnation expressed by the
Secretary-General and other Member States. Serbia

11-48292

S/PV.6604

will continue to play an active role in global efforts to
counter the scourge of terrorism in all its forms.
I thank the Acting Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for his remarks, and gratefully
acknowledge the unequivocal statement in the report
(S/2011/514) that UNMIK’s mission priorities remain
unchanged. Serbia looks forward to the swift
appointment of a new Special Representative. We will
continue to be actively engaged in the consultations to
produce an acceptable nomination. This will help
ensure that UNMIK remains an indispensable pillar of
peace and stability in Kosovo.
I would like to once again reaffirm my
Government’s position on Pristina’s attempt at
unilateral secession from Serbia. We do not and we
shall not recognize it, explicitly or implicitly. This is
mandated by the democratic will of our people and
enshrined in our Constitution.
A substantial majority of United Nations Member
States — and of those seated in the Security Council —
continues to respect Serbia’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity, in accordance with the basic principles of the
United Nations Charter and the Helsinki Final Act. On
behalf of Serbia, I would like to reiterate our deep
gratitude for their support and solidarity in the face of
tremendous pressure. We urge them to maintain their
principled stance, thus ensuring that unilateral moves
to impose outcomes on ethnic and territorial disputes
are not legitimized, and thereby preventing Kosovo’s
unilateral declaration of independence (UDI) from
becoming a dangerous and destabilizing precedent for
the world.
A little over a month ago, the situation in our
region suddenly became much less secure, stable and
predictable. This was the direct consequence of the
calculated decision of the ethnic Albanian secessionist
leadership to order an unprovoked armed incursion into
northern Kosovo as part of a sinister plan to forcibly
impose an illegitimate and unquestionably unwanted
regime on the residents of that part of the province. I
urge the Security Council to send a clear message to
the perpetrators that their unilateralism is totally
unacceptable.
The crisis began on Monday 25 July, when
Pristina’s special operations militia, the so-called
Regional Operational Support Units (ROSU), was
mobilized and equipped with full riot gear. Dozens of
armoured personnel carriers transported hundreds of

11-48292

heavily armed men across the Ibar River. This blatantly
violated the long-standing agreement between Pristina
and the European Union Rule of Law Mission
(EULEX) that ROSU is not to be deployed in the North
without the latter’s approval. The unsanctioned act of
sending ethnic Albanian paramilitaries from southern
Kosovo was perceived by the majority population of
northern Kosovo as an attempt to occupy the territory.
Serbia’s reaction to the ROSU incursion was
swift but measured. Within hours, my Government sent
an official delegation to northern Kosovo to help ease
tensions. They began negotiations with the Kosovo
Force (KFOR) about restoring stability in the province.
By the morning of 26 July, the KFOR Commander,
Major General Erhard Bühler of the German Army, had
secured what we believed was an agreement with
Pristina for ROSU to withdraw from northern Kosovo.
After an initial pullback, however, some of the
paramilitaries turned around and started heading back.
This resulted in skirmishes with local Serbs, leading to
a number of casualties, including one fatality. Later
that day, the ROSU militants began to leave northern
Kosovo for good. At the time, it appeared that calm
and the status quo ante would be quickly restored
without further altercations.
On the morning of 27 July, however, attention
was drawn to a highly regrettable incident at one of the
checkpoints, where masked individuals set fire to the
buildings there. The Serbian Government strongly and
immediately condemned this act of extremism. We also
indicated our readiness to work with relevant
stakeholders to uncover the arsonists’ identities and
motives and to determine whose instructions they were
following. A few days later, Belgrade and KFOR came
to an agreement on how to keep ROSU and the
so-called Kosovo Customs out of northern Kosovo. On
3 August, KFOR headquarters issued an official
communiqué outlining the parameters of the interim
agreement.
Ensuring peace and security in Kosovo is the
responsibility of the Security Council, as per resolution
1244 (1999). To understand what happened and to
determine who is responsible for the dramatic drop in
stability throughout the territory, we asked to address
the Council as events continued to escalate. An
emergency meeting did in fact take place; regrettably,
our voice was not allowed to be heard on that day.
From the outset of this crisis, our position has
remained the same, as I made clear in my letter to the

5

S/PV.6604

Secretary-General, the text of which has been
designated an official document of the Council
(S/2011/482). I repeat it today — the status quo ante
must be reinstated. Those who destabilized northern
Kosovo through the actions of ROSU must be brought
to account. Whoever gave the order to cross the Ibar
River violated an agreement with EULEX and must
suffer the consequences.

Such behaviour cannot possibly contribute to
security in the Balkans and must be rejected and
condemned in the clearest possible terms. Silence
today would be interpreted in Pristina as acquiescence,
dramatically increasing the likelihood of further
unilateral actions in the North, such as attempting to
occupy the Valac electricity substation or the North
Mitrovica courthouse.

Today, in this Council meeting, we respectfully
ask for answers to some very pointed questions. Who
ordered the unilateral action of the ROSU militants on
25 July? Did anyone from the international community
know that the operation was about to be put into
effect? Why did EULEX disappear from northern
Kosovo in the wake of the ROSU incursion, leaving
Serbs with no international police protection
whatsoever? Why did EULEX not exercise its broad
executive power — clearly defined in the relevant
European Union (EU) joint action — to reverse the
unilateral decision of Pristina as soon as it had begun?
Should attempts to create a new reality on the ground
through the use of force be allowed to stand, especially
when dialogue between the parties was producing
results? What if Serbs had been the unilateralists,
instead of ethnic Albanians?

Several
dangerous
misconceptions
have
circulated publicly over the past month or so. The
record must be set straight. One erroneous belief is that
the round of talks between Belgrade and Pristina that
was scheduled for 20 July was postponed by Serbia.
This is simply incorrect. We can bear no responsibility
for the last-minute decision made by the dialogue
facilitator to impose a hiatus on the process, which is
thankfully scheduled to resume in a few days’ time.

25 July was not the first time that Pristina has
purposely created instability. We have seen this
scenario before — a provocation followed by violence
and, finally, an attempt to blame the victim. Last
summer, for instance, an emergency meeting of the
Council was held in response to a forcible attempt to
establish a so-called Kosovo Government office in the
Serbian town of North Mitrovica.
Time and again, the international community has
unfortunately
failed
to
confront
Pristina’s
unilateralism. Consider the March 2004 pogrom that
resulted in the destruction of 35 Orthodox churches
and monasteries in a three-day orchestrated campaign
of cultural cleansing. Instead of making sure that the
guilty were brought to justice, the international
community abandoned its standards-before-status
approach. The brutal attack on the foundation of our
national and religious identity was de facto rewarded,
and the unilateral declaration of independence was the
result. Pristina got away with it back in 2004, and had
few reasons to believe it would not do so again on
25 July.

6

A second misconception involves the misleading
term “parallel structures” to designate the Serbian
institutions in North Kosovo. Not only are they
legitimized by the fact that the overwhelming majority
of the population supports them, but in the North, no
alternative that passes the test of democracy exists.
They are the only ones that can function without
constant armed protection. The truly parallel structures
that operate in the territory are those created on the
basis of UDI and the so-called Constitution of the
Republic of Kosovo, a document that has never been
approved by UNMIK or this Council.
Finally, I should like to address the basis upon
which KFOR and EULEX operate in Kosovo. The only
accepted standard — both within NATO and the EU, as
well as in this Council — is resolution 1244 (1999) and
the status-neutral framework of the United Nations.
With regard to KFOR, I refer to paragraphs 5, 6, 7, 9
and 19 of the resolution, as well as to point 3 in annex
1 and paragraphs 3 and 4 of annex 2. I also refer to
paragraph 5 of NATO’s 2010 Lisbon Summit
Declaration, which reads, in part: “KFOR remains in
Kosovo on the basis of United Nations Security
Council resolution 1244.”
With regard to EULEX, I refer to paragraph 50 of
the Secretary-General’s November 2008 report, which
was welcomed by the Council in a presidential
statement (S/PRST/2008/44). It reads:
“EULEX will fully respect Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999) and operate under the
overall authority and within the status-neutral

11-48292

S/PV.6604

framework of the United Nations.” (S/2008/692,
para. 50)

martyrs of the Battle of Kosovo took communion in
1389, before they went to face the Ottoman invaders.

I also underline the fact that the EU’s own joint action
establishing EULEX begins with a direct reference to
paragraph 19 of resolution 1244 (1999).

The overall atmosphere during the reporting
period must be characterized as deteriorating. This has
been the case for some time now, for the roots of
democracy have failed to take hold in the province.
The United Nations Development Programme’s most
recent democratization index for Kosovo concludes
that “democratic processes in Kosovo do not fulfil the
standards”. That is consistent with the results of
Freedom House’s 2011 Nations in Transit report,
published in June. It concluded that Kosovo’s overall
democracy score declined more than any other in the
European region, especially in the areas of electoral
process, independent media, judicial framework and
national democratic governance. Also during the
reporting period, Europol released its biannual
Organized Crime Threat Assessment. It identified
Kosovo as a major European organized crime hub and
stated that ethnic Albanian groups “remain the most
prominent in trafficking heroin to and within the EU”.

I now turn to the current situation in Kosovo,
separate from the developments that I just addressed.
The Secretary-General’s report underscores a number
of disturbing developments concerning the Serbian
community in the province. It says:
“Criminal
incidents
affecting
minority
communities nearly doubled during the past three
months compared to the same period the previous
year” (S/2011/514, para. 31).
It also refers to figures from the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees that identify
a nearly record-low number of Kosovo Serb returnees:
95. That is less than half the number of those who
came back during the comparable period last year. That
is a deeply worrisome trend.
Unfortunately, the report underemphasizes
several alarming incidents that contributed to the
overall escalation of fear and uncertainty among
Kosovo Serbs. For instance, the report states that some
Serbian religious sites and Orthodox graveyards were
damaged and focuses on attacks by ethnic Albanian
extremists on two medieval holy sites — one against
the monastery of Zočište, near the ethnic Serb ghetto of
Velika Hoča, the other against the church of Kyriake in
the centre of the ancient Serbian capital of Prizren.
However, it fails to mention the most atrocious
example of this type of hate crime, despite the fact that
the Kosovo Mission of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe reported it to UNMIK at the
beginning of May and again at the beginning of June.
According to the Mission, the thirteenth-century
Church of St. John the Baptist in village of Samodreza
has been “frequently used as a toilet and a waste
disposal site by the pupils from the nearby [Kosovo
Albanian] elementary school for more than a decade.”
Earlier this year, measures were finally taken to protect
the shrine, including the installation of metal doors at
its entrance. During the reporting period, unfortunately,
the doors were taken down, and the church again began
to be frequently desecrated. Let me underline how
important this holy site is for the Serbian people, as it
was built on the foundations of the church in which the

11-48292

On the economic front, consider the Doing
Business 2011 report jointly issued a few months ago
by the World Bank and the International Finance
Corporation. It compares business regulation in 183
economies around the world. Kosovo ranked overall
last in Europe, slipping below its already dismal results
for 2010. In addition, the Secretary-General’s report
indicates that Kosovo lost preferential trade treatment
by the European Union, which means that products
originating from the province are again subject to EU
customs duties. The report also indicates that on 1
June, the International Monetary Fund (IMF)
announced the interruption of the 18-month stand-by
arrangement with Kosovo, which had violated its
budgetary and fiscal commitments to the IMF. Pristina
does not presently qualify to keep accessing IMF
funds. According to the report, this means that a
considerable amount of EU and World Bank funds will
not materialize either, as they are linked to clear
assurances on a sound macroeconomic framework.
On the political front, the murder trials of some
of so-called Prime Minister Hashim Thaçi’s close
associates were beginning to reveal awkward
connections between public figures and organized
crime. Based in part on the sobering testimony of
Nazim Bllaca, a confessed assassin and torturer for a
quasi-official security service controlled by Hashim
Thaçi, senior lieutenants such as Fahredin Gashi and

7

S/PV.6604

Hysni Rama, could be convicted of war crimes, as
mentioned in annex 1 of the report.
In addition, a number of seemingly authentic,
publicly available videos show Mr. Bllaca negotiating
for contract killings with Azem Syla, a former
commander in the Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA) and
currently a deputy leader of Mr. Hashim Thaçi’s
political party. On the record, Mr. Bllaca has accused
Hashim Thaçi of responsibility for 450 murders of
political opponents and witnesses to war crimes. Mr.
Bllaca claims he acquired this first-hand knowledge
while working in the special unit for executions of
Hashim Thaçi’s security service. He has said that he
reported directly to Azem Syla, identified by the
Council of Europe as a leading organized crime figure
in Kosovo, together with Fatmir Limaj. Limaj is a
former minister in Hashim Thaçi’s cabinet and a senior
KLA official who stands indicted for corruption and
war crimes by EULEX.
A key opposition leader and former KLA
commander as well as former prime minister, Ramush
Haradinaj, is being retried before The Hague Tribunal.
The indictment alleges that Haradinaj committed
crimes against humanity and violations of the laws or
customs of war between March and September 1998.
He is accused of directly participating in the murder of
a number of ethnic Serbs, non-KLA ethnic Albanians
and Roma civilians in order to exert control over
territory. He is also accused of being subsequently
involved in an orchestrated campaign of witness
tampering.
For the third Council meeting in a row, I have
taken up the serious allegations contained in a deeply
disturbing report released close to 10 months ago —
and overwhelmingly approved by the Council of
Europe Parliamentary Assembly on 25 January —
entitled “Inhuman treatment of people and illicit
trafficking in human organs in Kosovo”. I believe that
it is our most solemn responsibility to come together in
the service of justice and to see that it gets done
through a comprehensive, independent investigation
accountable to the whole world.
I believe we have no right to settle for anything
less, for in each previous instance involving war crimes
and crimes against humanity in the Balkans, whichever
side the perpetrators belonged to and irrespective of
their political roles, the Security Council has given a
mandate to investigate. Serbia welcomes the EULEX

8

contribution to uncovering what occurred inside
Kosovo itself. But the harvesting and smuggling of
organs of innocent Serbian civilians took place beyond
that territory, as the relevant allegations appear to
encompass various United Nations Member States in
Europe, Asia and Africa. Only the kidnapping took
place within the contours of the province. And as we
all know, EULEX cannot operate at full capacity
anywhere outside Kosovo.
However significant the contribution of what
EULEX has called its task force might ultimately
become, it is an unassailable fact that the EU’s law and
order mission in Kosovo currently has neither the
mandate nor the temporal and territorial jurisdiction to
carry out an investigation that would be comprehensive
in scope. On its own, the way it is, it has no ability to
ensure the cooperation of the world. Only a mechanism
created by the Security Council can do that.
We do not expect the discussion on this topic to
be concluded today. We are aware of the fact that
consultations are ongoing, and we appreciate the
efforts to reach a consensus in the Council on how to
decisively address these monstrous contentions. We
will continue to insist, however, that this body must
take action so that the full truth concerning these
unprecedented war crimes can be uncovered. Come
what may, Serbia will not forsake its duty to make sure
the victims’ families receive the justice they deserve.
The chasm of discord between the stakeholders
has been widened by Pristina’s unprovoked
unilateralism. Its actions have been all the more
disappointing given the fact that we had believed the
dialogue was taking place in an atmosphere of good
faith, conducive to achieving compromise solutions to
all outstanding issues.
We were making progress. In the past few
months, agreements in principle were concluded on
aspects of the civil registry and on academic diplomas
issues, as well as on elements of freedom of
movement, including Kosovo Serb license plates. Yet
when Pristina felt it had hit the first bump in the road,
it struck out, unilaterally, turning to the instruments of
compulsion and violence.
My Government chose not to respond in kind. We
believe the only way to build bridges across the divide
is through dialogue. As one of the twentieth century’s
most respected moral authorities once exclaimed, we
are tied together in a single garment of destiny, caught

11-48292

S/PV.6604

in an inescapable network of mutuality. And whatever
affects one directly, he said, affects the other just as
much. This is the truth we live in.
Now is the time for each one of us to make a
decision about how to move forward. Our guiding
framework can be either the use of force, or dialogue.
The former is the choice of despair, the latter of hope.
One cannot have it both ways.
Unilateralism is incompatible with efforts to
reach a mutually acceptable solution to the problem of
Kosovo. Everyone must choose which road to take. No
equivocation is possible. Serbia reiterates its strong
preference for peace and will keep working
unrelentingly in its pursuit, despite the terrible setback
caused by Pristina’s unilateralism. In the Balkans of
the twenty-first century, the unsanctioned use of force
should not produce an advantage for the party that
resorted to it, for that would be tantamount to an
encouragement to do it again.
I call on this Council to commit to ensuring that
when we meet next time, the only changes to the
reality on the ground are those that are the product of
agreement between the parties to the dialogue. Serbia
remains committed to the dialogue.
The President: I thank Minister Jeremić for his
statement. I now give the floor to Mr. Enver Hoxhaj.
Mr. Hoxhaj: Allow me to start by thanking you,
Mr. President, and the Council on behalf of the
Government and the people of the Republic of Kosovo
for your continuing interest in Kosovo.
For more than a decade, the Council has been
meeting four times a year to follow developments in
Kosovo. Before that, Kosovo was a subject of the
Security Council’s deliberations — at times, much
more than four times a year — in the 1990s due to
violence and war crimes committed by former Serbian
Governments. There were some difficult sessions here,
when there was little progress reported and no hope in
sight for final peace in the Balkans.
I am glad that in the last three years we made
significant progress, and recently we have been able to
report good news. The situation has stabilized and the
people of the region have become more concerned
about the problems of economic transition and
European integration than about scars of the old
conflict.

11-48292

The United Nations and the Security Council
have contributed to our progress as well. I would like
to use this opportunity to thank the previous Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Lamberto
Zannier, for years of dedication to the people of
Kosovo. We also welcome Mr. Farid Zarif, the new
Acting Special Representative, to Kosovo. His long
experience in the United Nations will be important as
Kosovo seeks a new relationship with the United
Nations.
Our strategic national interest is for Kosovo to
become a member of the European Union and of the
United Nations. This is the vision of most people from
all ethnic communities in Kosovo, and this is the
mission of our Government.
Today’s meeting of the Council is dedicated to
the events of the reporting period in Kosovo. Important
processes unfolded in the last three months that may
finally bring an end to the last remaining major Balkan
challenge. That challenge is the relationship between
Kosovo and Serbia, two of the last States to emerge
from the drama of former Yugoslav wars that were
started by Slobodan Milosevic and his regime.
This reporting period was one of highs and lows.
Firstly, I am happy to report to you that there has been
clear progress in the Republic of Kosovo in all fields of
economic, social and political development. But at the
same time, I must voice grave concern at the escalation
of rhetoric and violent acts that are coming from
Belgrade and its illegal structures in the north of the
Republic of Kosovo. Belgrade finances, leads and
controls these structures. These are the biggest
challenges Kosovo faces at the present moment.
On the positive side, I would like to inform the
Council that Kosovo today is a functional, multi-ethnic
State with a diverse society and with the most stable
political landscape in the Balkans. The new
Government created after the elections last year under
the leadership of Prime Minister Hashim Thaçi moved
ahead with its programme and is committed to further
improve the life of the people.
The President of Kosovo, Atifete Jahjaga, the
first woman President in the Balkans, has reinforced
her role as a non-partisan head of State and has
performed her duties with distinction. The Assembly of
the Republic of Kosovo, during this time, has focused
on reforming the Constitution and the election law,
which
reflects
the
agreement
between
the

9

S/PV.6604

governmental and opposition parties. This is another
proof of the political maturity of Kosovo.

borders to visitors from Kosovo but close them to
smugglers and criminals.

The International Civilian Office led by
Mr. Pieter Feith, which oversees the implementation of
Ahtisaari Plan, has recently concluded that Kosovo has
almost completely finished the entire process of
building democratic, transparent and multi-ethnic
institutions that serve all citizens. The Republic of
Kosovo has invested €150 million in the last three
years to implement the Ahtisaari Plan, including the
creation of new municipalities and new mechanisms
for protection of minorities. As a result, there has been
a distinct drop of inter-ethnic incidents, while
interaction between state and minority citizens has
increased, in the last three months.

The Republic of Kosovo reports significant
successes in foreign policy as well. The President, the
Prime Minister, the new Deputy Prime Minister,
Mr. Behxhet Pacolli, as well as other members of the
Government and Parliament have had important visits
and meetings in international forums.

The economy has also benefited from the
political stability. In August, International Monetary
Fund mission to Kosovo projected strong growth in the
gross domestic product of six per cent for 2011, with
foreign direct and public investments reaching
“fervent” levels. Kosovo also remains the least
indebted country in the region. We have continued with
substantive infrastructure investments this summer,
with the new highway to the Adriatic coast that will
also link Kosovo with Albania and Montenegro, as well
as with Serbia.
There has been noted progress on the rule of law.
This progress has happened due to close cooperation
between the Government of the Republic of Kosovo
and EULEX. We are pleased that the United Nations
Mission in Kosovo has pointed out in the latest report
that:
“Kosovo
police
demonstrated
improved
professionalism by conducting a number of
successful operations against arms smuggling,
trafficking of human beings, corruption and
money-laundering” (S/2011/514, para. 30).
The European perspective has begun to rapidly
shape political discourse in the Republic of Kosovo.
The visa liberalization process and obtaining a
contractual relationship with the European Union
remain the top priorities for Kosovo. The European
Commission has noted significant progress on its two
conditions for Kosovo for a visa liberalization
dialogue: the readmission and reintegration processes.
One of the principal conditions is integrated border
management, so the Kosovo Government will continue
to implement policies that will open European Union

10

Since my last report to the Council, the rate of
recognition of Kosovo’s independence by other nations
has increased. This is a result of the new strategy of the
Government of Kosovo. We take this opportunity to
thank the Governments of Andorra, the Central African
Republic, Niger, Guinea Konakry, Benin and Saint
Lucia for having recognized the Republic of Kosovo in
recent weeks. We also thank the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation for making an open call in Astana
in July on all its member States to recognize the
Republic of Kosovo.
I would like to inform the Council that we have
remained committed to increasing interaction and
dialogue with the entire region. Kosovo has played an
active part in the Regional Cooperation Council and
the Central European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA).
This shows that Kosovo is indeed rapidly becoming a
new and responsible member of the international
community.
Our dedication to regional cooperation prompted
the Government of Kosovo to reach its first agreements
with Serbia in the ongoing technical dialogue. As
members may recall, the General Assembly has
welcomed the European Union’s facilitation of the
technical dialogue between Kosovo and Serbia. The
aim of the dialogue is to improve the daily life of the
people and regional cooperation, and to prepare both
countries for a European future. The freedom of
movement of people and of goods, and trade relations
have been discussed in the five rounds of the dialogue.
The two Governments reached their first agreements by
which, for the first time since 1999, the Serbian
Government has accepted the identity cards, license
plates and school diplomas issued by the Government
of Kosovo.
We were to meet one more time during the
summer, but the Serbian delegation refused to take part
in the meeting scheduled for the month of July. We had
hoped to reach an agreement on the most important
economic issue that has been troubling Kosovo —

11-48292

S/PV.6604

Serbia’s refusal to accept Kosovo customs stamps.
These stamps are considered status-neutral by both the
United Nations and the European Union. Kosovo was
expected to import goods worth €500 million from
Serbia in 2011, while Serbia flatly bans any goods
from Kosovo. More importantly, Kosovo goods are not
allowed to even transit through Serbia to other
European markets. This situation has lasted for three
and a half years. At the beginning of this year, we
warned the Republic of Serbia that it was
discriminating against our industries and farmers in
direct violation of CEFTA accords and UNMIK legal
opinion.
Serbia had accepted the principle that Kosovo
was a single legal space when it agreed to resolution
1244 (1999) in July 1999. Unfortunately, the
Government of Serbia instead began making
orchestrated noises about the partition of Kosovo, with
the Serb-majority northern municipalities going to
Serbia. Both President Tadić and other senior officials
in Serbia have frequently proposed the ethnic division
of Kosovo.
I have to stress that such suggestions are very
dangerous because they provide an opening for ethnic
divisions within all units of the former Yugoslavia.
This forced us, with great regret, to take measures of
reciprocity against Serbian goods. This happened after
over three years of economic hardship caused by the
Serbian blockade against our exports. This also forced
us — with no regret at all — to take control over our
northern border crossings.
Let me be clear on this issue. We sent Kosovo
Police forces to our northern borders neither to disturb
citizens nor to attack them; we simply wanted to
reinforce measures of reciprocity in trade when all
attempts to negotiate the matter had failed. Our actions
were a legitimate exercise of the authority of the
Police. The authority for the Kosovo Police to operate
in northern Kosovo was accepted by Serbia itself in
2002, under Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Michael Steiner. The Kosovo Police in the
North has always operated in accordance with
resolution 1244 (1999), the Ahtisaari Plan and the
Constitution of the Republic of Kosovo.
As many UNMIK, EULEX and Kosovo Force
(KFOR) observers have reported, on 25 July Kosovo
Police were conducting an operation in a professional
manner. Road blocks were put in place by the illegal

11-48292

parallel structures and members of the Serbian
Government. Unfortunately, Serbian Government
members entered Kosovo illegally several times to
make very inflammatory remarks.
What happened was, frankly, the biggest
challenge we have seen to peace in the Balkans in
many years. Serbian illegal structures used explosives,
automatic weapons and snipers to shoot at Kosovo
Police, EULEX police and KFOR. One Kosovo Police
officer was killed by these extremists and criminals,
who are financed by both Belgrade and smuggling
activities. I repeat — the Kosovo Police did not use
violence. It was the Serbian Government that
committed acts of violence inside the territory of
Kosovo.
It was thanks to KFOR and Commander Bühler
that violence was stopped. He was able to broker a deal
that made possible the implementation of the legitimate
Kosovo Government’s measures. We recall that this
agreement with KFOR enables full control of the
border posts, but at the same time parallel structures
still frequently block the roads.
The United Nations, the European Union, CEFTA
and even Serbia have all agreed previously that Kosovo
is a single customs area. While Serbia and Kosovo can
disagree on how to establish their mutual relationship,
no one in this Chamber can disagree with the fact that
Serbia has no legal right to finance and support its own
armed, paramilitary, security, intelligence and other
institutions in Kosovo. Over the past 12 years, the
Government of Serbia has invested over €6 billion to
maintain and control those illegal structures in Kosovo.
This has to stop because it violates resolution 1244
(1999), the Ahtisaari agreement and international law.
When these forces are used to attack Kosovo Police,
EULEX police and KFOR troops, this is a grave attack
upon the entire architecture of security established in
the Balkans in 1999.
Some of the greatest problems reported in the
Secretary-General report before us today have to do
with the fact that Serbia not only insists on supporting
criminal structures in Kosovo, but also is actively
forbidding the integration of Kosovo Serbs.
On the basis of the Ahtisaari Plan, Kosovo Serbs
enjoy a wide range of preferential treatment, positive
discrimination and self-governance in certain sectors.
Their integration across the country has happened and
is a success story. Today, the majority of Serbs living

11

S/PV.6604

in Kosovo are integrated at the central and the local
levels. That shows that Kosovo’s multi-ethnic
democracy is responsive to the needs of the citizens.
Serb minority participation in the Government is strong
and genuine. One deputy prime minister, three
ministers, three deputy ministers and 12 Members of
Parliament represent the strong interests of the Serb
minority in Kosovo institutions.
Kosovo has proved that it can deliver to the
minorities. The new municipalities, such as Graçanicë,
Novobërdë, Ranillug, Partesh and Shtërpcë, have
managed to become fully functional. That shows the
full involvement of and economic benefits for the local
Serb population. That has happened due to the strong
commitment of local Serb politicians, led by Deputy
Prime Minister Slobodan Petrović.
On the other hand, Zubin Potok, Leposavić and
northern Mitrovica have never had proper and free
elections. That is the only corner of Europe where
criminal structures keep the local population hostage to
extremist aims. That has to change. The situation has
resulted in an area that exists outside the application of
Kosovo law and is under the control of Serbian illegal
structures. It has become a black hole, where criminals
of all ethnicities can flourish and where there is no
legal certainty for any citizen. It is a smugglers’
paradise in all sectors of the economy, where criminals
and smugglers profit and ordinary citizens live in very
bad conditions.
We call on the Security Council not to tolerate
efforts to challenge the legal order established after the
adoption of resolution 1244 (1999). The Kosovo
Government is committed to ensuring that the rule of
law is implemented within all its territory. We shall not
use force, nor do we need to; but we shall use our full
determination.
Here, let me emphasize that Kosovo is and will
be a free nation for all Kosovars, whether they be
Albanian, Serb, Roma, Turk, Bosniak, Croat,
Montenegrin or other. We do not want to impose any
rule in the North other than the rule of law. For Serb
political representatives to make the most of the very
broad political affirmative rights under the Ahtisaari
Plan is a matter of their choice. However, they should
at least be allowed the freedom to choose, and the
Ahtisaari Plan is the best framework for that. We will
continue to support the Kosovo police, KFOR and

12

EULEX in making sure that Kosovo makes more
progress in the rule of law.
As we have said many times, Pristina is the party
most interested in fully clarifying the allegations
brought by Dick Marty. We are pleased that the
investigation team is now well in place, and in that
context we welcome the nomination of Mr. John Clint
Williamson as the lead prosecutor for the EULEX
special task force. Let me affirm that the Government
of Kosovo will fully cooperate with EULEX as an
independent arbiter of justice in the case. As I have
noted in my intervention, Kosovo is a country of law,
dedicated to justice for victims and punishment for
criminals.
I have tried to be as brief as I can. I wish I could
have been briefer. The world has many pressing needs,
and other countries need the Council’s immediate
attention. Kosovo’s challenges are great, but they also
provide an important window of opportunity. Now that
the status issue is behind us, one can see that dialogue
between the two countries can become a generator of
goodwill and good solutions.
We are happy to see that a coherent international
effort to move away from the situation of a frozen
conflict and a status quo is taking place. I repeat,
status-quo, frozen conflict and partition are not
acceptable at all. There is no return to the situation that
existed before 25 July.
After 12 years, Serbia must dissolve parallel
structures and should start coming to terms with the
new independent nation as a neighbour and partner.
The Kosovo Government will redouble efforts to
provide democratic representation in all Kosovo, from
the very grass-roots politics at the municipal level. Our
institutions are open to all those who seek political
change through institutional means, including Kosovo
Serb politicians from the North.
I hope that the Security Council will recognize
the progress in the Balkans and will support both sides
engaging in a dialogue. That will confirm the most
basic principles of rejection of violence and respect for
the rule of law in the entire territory of the Republic of
Kosovo.
The President: I thank Mr. Hoxhaj for his
statement.
I now give the floor to members of the Council.

11-48292

S/PV.6604

Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, allow me to welcome and thank Mr. Farid
Zarif, Acting Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, for his briefing and for the detailed report on
the activities of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). I also
wish to welcome and commend the very interesting and
sharp analyses and cases made by the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of Serbia and of Kosovo, Mr. Vuk
Jeremić and Mr. Enver Hoxhaj.
For us, it is very important to note that the
political crisis in Kosovo has been overcome and that
the Government authorities now have the opportunity
to concentrate on building and strengthening
institutions.
The meetings between representatives of Pristina
and Belgrade, about which we received information
from both representatives, are very important. They are
of crucial value to the processes of dialogue and of
establishing specific areas, such as civil registry,
freedom of movement, regulation of academic
diplomas, movement of goods and all those issues that
are on the agenda.
Unfortunately, the violent incidents in July mar
and threaten that constructive dialogue and goodwill
towards a peaceful understanding. We wish to renew
our call for such outbreaks and such actions not to be
tolerated and for the authorities to do their utmost to
prevent them from reoccurring.
We wish to underscore the cooperation and
monitoring work that UNMIK is developing at the
technical level with the Ministry of Justice and the
Ministry of Internal Affairs of Kosovo and the work
with the Ministry of Justice of Serbia. We value their
work to facilitate dialogue between the authorities of
Serbia and States that have not recognized Kosovo and
the Ministry of Justice. We regret that mutual legal
assistance between the Ministries of Justice of Kosovo
and of Serbia remains at an impasse.
We are greatly concerned that incomplete
investigations, the inadequate implementation of
protection measures, lack of cooperation between the
police and prosecutors and a failure to prosecute
offenders exacerbate impunity. Without a strong
message from law enforcement mechanisms that
violence will not be tolerated, perpetrators will
continue to abuse, aware or confident that they will not
be punished.

11-48292

We take note of the recommendations contained
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2011/514), as
they will help to strengthen the dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina. Sensitive issues with regard to
North Kosovo can be resolved only by peaceful means,
on the basis of consultations with all communities on
the ground, and not through unilateral actions. Joint
work must be undertaken to prevent the deterioration
of the situation, and we call forcefully for the
outbreaks of violence and tensions in northern Kosovo
to end. Violent unilateral actions are unacceptable
because they only disrupt peaceful dialogue and the
pursuit of lasting solutions.
We welcome the reiteration by the Kosovo
authorities of their will to cooperate with the
investigation into organ trafficking undertaken by
Mr. Dick Marty, Special Rapporteur of the Council of
Europe, and we would ask the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo to inject real momentum into
the investigation work entrusted to it by the Task Force
established to that end. The announced appointment of
the new prosecutor is a step in the right direction, and
we urge him to make meaningful progress in the
investigation. If he does not, another alternative will
have to be found.
Finally, it is regrettable that the Security Council
has been unable to agree on a draft presidential
statement with respect on a situation and debate as
important as today’s.
Mr. Briens (France): I thank Mr. Vuk Jeremić,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and Mr. Enver
Hoxhaj, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kosovo, for
joining us today. I also welcome the Acting Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Farid
Zarif, and thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2011/514).
I should like to make three points. Northern
Kosovo experienced tensions and violence a few
weeks, which was addressed in an emergency meeting
of the Security Council. Tensions have abated, but such
incidents remind us that the international community
must remain very alert and of the importance of
dialogue between the parties. In that respect, I
welcome the activities of the Kosovo Force and the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX) that helped to restore calm and the free
movement of people through sensitive border crossings
between Serbia and Kosovo. Hasty or unilateral actions

13

S/PV.6604

should be avoided while a common solution is sought
through dialogue. There is no place for violence, which
should be firmly condemned by the political authorities
on both sides, who must take all measures necessary to
maintain the calm.
Dialogue between Serbia and Kosovo in the
context of the European Union has already borne fruit,
which must now be implemented. The next meeting
will take place in several days. We support this process
and call on Serbia and Kosovo to return to the
negotiating table in a constructive spirit. We hope that
these discussions, in addition to improving the daily
lives of the population, will strengthen trust between
the parties and contribute to the European prospects of
both countries, which must demonstrate a spirit of
compromise and creativity.
Such dialogue requires a gradual increase of
mutual trust. In this respect, we commend the
deployment by the European Union of a task force of
magistrates and investigators to look into allegations of
trafficking in human organs set out in the report of the
Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe that
was made public in 2010. The task force’s activities
will be based on the important work already
undertaken by EULEX in the framework of a
preliminary investigation that began on 27 January.
The willingness of the Serbian and Albanian authorities
of Kosovo to cooperate fully with EULEX should be
stressed. We call on all States concerned to continue
their cooperation with the Mission. The investigation
should be undertaken in an atmosphere of calm and a
spirit of dialogue, and not should not be exploited for
ulterior motives.
The international presence remains a motor of
stabilization. The European Union, the United Nations
and NATO are implementing their respective mandates
to move Kosovo towards sustainable stability and rule
of law. France hails the work of Mr. Lamberto Zannier
as Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo for some three years.
EULEX plays a crucial in helping the Kosovo
authorities to fight corruption and organized crime,
although it is the primary responsibility of
Governments to adopt relevant policies. The European
Union is also preparing to strengthen its presence with
the appointment of a single representative who will act
both as special representative of the European Union

14

and as head of its Kosovo office, and will shortly
assume his functions.
France stands with Kosovo and all States of the
region in helping to move them towards European
standards and European Union membership.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): I should like to join my
colleagues in thanking Mr. Zarif for his comprehensive
briefing. I also wish to take this opportunity to express
our gratitude to former Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Zannier for his important work in
recent years.
As highlighted in the recent report of the
Secretary-General (S/2011/514), the security situation
in Kosovo has generally remained calm. We welcome
the decrease in incidents of severe crime. However, we
deplore the increase in low-level incidents that have
affected minority communities, and we should not
close our eyes to ongoing problems, including
widespread organized crime. We also call on all
authorities to ensure that the strongest possible
measures are taken to ensure that no incidents affecting
international personnel take place.
At its most recent consultations on Kosovo at the
end of July, the Council discussed the latest incident in
northern Kosovo. That incident clearly showed that
issues related to the North must be a crucial element of
the European Union-led dialogue between Belgrade
and Pristina. We continue to hold the view that the
independence and territorial integrity of Kosovo are
not up for negotiation.
At the moment, the situation in the North remains
generally calm. We call upon all parties to further
respect and implement the provisional solution
negotiated by the Commander of the Kosovo Force. All
parties concerned have to fully cooperate with the
international presences, including the European Union
(EU) and the EU Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX).
The way forward towards improving the security
situation and alleviating tensions in the northern part of
Kosovo is to focus on practical solutions to outstanding
issues. We urge all sides to concentrate their efforts on
resolving the underlying issues through the European
Union-facilitated dialogue. The talks between Belgrade
and Pristina need to be conducted with a focus on
tangible issues and tangible results that improve the
lives of people in Serbia, Kosovo and the region. As a

11-48292

S/PV.6604

matter of urgency, this dialogue is the only way
forward to solve the issues currently being negotiated,
including the issue of customs and trade.

shared European future. Our objective is peace and
stability in the region with a clear European
perspective.

It is crucial that the commitment of both sides to
facilitating freedom of movement, the preservation of
culture and religious heritage, and the mutual
acceptance of university and school diplomas be fully
implemented. We also very much welcome the positive
developments in terms of the rule of law. Germany sees
the resumption of the sessions of the Working Group
on Missing Persons as a positive development that
needs our further support. It is crucial to
reconstruction.

Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): On
behalf of the delegation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, I
would like to express our appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for his comprehensive report (S/2011/514). We
also welcome the Acting Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Kosovo, Mr. Farid Zarif, and
thank him for his briefing on recent developments. Our
delegation will continue to fully support the work of
the Special Representative and the staff of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK).

Furthermore, we welcome the progress made in
recent months by EULEX in its full investigation of the
allegations of despicable crimes committed against
Serbian nationals during and after the end of the armed
conflict in Kosovo. The task force has been
successfully built up, and we are confident that it will
fully accomplish its assignment. We welcome the
appointment of John Clint Williamson, an experienced
legal expert and former prosecutor in the International
Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, as lead
prosecutor for the special investigative task force. The
unreserved commitment made by the Kosovo
authorities to cooperate with EULEX is a clear signal
that the allegations made can be fully investigated.
Kosovo has also made significant progress in the
reporting period. After successfully solving a series of
political crises within the constitutional framework, the
President, Government and Parliament of Kosovo have
taken up their work in order to further ensure political
stability and to meet the current economic and social
challenges in the country.
We therefore welcome the fact that the number of
countries recognizing Kosovo as an independent State
has increased yet again and this month reached the
threshold of 80 States. Those recognitions are a clear
sign that the region has gained stability and that the
international community is supportive of developments
in Kosovo. We call on States that have not yet done so
to recognize the Republic of Kosovo as a contribution
to peace and stability in the Western Balkans.
Let me conclude by underlining that Germany
will continue to pay great attention to developments in
Kosovo. As emphasized by Chancellor Angela Merkel
during her recent visit to Serbia and Kosovo, Germany
will continue to promote those countries’ joint and

11-48292

We welcome the participation in today’s meeting
of His Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremić, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, as well as of
Mr. Enver Hoxhaj.
Bosnia
and
Herzegovina
reiterates
its
appreciation for UNMIK’s efforts to fulfil its mandate,
including its support for the reconciliation process, its
facilitation of constructive dialogue and regional
cooperation and its focus on mediation between the
communities, as well as its support for minority
communities.
We remain convinced that sustained dialogue is
indispensable to achieving a mutually acceptable
solution to all outstanding issues in Kosovo. It is
important that the positive development — the
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina facilitated by
the European Union, in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 64/298 — continues, in order to
produce concrete results and solutions to the topics
under discussion.
In that context, we welcome the agreements on
freedom of movement, the civil registry and acceptance
of university and school diplomas. Furthermore, in
order to resolve longstanding issues affecting the dayto-day activities of the local population, it is essential
that both sides remain committed to implementing the
aforementioned agreements and to continuing dialogue
on pending issues.
With regard to the rule of law, we reiterate our
support for the activities of UNMIK, as well as of the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX), operating within the status-neutral
framework of the United Nations. We also support the

15

S/PV.6604

existing practice of cooperation and coordination
between UNMIK, EULEX, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and NATO — the
latter present through Kosovo Force troops — and we
hope that this practice will continue.
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s position, which is well
known, is that the rule of law is crucial to stability and
progress in the Balkans. In that regard, we would like
to re-state our concerns regarding the allegations
contained in the report of the Council of Europe’s
Special Rapporteur Dick Marty on the inhuman
treatment of people and illicit trafficking in human
organs in Kosovo.
Without a doubt, there is a need for a thorough,
impartial and independent investigation into these
serious allegations, with a strong witness-protection
programme and the full cooperation of all relevant
stakeholders. We welcome the recent formation of the
EULEX task force, to be composed of international
prosecutors and several international investigators
specializing in war crime investigations. We call on
EULEX to start working on those investigations
immediately. We also welcome UNMIK’s readiness to
extend its full cooperation to any investigation that
may take place.
We have taken note that the security situation in
Kosovo during the reporting period has remained
relatively calm, although tensions remain, mainly in
northern Kosovo, where the situation continues to be
sensitive and politically delicate, as the SecretaryGeneral’s report states. However, the most recent
incidents — which were not covered by the report —
remain a cause for concern for our delegation. In light
of these developments, we would like to appeal to the
parties to remain calm and act in a responsible manner,
in order for peace to prevail.
In the context of improvement of intercommunity dialogue and confidence-building among
the parties, we believe in UNMIK’s crucial role and
welcome its efforts to decrease tensions, draw attention
to common needs and create conditions conducive to
sustainable returns. During the reporting period,
UNMIK and the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees facilitated several “go-and-see” and “goand-inform” visits, which gave displaced persons the
opportunity to visit their properties and make firsthand
assessments of conditions in the receiving community.
The number of voluntary returns remains low, despite

16

the efforts of local and central authorities and the
international community, due to socio-economic
difficulties associated with the reintegration of
returnees.
In conclusion, we would like to repeat our
longstanding position that stability and security in
Kosovo are crucial to achieving lasting peace and
prosperity in our region. We consider that the
international community should continue to play an
important role in supporting the aspirations of the
countries of the region to integration into European and
Euro-Atlantic structures.
Finally, Bosnia and Herzegovina commends
UNMIK, operating within the framework of Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999), and its role in
maintaining peace, security, stability, and respect for
human rights in Kosovo.
Mr. Messone (Gabon) (spoke in French): My
delegation has listened attentively to the briefing on
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2011/514) on the
issue under discussion, We would like to thank the
Secretary-General for the report, as well as Mr. Farid
Zarif, his Acting Special Representative in Kosovo. We
also wish to take this opportunity to thank and
congratulate Mr. Lamberto Zannier for his excellent
work during his tenure.
Like other delegations, we welcome the presence
at his meeting of Mr. Vuk Jeremić, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and of Mr. Enver Hoxhaj.
In examining the situation in Kosovo, we note
some positive developments in the political dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina during the period
covered by the report, and a security situation that is
relatively calm but fragile, with an increase in tension
towards the end of the period.
Before going into details, my delegation would
like to recall the following points. Gabon underscores
the need to respect international law and believes in the
importance of dialogue and negotiations between the
parties to reach a lasting solution. We hope that the
parties will abstain from unilateral actions outside the
framework of negotiations to which they have
committed, which action could create tensions. In this
regard, we naturally condemn all unilateral acts of
violence committed by either party.
It is because of these factors that my country
continues to support the efforts of the United Nations

11-48292

S/PV.6604

Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
to implement the mandates of resolution 1244 (1999)
and welcomes its cooperation on the ground, especially
with the European Union Rule of Law Mission, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and KFOR, aimed at building on efforts to maintain
peace and stability in the region.
We therefore welcome the first political steps
forward in Kosovo, in reaching agreements on freedom
of movement, civil registry and university diplomas.
We encourage both parties to wholeheartedly set about
putting them into practice.
We are also pleased that the Working Group on
Missing Persons has resumed meetings after a year’s
hiatus because of internal political events in Kosovo.
That humanitarian issue is crucial to reconciliation in
Kosovo and in the region. Like other delegations, we
of course welcome the establishment of the task force
on missing persons and trafficking in organs, and we
hope that task force will carry out its investigation in a
transparent and independent manner.
Direct negotiations between Belgrade and
Pristina on living standards in Kosovo and on technical
peace and stability issues in the Balkans — which had
resumed last March in Brussels under the auspices of
the European Union — have sadly come to another halt
because of resurgent tensions in northern Kosovo.
Those negotiations must resume, and the issue of
northern Kosovo will obviously be a high priority.
In our last intervention in the Council on this
topic, my delegation, like others, expressed its regret at
renewed tensions. Today we once again call on all
parties to refrain from provocative acts that could
aggravate tensions and to adopt a constructive and
moderate attitude to create an atmosphere conducive to
dialogue. The distorting effect of a commercial
embargo on the products of each neighbouring region
in conflict is counterproductive and even sets the
negotiations back.
To conclude, in the interest of a peaceful
resolution of the question of Kosovo, Gabon calls on
all parties to be calm and to engage in a good faith in
direct dialogue, without which issues of common
interest will remain unresolved. My delegation hopes
to see the negotiations renewed under the auspices of
the European Union and the United Nations, and
success in the next round of talks due in September.

11-48292

Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Zarif for presenting
the Secretary-General’s report on the activities of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) (S/2011/514). We welcome the
participation in this meeting of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, Mr. Vuk Jeremić, and we share his
views. We listened with attention to the words of
Mr. Hoxhaj.
Russia’s position of not recognizing the unilateral
declaration of independence of Kosovo has not
changed. We support the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of the Republic of Serbia. Resolution 1244
(1999) retains its full force and remains obligatory for
all international legal approaches for a settlement in
Kosovo and for ensuring security in the region.
Moreover, the Security Council should continue to play
the leadership role in resolving tensions in Kosovo.
We are deeply concerned about the swift
deterioration of the situation in the northern region.
The provocative acts on the part of the Kosovo
authorities — especially the taking by force on 25 July
of the border crossing points Brnjak and Jarinje on the
Serbian border — destabilize an already tenuous
situation and only further enflame tensions. We agree
with Mr. Jeremić that the situation in northern Kosovo
should return to its pre-25 July status. Otherwise the
outcome will be to reward the unilateral use of force.
The international presence, in particular the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and
the International Security Force in Kosovo (KFOR),
should increase their efforts to restrain such dangerous
and destructive ambitions.
The questions raised by Mr. Jeremić on the events
of 25 July deserve a response. We consider the use of
KFOR helicopters in July for the transfer of Kosovo
police to be a flagrant violation of the neutral status of
the Force in Kosovo. In this context, we are concerned
about the declaration of the border crossings of Jarinje
and Brnjak as military protected zones where KFOR
has been given authorization to use force. We call on
the Force Commander to act responsibly and refrain
from extreme measures that favour one side. The
United Nations Mission should maintain close contact
with KFOR and ensure that it fully complies with
resolution 1244 (1999).
In our view, a compromise is needed on the
temporary plan for controlling the administrative

17

S/PV.6604

borders in the north of the Serbian autonomous region
of Kosovo. It is important that such an agreement
reflect the interests of those people for whom it is
drafted — in this case the residents of the region.
We have a few words to say about the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo. There have
been instances of a blatant hands-off policy regarding
the authorities in Pristina. That contradicts the neutral
status of that Mission and undermines its authority.
EULEX must strictly comply with resolution 1244
(1999), which means behaving with neutrality, taking
into account the interests of both sides, under the
leadership of UNMIK. That is not merely our wishes in
the matter; it is what was defined in 2008 by the
Secretary-General as one of the conditions for the
deployment of EULEX in the area. That was endorsed
by all members of the Council.
A sustainable solution to the Kosovo situation is
possible only through negotiations among interested
sides on the basis of the provisions of resolution 1244
(1999). In accordance with its Security Council
mandate, UNMIK should play an important role in the
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina.
In reality, with all respect to Mr. Zarif, we must
note a genuine lack of leadership at UNMIK. The
Mission is ignored by other international presences,
and it has failed to respond to recent events in the
northern region. The time has come to appoint a new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Kosovo to head UNMIK. We do not understand why
the Secretariat is delaying in resolving this crucial
issue. Action should be taken immediately.
Moreover, the Secretariat said that a reduction in
the financing of UNMIK would not undermine the
Mission’s activities, but today, taking into account
Mr. Zarif’s presentation, it is clear that that is not in
fact the case. The situation must be rectified.
We insist on a full and objective investigation of
crimes in Kosovo, including illegal trafficking in
human organs revealed in the report of the
Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe by
Dick Marty. We believe that the establishment of a
special group by EULEX to conduct an investigation
has been needlessly delayed. The appointment of the
American specialist at its head underscores yet again
that investigations of this kind should be international.
In that vein, we reiterate our support for the proposal
by Serbia for the Security Council to create a special

18

international investigative mechanism, answering to
the Council. That would guarantee its reliability and
political impartiality.
We call attention to the inadmissibility of Kosovo
leaders participating — outside the UNMIK format —
in international forums, including the United Nations
and its specialized bodies. We do not accept attempts to
legitimize Kosovo by making it a member of
international structures.
The situation regarding the return to Kosovo of
internally displaced persons continues to be
unsatisfactory. Unfortunately there is an ongoing
neglect of multiple cases in which Kosovo Serbs are
forced to sell their property and leave the region. That
bears witness to the absence of any growing interethnic tolerance in Kosovo. On the contrary, the trend
is actually one of regression. The territories of large
Serbian enclaves are gradually shrinking and will
finally disappear.
One of the Council’s important achievements in
Kosovo is the fact that after 1999 we succeeded in
preventing a full-fledged bloodbath in the region. That
was to a great extent made possible by a shared
understanding of the inadmissibility of the use of force
to resolve disagreements. The tragic events of the end
of July in northern Kosovo clearly demonstrated that
the situation in the region is far from being stable and
continues to be explosive.
In these conditions, the Russian delegation
proposed for consideration by members of the Council
a draft presidential statement that was intended to
provide a clear and unequivocal message to all sides on
the need to refrain from unilateral actions and the use
of force and to employ dialogue to overcome
differences in opinion. Taking into account the known
differences in opinion on the Council regarding the
issue of Kosovo, we drafted a document that was
utterly balanced. However, given the obstructive
position taken by the quintet in the Council, that draft
has been blocked. We express our regret and
disappointment at that.
Mr. Cabral (Portugal): I wish to thank the Acting
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Farid Zarif, for his briefing. I would like to
welcome the Foreign Minister of Serbia, Mr. Vuk
Jeremić, and the Foreign Minister of Kosovo,
Mr. Enver Hoxhaj, and to thank them for their
interventions. I also wish to express my appreciation to

11-48292

S/PV.6604

Mr. Lamberto Zannier for his work in Kosovo, and I
wish him well in his new office.
I would like to focus my statement on some
specific issues. First is the dialogue between Belgrade
and Pristina, which has already produced some
important results in the fields of freedom of movement,
civil registry and academic diplomas. It continues to be
the most important setting for achieving a mutually
agreed solution for the outstanding issues.
Under the auspices of, and at the incentive of, the
European Union, the parties are sitting at the same
table discussing issues with an impact on the daily
lives of people in Serbia and Kosovo. That is a process
that can go forward only if there is good faith, good
will and a spirit of compromise on both sides. I believe
we would be taking a significant step backwards if this
process came to a halt because the hope of a mutually
agreed settlement had been lost. If we are to expect
positive developments, if the negotiations process is to
move forward in a meaningful way, concessions are
needed from both sides. I will return to that point
further on.
Now I wish to bring up some of the issues
referred to in the report of the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX). The continued
efforts by this Mission to uphold the rule of law and
law enforcement in Kosovo should be duly
appreciated. High-profile cases continue to take a
prominent place in the report on EULEX activity.
Allow me to refer once more to the investigation of the
allegations made regarding the trafficking in human
organs that may amount to war crimes in Kosovo, with
ramifications in other countries.

circumstances on the ground, hoping that they may
become permanent. Such actions or initiatives by
whatever party are unacceptable. It is up to us to make
sure that nothing is to be gained by straying from the
diplomatic track — as narrow and winding as it may
look.
In this framework, the work of the international
forces and bodies and the reinforcement of their
capacities are to be welcomed. In that regard, I wish to
commend the operational and tactical skills shown by
KFOR during the events we are discussing.
EULEX is also playing a key role in several
fundamental aspects of the normalization of life in
Kosovo. We commend its work and its commitment to
that difficult mission. We welcome the considerable
drop in violent crime described in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2011/514), as well as the
improved professionalism of the Kosovo police.
On the other hand, we are concerned about the
sharp increase in criminal incidents affecting minority
communities in the past three months. Guaranteeing
the physical safety of minorities is one of the
cornerstones of the rule of law in any modern polity.
Also important is the fight against domestic
violence — a social phenomenon that law enforcement
agencies must not leave unpunished and should not
tolerate.
It is vital for the parties to persevere in and
intensify their diplomatic efforts, in good faith and in
transparency. That is not only possible; it is an
imperative. They all have our full support in that
endeavour.
I believe we must rely on the professionalism and
commitment of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo, as well as of KFOR
and EULEX and other international partners on the
ground, in continuing to carry out their mandates, as
they have done so far. My final words are words of
appreciation for and encouragement of their work.

A considerable amount of new staff and resources
have been assigned to the EULEX special task force to
investigate the allegations in Senator Dick Marty’s
report, which is now in the last stages of preparation.
We welcome the fact that the mission has successfully
established jurisdiction regarding certain crimes
committed outside the borders of Kosovo. That is an
important development in the endeavour to uncover the
whole truth behind the allegations, which must remain
our ultimate goal. It is important that the members of
this Council are kept fully updated on the progress of
the EULEX investigations concerning the Senator’s
allegations.

Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): Allow
me to start by thanking Mr. Farid Zarif for his briefing
today. I wish him well in his role as Acting Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. I also wish to
thank his predecessor, Mr. Lamberto Zannier, for his
effective work as Special Representative.

The current situation in Kosovo offers ample
opportunity for attempts to force a change of

I wish to welcome today Mr. Enver Hoxhaj,
Foreign Minister of Kosovo, and Mr. Vuk Jeremić,

11-48292

19

S/PV.6604

Foreign Minister of Serbia, and to thank them for their
statements.

should be ready to engage constructively at the next
meeting of the dialogue, scheduled to start this Friday.

We have witnessed troubled times in Kosovo over
the past month. The United Kingdom was very
seriously concerned by the outbreaks of violence there,
which resulted in the death of one Kosovo policeman
and injuries to many other Kosovo citizens. We
appreciate the role played by KFOR and the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) in
calming the situation and in facilitating agreements
with Kosovo and Serbia to end the tense standoff. We
urge all parties to continue to coordinate with these and
other international actors in Kosovo.

We are encouraged by the resumption of the
Working Group on Missing Persons, highlighted in the
Secretary-General’s report. A continuing commitment
to this process on both sides is fundamental for
providing closure for those families who lost loved
ones in the 1990s, and for continuing progress toward
regional reconciliation.

We welcome the fact that there has been no
further violence, and we urge both Kosovo and Serbia
to continue to engage constructively. As Mr. Zarif said,
rhetoric on both sides needs to be constructive, not
confrontational.
Tensions in the north need to be calmed so that
people who live there do not suffer. The report of the
Secretary-General (S/2011/514) notes that in April the
Kosovo authorities conducted a population and housing
census throughout Kosovo, with the exception of
northern Kosovo. It is regrettable that the so-called
parallel structures in the north prevented the United
Nations Office for Project Services — UNOPS — from
conducting the census there. Important data needed to
provide social, economic and health services to the
people in northern Kosovo will be distorted.
That, together with the outbreak of violence in
July, demonstrates how vulnerable the situation is in
northern Kosovo. It also underlines more than ever the
importance of Kosovo-Serbian relations being put on a
more stable track. That is why we actively and fully
support the EU-facilitated dialogue. That dialogue
provides a unique opportunity to build sustainable and
practical cooperation between Kosovo and Serbia and
to move both countries, in a more stable fashion,
towards a secure and prosperous future in the European
Union.
The Secretary-General’s report rightly highlights
the progress made during the fifth round of the
dialogue. Agreements were reached that will, if
properly implemented, improve the lives of people in
both Kosovo and Serbia. I urge Ministers Hoxhaj and
Jeremić not to lose sight of that progress, or of our
shared goals. The Governments of Kosovo and Serbia

20

Of continuing concern is the Secretary-General’s
assessment that tensions persist between receiving
communities and returnees. The United Kingdom has
long supported the work of the United Nations and the
Government of Kosovo to ensure that returnees feel
able to go home. Over the past several years my
Government has given more than $3 million to support
the work on returns.
Finally, as Foreign Secretary Hague and Foreign
Minister Westerwelle said on 8 August, the countries of
the Western Balkans have made good progress towards
democracy and neighbourly relations in the 17 years
since the break-up of the former Yugoslavia. War crime
suspects have been delivered to face international
justice. Croatia has been invited to join the European
Union. Since we last met, the number of countries
which recognize Kosovo as an independent State has
risen to 81. This shows that Kosovo’s progress as a
viable independent States is irreversible.
Kosovo’s future belongs in the European Union,
along with Serbia and its other neighbours in the
Western Balkan. The United Kingdom underlines once
more its commitment to work tirelessly towards that
goal.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I wish
to thank Mr. Farid Zarif for his briefing and to
welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia,
Mr. Vuk Jeremić, and to thank him for his statement. I
also thank Mr. Enver Hoxhaj for his statement.
We wish to confirm our support for the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) in its efforts to promote reconciliation,
security and human rights. We pay tribute to UNMIK
for its role on several fronts, including missing persons
and the protection of cultural and religious heritage.
We call on the parties to provide the necessary support
to UNMIK so as to enable it to implement its mandate.
We believe that coordination between UNMIK, the

11-48292

S/PV.6604

European Union Rule of Law Mission (EULEX) and
the Kosovo Force should continue within the statusneutral framework referred to in resolution 1244
(1999).
It is encouraging that progress has been achieved
in the dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina. That
has lead to progress on many issues that facilitate the
daily lives of the people of Kosovo, including civil
registry, freedom of movement and academic diplomas.
We are hopeful that this will lay the foundations for the
resolution of all outstanding issues in an open and
constructive spirit. We also hope that the two parties
will make efforts to achieve genuine reconciliation
between communities and thereby enhance long-term
peace and security.
We believe that the current situation is very
delicate as it paves the way for future steps. Any
unilateral actions that exacerbate the situation on the
ground will impact dialogue and trust between parties,
not to mention the legal implications. We view the
incidents that took place on 25 and 26 July from this
perspective. We urge both parties to refrain in future
from unilateral action or from resort to violence. We
urge them to contain any escalation of tension via
dialogue.
When it comes to security, we are satisfied at the
relative calm that prevailed in most of the region
during the reporting period. We share the SecretaryGeneral’s concern regarding the increased tension in
northern Kosovo and his assessment that delicate
issues can be resolved only through peaceful means
and consultations among local communities. We call on
all stakeholders in northern Kosovo to play a
constructive role in finding solutions to delicate issues,
as this is very important for the political and security
environment.
Moreover, we believe that the current efforts to
shed light on the fate of missing persons are very
important despite the slow progress in this respect. We
pay tribute to UNMIK, EULEX and the International
Committee of the Red Cross for their efforts in this
area.
Finally, with regard to allegations of inhumane
treatment and the alleged trafficking of human organs
in Kosovo in 1999, we hope that every effort will be
made to uncover the truth, hold the perpetrators
accountable and promote justice, reconciliation and
lasting peace.

11-48292

Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank the Acting Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Farid Zarif, for his
briefing. I welcome the presence of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Serbia, Mr. Jeremić, at today’s
meeting. I listened very attentively to the statement by
Mr. Hoxhaj.
Recently, the situation in Kosovo has generally
remained stable, yet it is still sensitive and fragile. The
situation in northern Kosovo where ethnic minorities
live is particularly complex.
China is gravely concerned at the recent tension
in northern Kosovo. We are of the view that the parties
concerned should exercise caution and resolve their
differences through dialogue and negotiations and
should refrain from taking any unilateral action that
could change the current status of the region and
escalate the present situation.
The question of Kosovo has a direct bearing on
peace and stability in the Balkans and Europe at large.
China believes that the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Serbia should be respected. Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999) serves as the important
legal basis for resolving the question of Kosovo. The
question of Kosovo should be settled in the framework
of relevant resolutions and through peaceful means
such as dialogue, consultations and negotiations among
the parties concerned.
China is encouraged by the recent progress made
during the dialogue between Serbia and Kosovo. We
urge both parties to keep up the momentum and
endeavour to find a mutually acceptable solution at an
early date.
China commends the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo for its efforts to
carry out its mandate under difficult circumstances,
and we support the Mission’s continuing contribution
to maintaining regional peace and stability. We hope
that the relevant regional organizations will continue to
play a positive and constructive role in properly
addressing the question of Kosovo.
China is deeply concerned at the illicit trafficking
in human organs in Kosovo. No action in violation of
international law and international humanitarian
standards can be tolerated. Serbia’s concern at such
cases is fully justified. We support calls for the United
Nations to conduct investigation into these cases.

21

S/PV.6604

Mr. Onowu (Nigeria): I join others in thanking
His Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremić, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, for sharing his perspectives with us. I
thank Mr. Enver Hoxhaj for his statement. I would also
like to thank the Acting Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Farid Zarif, for his update on
the situation in Kosovo.
It is satisfying to note the return to normalcy in
northern Kosovo following last month’s incident. We
urge the parties to continue to maintain the momentum
in order to guard against a relapse into violence. They
should also engage just as seriously in promoting
reconciliation and the peaceful settlement of pending
issues through the time-tested principles of
compromise and mutual respect.
While the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2010/514) indicates that the overall security
situation in Kosovo is stable, it remains in a fragile
balance. Incidents of attacks against minority
communities and international personnel and the
underlying tensions in northern Kosovo are indicative
of the challenges in the territory. Of particular concern
is the need to address insecurity and other outstanding
challenges bedevilling northern Kosovo. Concrete and
concerted action is required to strengthen law
enforcement and encourage broad-based consultations
towards promoting social cohesion and reconciliation
among the communities.
We commend the efforts of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
to facilitate dialogue and cordial relations among the
communities. We appreciate the collaboration among
UNMIK, the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX) and other actors in fostering
cooperation and peace in Kosovo and the region in
general. Finding sustainable and far-reaching solutions
to issues of common concern to the communities and
between the parties will go a long way towards
fostering lasting peace and stability in Kosovo and the
region.
We therefore urge regional and international
actors to work in concert and to intensify their efforts
to reach a durable solution to the problems in Kosovo.
We further urge the parties not to allow the misgivings
over last month’s incidents to impede the European
Union-facilitated talks. Both parties have hitherto to
engage constructively in those talks. We commend
them on the results achieved thus far, and urge them to

22

stay committed to the process. It is only proper that the
international community step up efforts to preserve the
gains in those talks.
In that connection, we urge the European Union,
UNMIK and other international actors to continue to
provide the necessary support to the talks. We also
underline the importance of ensuring that all local
stakeholders are involved in the process.
On the issue of returns, it is essential to sustain
efforts to promote voluntary returns, as well as the
conditions necessary for those returns. In that context,
we support the proposal to include benefits for the
receiving communities in returns projects. The
sustained outreach activities of UNMIK, as well as the
support of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and of the international
community, are needed to underpin such efforts.
Nigeria notes the intention of EULEX to
commence investigations into the allegations of
trafficking in human organs. We underline the
importance of ensuring that the views and concerns of
all stakeholders are adequately accommodated. That
will ensure that the final outcome of the investigations
enjoy the broadest possible support.
In concluding, we pay special tribute to the work
of the former Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Lamberto Zannier.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I
would like to welcome Foreign Ministers Hoxhaj and
Jeremić back to the Council. I would also like to
welcome Acting Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Farid Zarif to the Council and to
thank him for his briefing. Let me take a moment to
express our gratitude and appreciation for former
Special Representative Lamberto’s service to the
United Nations and leadership of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
We wish him continued success during his term as
Secretary-General of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe.
I would like to make four points today. First,
following the recent events and violence in northern
Kosovo, we welcome the common understanding
reached between the leaders of Kosovo and Serbia with
the goal of reducing further tensions. We expect both
sides to peacefully and fully adhere to the
understanding and scrupulously respect it. We

11-48292

S/PV.6604

commend the Kosovo Force for facilitating the process
leading to the common understanding and for working
to maintain a safe and secure environment and freedom
of movement, in accordance with its mandate pursuant
to resolution 1244 (1999).
As an independent and sovereign State, Kosovo
has the right to extend its authority and enforce the rule
of law throughout its territory, and to ensure a unified
police chain of command. Strengthening the rule of
law, including in Kosovo’s North, is critical to
Kosovo’s development as a European State,
fundamental to ensuring the welfare and security of all
Kosovo’s citizens, regardless of ethnicity or location,
and in the interest of its neighbours and the entire
region. We remain deeply concerned by the
engagement of Serbian Interior Ministry police in
northern Kosovo, in direct violation of Kosovo’s
sovereignty and in breach of resolution 1244 (1999),
which demands the withdrawal of such military police
and military forces.
Secondly, I would like to point out that the
European Union-facilitated dialogue between Kosovo
and Serbia is already bearing fruit. Indeed, as a result
of agreements reached thus far, travellers should find it
easier to move throughout the region, students have
clearer prospects of having the records of their
academic achievements accepted in neighbouring
countries, and ordinary citizens will have access to
more accurate civil registry records, thereby
strengthening the rule of law.
We support the intention of Belgrade and Pristina
to continue the European Union (EU) dialogue in
September, and remain hopeful that they can arrive at
an arrangement of positive reciprocity at the border,
through which people and goods can move freely in
both directions. We call on both sides, in line with their
European aspirations and the economic interests of the
greater region, to resolve that impasse and to end their
respective trade restrictions. It is unfortunate that the
Government of Kosovo felt forced to impose reciprocal
trade restrictions on Serbia. At the same time, we have
to recognize the truth, which is that Serbia imposed a
similar embargo on goods from Kosovo more than
three years ago.
The EU-facilitated dialogue is not about
Kosovo’s status. Kosovo is a sovereign and
independent country. Neither partition nor territorial
adjustments are on the table, and such suggestions only

11-48292

sow fear and undermine stability in the region. The
dialogue is about realizing both Kosovo’s and Serbia’s
European futures. Both benefit from each other’s
progress on the path towards full European integration.
Thirdly, we welcome the progress made by the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX) in securing the necessary personnel,
facilities and equipment for its Task Force, dedicated to
conducting a thorough and transparent investigation
into the allegations contained in Special Rapporteur
Marty’s report to the Council of Europe. The United
States has offered its support to the EU Task Force, and
we welcome the appointment of a lead prosecutor.
The Secretary-General’s report notes the positive
cooperation that EULEX is already enjoying from the
Albanian authorities on that and other cases. We fully
expect the Task Force, throughout its investigation, to
continue to enjoy the full cooperation of all local
authorities in the region. We fully support EULEX in
leading an investigation into the substance of the report
on the basis of relevant evidence or sources. Kosovo
law and EU joint action on EULEX explicitly provide
that EULEX can investigate and prosecute serious
crimes, such as those alleged in the report, and do so
independently. As demonstrated by the Geci case
detailed in the EULEX addendum (see S/2011/514,
annex), EULEX already has the jurisdiction and ability
to investigate and prosecute crimes committed outside
Kosovo as well.
The assertion that all investigations into war
crimes in the ex-Yugoslav realm have taken place
under Security Council auspices is not correct. There
have been and remain today many cases in domestic
courts in the region. Such an approach is intrinsic to
the completion strategy of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.
Lastly, I would like to underscore again that the
United States remains committed to a stable,
prosperous, multi-ethnic and democratic Kosovo that is
at peace with all its neighbours. We welcome the
continued progress in the region to grapple with the
difficult legacy of the 1990s. The renewed sessions of
the Working Group on Missing Persons after nearly a
year’s hiatus give hope for resolving that difficult
legacy. We also welcome the progress achieved by
local authorities in reintegrating both voluntary and
forced returnees into Kosovo society.

23

S/PV.6604

Eighty-one countries share our vision for the
region and have recognized Kosovo. We once again
call on the remaining countries to contribute to
stability in the region by welcoming Kosovo into the
international community through formal recognition.
Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Jeremić, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Serbia, and thank him for his statement. I
also thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2011/514). I would like to express our appreciation
to Acting Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Farid Zarif for his briefing and to Mr. Hoxhaj
for his remarks.
Brazil also takes this opportunity to convey our
gratitude to Mr. Lamberto Zannier for his competent
work as Special Representative for Kosovo and wish
him success in his new activities.
We are pleased with the intensification of the
discussions between Belgrade and Pristina and their
willingness to bring about concrete results. Progress in
the areas of civil registry, freedom of movement and
academic certification, among others, is commendable
and can provide tangible improvements to the daily
lives of the population in Kosovo. These agreements
have the potential to pave the way for the discussion of
outstanding political issues that need to be addressed.
Dialogue is the only way to create peace, security and
stability in the region.
Notwithstanding these positive developments, we
are concerned about the increasing tension in northern
Kosovo. All stakeholders must be extremely careful at
this stage to avoid any unnecessary aggravation of the
situation. We are also worried about the increase in the
number of incidents involving minority communities
and international personnel throughout the region. The
relevant authorities must do everything in their power
to discourage these actions.
Regarding humanitarian and human rights issues,
we welcome the resumption of the activities of the
Working Group on Missing Persons on an issue that is
so important to the local population. On the other hand,
we share the Secretary-General’s concern over the low
number of voluntary returns to the region, despite
efforts in that regard.
Brazil remains concerned about the allegations of
inhuman treatment of people and illicit trafficking in
human organs in Kosovo. We are encouraged by the

24

willingness of the parties to cooperate in the
investigation of these cases, which must be subject to
independent and credible scrutiny. In that regard, we
remain open to the possibility of exploring options that
take into account the need to involve various
jurisdictions and the importance of ensuring
consistency with resolution 1244 (1999).
Brazil reaffirms its belief that resolution 1244
(1999) offers the appropriate framework for a
negotiated settlement that can address tensions in the
region. We are confident that a fair and legitimate
solution can be reached under the auspices of the
Security Council through the support of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) and regional organizations. The work of
UNMIK is crucial to the stability of the region. The
Mission must have complete safety to carry out its
important functions.
The Council should continue to keep political
developments in Kosovo under close review and
encourage further dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina. The long-term benefits of this dialogue must
be made evident to all stakeholders, regardless of
discussions on yet unresolved political issues.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): South Africa would
like to take this opportunity to welcome the Acting
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Farid Zarif, to the Council. He can be assured of
our support. We also wish to pay tribute to former
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Zannier for his contribution to the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
We again welcome Foreign Minister Jeremić to
the Council and thank him for his statement. We also
welcome Mr. Hoxhaj and thank him for his statement.
My delegation reiterates its conviction that
resolution 1244 (1999) remains in force and forms the
basis for resolving the situation in Kosovo. UNMIK’s
role is to promote security and stability in Kosovo, and
it should be allowed to fully implement its mandate as
authorized by the Council. Further, it is essential that
the international presence in Kosovo maintain its
status-neutral posture in the execution of its mandates,
in
line
with
the
presidential
statement
(S/PRST/2008/44) adopted in November 2008.
South Africa supports the dialogue process
between the two sides, as mandated by the General

11-48292

S/PV.6604

Assembly. Moreover, we believe that this regular
contact between the parties is an important confidencebuilding measure that will, hopefully, improve trust
and allow the parties to address the outstanding
contentious issues. In this regard, we note from the
Secretary-General’s
report
(S/2011/514)
that
agreements have been reached on political measures
aimed at improving the lives of the ordinary people of
Serbia and Kosovo in the areas of freedom of
movement, civil registry, academic diplomas and other
practical matters, as acknowledged by the
representatives of both parties here today. Although the
dialogue has been suspended until September, we urge
the parties to engage constructively with the aim of
resolving all outstanding matters and promoting
reconciliation once the dialogue resumes.
However, the achievement attained in the
dialogue process could be undermined by negative
developments on the ground. In this regard, we are
concerned about the developments of 25 July in
northern Kosovo, which have led to a deterioration in
the already tense security situation in that area.
Unilateral actions by Pristina will jeopardize the
advances made by the parties in the dialogue process
and ultimately make reconciliation more difficult to
achieve.
The international presence in Kosovo is mandated
by this Council to facilitate peace and reconciliation.
Therefore, any action by either side aimed against
either UNMIK, the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) or the Kosovo Force is
unacceptable. We support the Secretary-General’s calls
on Pristina and the authorities in Mitrovica to
demonstrate full respect for the international presence
and to provide reassurances that the inviolability of
UNMIK’s premises will be protected and observed.
In this Council’s previous debates on UNMIK in
February (S/PV.6483) and May (S/PV.6534), we stated
that the limited progress towards reconciliation
between the communities in Belgrade and Pristina
could also be undone by the allegation of human organ
smuggling. We reiterate our position that a credible,
thorough, impartial and independent inquiry into these
allegations should be conducted as quickly as possible.
South Africa believes that there should be no impunity
for grave violations of human rights.
In this regard, we have noted the statement issued
by EULEX that it has the capacity, expertise and

11-48292

jurisdiction to handle the investigations, and indeed
that it has assumed responsibility for them. We have
also noted the creation of the EULEX special Task
Force. South Africa wishes to encourage EULEX to
provide regular reports to the Council on the progress
of these investigations.
In conclusion, sustainable peace, stability and
development in the region are best served by
reconciliation between Belgrade and Pristina. Dialogue
is the only way to find a viable and long-term solution
to the situation on the ground and for the region to
move forward in its socio-economic development and
regional integration. South Africa stands ready to work
in the Council with these partners in support of that
process.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my national capacity.
I should like to join others in thanking Acting
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Farid
Zarif for his comprehensive briefing on the situation in
Kosovo and the activities of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
I also want to thank His Excellency Mr. Vuk
Jeremić, Foreign Minister of the Republic of Serbia,
for his statement. We have also carefully listened to the
statement of Mr. Enver Hoxhaj.
The Secretary-General’s report on UNMIK
(S/2011/514) has brought out in detail the ground
situation in Kosovo. We are happy to note that UNMIK
is pursuing its mandated priorities to promote security,
stability and respect for human rights in Kosovo and
the region, while continuing to provide transitional
administration to Kosovo, as mandated by resolution
1244 (1999). In furtherance of these objectives, it has
actively engaged with Pristina and Belgrade, the
communities in Kosovo and regional and international
actors.
We also note with satisfaction that the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
the Kosovo Force and the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) have continued to
perform their important roles within the framework of
resolution 1244 (1999), and to cooperate and
coordinate with UNMIK. We hope that the resumption
of talks between Belgrade and Pristina, scheduled for
next months in Brussels, will build the necessary trust
and confidence between the two sides.

25

S/PV.6604

India has always believed that the Kosovo issue
should be resolved peacefully through consultation and
dialogue between the concerned parties. We agree with
the Secretary-General’s view that this dialogue process
has the potential to bridge the differences between the
two sides and resolve a series of longstanding issues
that affect the lives of people on the ground. We urge
both parties to show flexibility, understanding and
creativity in order to achieve tangible results. The
positive engagement of both sides in the formal and
informal dialogue processes could pave the way for
further progress in their relations. In that connection,
we appreciate and support UNMIK’s continued role in
facilitating that dialogue process, and urge the parties
to cooperate fully with it.
We also support UNMIK’s efforts to facilitate the
work
of
the
Reconstruction
Implementation
Commission and the Working Group on Missing
Persons. The continued voluntary return of refugees
recorded by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees is heartening. The number
of voluntary returns has, however, remained very low,
and appropriate solutions must be found to address the
persisting tensions between receiving communities and
returnees, as well as the successful integration of all
the returning communities.
We are concerned about the recurrence of threats
to the premises of the UNMIK office in Mitrovica and
the growing number of incidents affecting international
personnel and assets, including the growing tensions
and recent border incidents in northern Kosovo. We
call on the parties to resolve sensitive issues through
peaceful means on the basis of consultations and
engagement with all communities, avoiding any
unilateral action.

26

We have noted with concern the SecretaryGeneral’s view that the Kosovo authorities remain
fundamentally sceptical about UNMIK’s facilitation of
their engagement in international and regional
initiatives. We hope that they will not seek to
undermine UNMIK’s role, mandated by the Security
Council, and will instead cooperate fully with UNMIK
and other United Nations and European Union
institutions. In this connection, we deeply regret the
Council’s failure to adopt a presidential statement on
recent developments in Kosovo.
While we welcome the efforts made by EULEX
to investigate allegations of inhuman treatment of
people and illicit trafficking in human organs in
Kosovo, we have noted Serbia’s continued interest in
the role of the Security Council in this investigation.
We continue to support the proposal for the creation of
a mechanism that enjoys the support and confidence of
all stakeholders.
In conclusion, let me reiterate India’s consistent
position that all issues concerning Kosovo should be
resolved peacefully through consultation and dialogue
between the concerned parties, without resort to
destabilizing unilateral action. Only in this way can the
aspirations of all the peoples concerned be met and
lasting peace and stability established in the region.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.30 p.m.

11-48292
