UNITED NATIONS

THIRTY-FIFTH

YEAR

th
MEETING:

19 FEBRUARY

1980

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
. . , . , . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . a. .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . , . . , . . . ~, , , , . . . . , . . . . , , . . , . , . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Admission of new Members:
Report of the Committee on the Admission of New Members concerning
the application of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines for membership in
the United Nations (S/13805) . . . . . , . . , . . . . . , . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ,

1

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2198)

SlPV.2198

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplctwtltsof the Q[/Clicirrl R~umi.s ~f‘the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Rcwlrltions
trrrtl
Decisions
oJ’ tl~e Scc*rr~Yt~ Corrncil. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 196.5, became fully operative
on that date.

2198th MEETING

President:

(German

Held in New York on Tuesday,

19 February

Mr. Peter FLORIN
Democratic Republic).

the Committee
on the Admission of New Members
concerning the application of Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines for membership in the United Nations

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh,
China, France, German Democratic
Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.

Provisional
Adoption

2.

Admission of new Members:
Report of the Committee on the Admission of
New Members concerning the application of
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines for membership in the United Nations (S/13805)
The meeting

[S/13784].

In paragraph 3 of its report, the Committee recommends to the Council the adoption of a draft resolution
on the application for membership of Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines. In accordance with the procedure
followed on previous occasions, I propose that the
Council should first vote on the draft resolution and
that those who wish to speak do so thereafter. If
I hear no objection, I shall take it that that procedure
is acceptable to the members of the Council. Accordingly, I shall now put the draft resolution to the
vote.
3.

agenda (S/Agenda/2198)

1.

of the agenda

wm

culled

to order

1980, at 4.30 p.m.

The dsoft resolution
(resolution
464 (1980)).

at 5 p.m.

ws

m/opted

rinnnit?lorrsly

4. The PRESIDENT
(interpretatiorz
j?om Russian):
I shall immediately
convey this decision to the
Secretary-General
for transmission
to the General
Assembly in accordance with the provisions of rule 60
of the provisional rules of procedure.

Adoption of the agenda
T/W ngelzdn WLIS odopfed.
Admission of new Members:
Report of the Committee on the Admission of New
Members concerning the application
of Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines for membership in the
United Nations (S/13805)

5. At this stage, I should like to welcome Mr. Hudson
Tannis, Minister of Home Affairs and Tourism of
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, who is here in this
chamber. I should like to convey to him, and, through
him, to his Government and the people of his country,
cordial congratulations
on the occasion of the recommendation just adopted unanimously by the Security
Council.

1. The PRESIDENT
(itzterpretation
f>ota Russia):
I have received letters dated 19 February 1980 from
the representatives of Saint Lucia and Trinidad and
Tobago in which they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the application of Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines for admission to membership in the United Nations. In accordance with the
Provisions of Article 31 of the Charter and rule 37 of
the provisional rules of procedure, as well as with the
usual practice of the Council, I propose to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion without
the right to vote.

6. A number of representatives have expressed the
wish to speak after the vote and I now call on them.

At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Auglrste
(Saint Lucia) and Mu. Dorset (Trinidad
crnd Tobngo)
took the places reserved for them ut the side of the
Corrncil chamber.

7. Sir Anthony PARSONS (United Kingdom): It gave
my delegation great pleasure to vote, as we have just
done, in favour of the admission of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines as a Member of the United Nations.
I am confident that the General Assembly will accept
the unanimous recommendation
of the Council and
welcome Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
with
equal unanimity
as the one hundred and fifty-third
Member of the United Nations.

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from
Russian):
The Security Council will now consider the report of

8. It also gives my delegation much pleasure
reiterate your words of welcome, Mr. President,
I

to
to

Mr. Hudson Tannis, Minister of Home Affairs and
Tourism of Saint Vincent, who has come to New York
to see the Council adopt this historic decision.

pleasure to welcome its representative to New York
and we look forward to seeing him and his colleagues
here when the General Assembly meets later in the
year.

9. The ‘United Kingdom and Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines have a long history of association going
back to the early seventeenth century. At the end of
the 196Os, Saint Vincent took on the status of an
associated State. My Government
is delighted that,
10 years later, its people have decided to become a
fully independent
State within the Commonwealth.
Our partnership will therefore continue and our ties of
friendship will be strengthened.
As Saint Vincent
takes its place amongst the comity offully independent
nations, we shall find new areas of co-operation.

14. Mr. MILLS (Jamaica): Mr. President, my delegation has not had the opportunity
before now of
formally congratulating
you on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of February. You took over that office in the middle
of a difficult debate, and the competence and calm
confidence you have displayed have impressed my
delegation, particularly since this is only the second
month of your country’s membership of the Security
Council. We look forward to continued co-operation
with you.

10. The Government of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines has achieved its independence in a way that
reflects the democratic traditions of the islands. The
present Government of Saint Vincent decided to seek
independence
through the constitutional
procedures
open to it and a constitutional
conference was convened in London in September 1978. This Ied to the
achievement of full independence on 27 October 1979.

15. Might I also take this opportunity to express to
Mr. Jacques Leprette, President for the month of
January, the warm appreciation of my delegation for
the outstanding leadership he provided and the initiatives he took in the cause of peace during a particularly critical month.
16. Today we are participating
in the continuing
process of decolonization,
a process which for the
English-speaking
Caribbean began in 1962 and has in
the ensuing 17 years resulted in the achievement of
statehood by nine Territories of that group. In fact,
the last two States to be admitted to membership of
the United Nations, Dominica and Saint Lucia, are
from that subregion, of which my country is also apart.

11. Unhappily,
in that very same year of independence, a severe challenge faced the people of Saint
Vincent. A major eruption of the volcano Soufribre
in the north of Saint Vincent Island threatened
catastrophe and over 15,000 people had to be evacuated to other parts of the island. Saint Vincent’s
friends rallied round and the British Government
joined other Governments in the Caribbean, together
with Canada and the United States, in an emergency
relief operation. The Government
of Saint Vincent,
under the leadership of Prime Minister Cato, deserves
great credit for the resolve it showed in meeting this
emergency. And even amidst this crisis, which could
not be forgotten as the rumblings continued inside the
volcano, the Government did not lose sight of the goal
it had set itself. The original timetable for independence was rigorously followed and the process was
not delayed as some had thought inevitable at the
time. In this connection, I should also Iike to recall
that the people of Saint Vincent already have reason
to be grateful to the United Nations and its Secretariat. By means of a special Saint Vincent Volcano
Relief Fund, a group of staff members at the United
Nations launched a drive to collect private donations
for the victims of the disaster, an action which reflected
the best humanitarian
spirit of the United Nations.

17. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines achieved independence in October 1979, a process that was facilitated by the positive co-operation
of the former
administering
Power, the Government of the United
Kingdom. The new nation is a member of that family
of countries that reaches from one end of the Caribbean
to the other and forms a significant component of the
wider grouping of Latin American States to which we
belong. Most of those Caribbean States are small
developing island countries, with the special positive
qualities and the charm associated with them, but
they also suffer from serious economic constraints
and difficulties. In addition they are subject to such
natural hazards as hurricanes, earthquakes and, in the
case of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, volcanic
eruption. Indeed, the year 1979 witnessed a series of
devastating
hurricanes that seriously affected the
area and the eruption of Soufri&re, which caused largescale damage and destruction. The response of the
United Nations system and of member countries to
the needs of the countries of the area in the face of
those disasters has been most gratifying to all of us.

12. The British Government made provision to help
to repair the long-term effects of the eruption and to
bring agriculture
back into production.
We have
drawn up an aid programme covering special development projects and technical co-operation.

18. Jamaica has strong links with Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines and, indeed, with all the countries of
the area. They are based not merely on geographical
proximity,
but on a number of other factors including
our long common experience as colonial Territories
over a period of centuries. Over the past few decades

13. My delegation has every confidence that Saint
Vincent will be a strong and resilient Member of the
United Nations and that the international
community
will benefit from its membership.
It gives me great
2

23. The United Nations has written a brilliant chapter
in the history of its policy of encouraging the independence of Territories
that were still subject to
colonial domination at the end of the Second World
War. This is action that complements
the will of
nations and peoples to win self-determination
and to
escape from foreign domination.

we have together advanced our relationships
and
established such institutions as the Caribbean Common Market and the University of the West Indies.
19, The Caribbean area has in recent times been
undergoing major changes in the social, economic
and political spheres and has attracted a great deal of
attention,
much of the analysis and conclusions
deriving from this being based on a lack of full understanding and appreciation of the special character of
the region and its peoples and the pressures and
necessities facing them. While those countries have
much in common, each has its own special character,
its own perception, its own approach. It is our hope
that Saint Vincent and the Grenadines will, through
its membership
in the United Nations, bring new
insights and new dimensions to the various problems
and questions affecting not only that region but the
Latin American community of which we form a part
and the international community as a whole.

24. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines have since
their discovery in 1496 been subjected to various forms
of exploitation,
including the transfer of quite a large
part of their populations to other regions. Theirs has
also been an area of export agriculture, with the inevitable consequence of dependency and control of its
development capacity.
25. Mexico has a major relationship
with and is
historically, geographically and socially close to the
Caribbean region, and its continental shelf forms part
of the area. We want the achievement
of independence in the area also to be a step towards the
establishment
of real self-determination
in the economic and political spheres.

20. For small States like Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines and my own country, membership in the
United Nations is of particular importance and special
significance. That is so, first, because of our realization that our own march to nationhood was greatly
facilitated by the commitment of the United Nations to
the exercise by colonial countries and peoples of their
right to self-determination;
secondly, it is only in the
United Nations that small States can play a role in the
solution of political and economic problems at the
international level, problems that often affect them SO
fundamentally;
thirdly, it is in the United Nations
that the sovereignty of small States is best reaffirmed;
fourthly, the United Nations affords the opportunity,
in some cases the sole opportunity, for small States to
establish and improve bilateral relations between
ourselves and countries of other regions. It is for such
countries that global adherence to the principles of
the Charter of the United Nations assumes such a
vital role.

26, The independence
of Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines is another step in the struggle for independence for Latin America. It is the longest such
struggle in the history of world decolonization,
begun
early in the nineteenth century and still not ended.
The accession of a new independent
country to
membership
in the United Nations represents an
advance towards universality and the democratization
of representation in the Organization,
which is one of
its basic principles.
27. Since the foundation of the United Nations, not
only has Mexico favoured the admission of new
Members; its representatives or international officials
have played their part-an
outstanding one, I may
say-in the political process of decolonization
that
has seen independence come to many countries of
Latin America, Africa, Asia and the Pacific. I shall
in passing mention the vanguard role played by OUJ
compatriots in the achievement
of independence
by
Libya, Togo and Zaire, or in its consolidation.
In 1946,
during the first year of work of the Security Council,
the representative of Mexico in the Council stated
that

21. Before us today is the application of Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines for membership in the United
Nations. This is an application which the Government
and people of Jamaica have whole-heartedly
SUPported. Our sister Caribbean country will join the ranks
of those Member States that are totally committed
to the principles and objectives of the United Nations,
and will, we are convinced, play a constructive role
in the activities of the Group of Latin American States.
MY own country and delegation stand ready to COoperate fully with Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
as they take their place in the family of nations.

“In accordance with the principle
of universality which Mexico has always advocated, the
Mexican delegation is in favour of the admission
of all the applicant States where it is not proved
that the applicant does not fulfil the requirements of
the Charter.“’

22. Mr. WECKMANN
(Mexico)
(i/zfe/*prefcrfio/l
fio~?l Spclnisl~): Mr. President, I wish on behalf of my
Government
most warmly to congratulate
Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines on their accession to
independence on 27 October 1979, after almost five
centuries under the colonial trusteeship of various
Powers, and on having thus won the highest prize to
which peoples can aspire.

28. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines will be the
thirtieth member of the Latin American Group, and
that also constitutes progress towards greater representativeness for the region, although there remain
some major exceptions; as everyone is aware, there
are still clear instances of colonial domination
in
3

recommend to the General Assembly the admission of
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines as the one hundred
and fifty-third State Member of the United Nations.

various parts of the Caribbean. Despite its different
languages, whether they be Spanish, Portuguese,
English, French or one of our indigenous languages,
the Latin American region is a socio-economic entity,
and it is one of our dearest aims to see it increasingly
united.

34. It has been a consistent policy of the Government of Bangladesh in furtherance of the objectives
of decolonization, in particular of the principle of seifdetermination,
and in pursuit of the goal of universality
to extend our firm support to any State seeking admission to membership of the United Nations irrespective
of its size, ideology or political, economic or social
system.

29. Anticipating what will certainly be the unanimous
decision of the General Assembly, I should like to
welcome a new Latin American Member of the United
Nations.
30.

Mr.

CHEN Chu (China) (intcrprefution
from
On 27 October 1979, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines procIaimed its independence and became
the 30th independent State in Latin America. In his
letter addressed to the Secretary-General
on 8 January
1980 [see S/13784] Prime Minister Milton Cato of
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines made the application
of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines for admission
to membership
in the United Nations and declared
on behalf of his Government
that it accepted the
obligations
contained in the Charter and undertook
to fulfil them. In the view of the Chinese delegation,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is qualified for
membership in the United Nations in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter. We fully support its application, and we are in favour of the Security Council’s recommending
to the General Assembly
the admission of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
to membership in the United Nations.

35. Bangladesh noted with great satisfaction the
accession of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to
sovereign independence on 27 October 1979. We welcome its application for membership and believe that
it is fully qualified to become a Member of the United
Nations in accordance with the relevant provisions
of the Charter. It is the sincere expectation and desire
of the Government
and people of Bangladesh to
strengthen and consolidate our relations with the
Government
and people of Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines. The groundwork for these ties has already
become established through our association as member of the Commonwealth of Nations and our common
identity as developing countries newly emerged into
independence. We extend our heartfelt congratulations
to the Minister of Home Affairs and Tourism and,
through him, express to the Government and people
of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines our best wishes
for continued prosperity, peace and happiness.

Chirzese):

31. The people of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
have won their national independence through prolonged struggles.
The Chinese Government
and
people sincerely rejoice in this and wish the people of
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines continued new
victories in their cause of safeguarding national independence and building their own country.

36. Mr. YANG0 (Philippines):
In considering the
application of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines for
admission to membership in the United Nations, we
had before us the letter dated 8 January 1980 [ikirl.]
from Mr. R. Milton Cato, Prime Minister of Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines. Prime Minister Cato, in
his letter to the Secretary-General,
has made a declaration that Saint Vincent and the Grenadines accepted
the obligations contained in the Charter of the United
Nations and solemnly undertook to fulfil them.

32. Both China and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines are developing countries. On the occasion of the
proclamation
of the independence of Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines,
Premier Hua Guofeng of the
State Council of the People’s Republic of China sent
a cable to Prime Minister Milton Cato on behalf of the
Chinese Government
and people, extending warm
congratulations
to the Government
and people of
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and announcing the
decision of the Chinese Government
to recognize
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. We sincerely hope
that the relations between our two countries and
friendship
between our two peoples will develop
steadily. We also hope that upon its admission to
membership
in the United Nations, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines will make positive contributions
to the realization of the purposes and principIes of the
Charter, together with all the other Member States
that uphold justice and love peace.

37. The General Assembly, in resolution 34/94 of
13 December 1979, warmly welcomed by an overwhelming vote the accession to independence of Saint
Lucia on 22 February 1979, Kiribati on 12 July 1979
and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines on 27 October
1979. The admission of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to membership in the United Nations is a fulfilment of the principle of the universality of United
Nations membership and is yet another testimony of
the important
decolonization
work of the United
Nations and the need to implement the 1960 Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial
Countries and Peoples embodied in Assembly resolution 1514 (XV). Its membership accords with the principle embodied in the Declaration and in the various
relevant Assembly resolutions, including resolution
34/34 of 21 November 1979, that questions of territorial size, geographical location and limited resources

33. Mr. R. RAHMAN
(Bangladesh): My delegation
warmly welcomes the Security Council’s decision to
4

should in no way delay the implementation
Declaration.

of the

38. In supporting the application of Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines for admission to membership in
the United Nations, I should like, on behalf of my
delegation, to express our deep appreciation to the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples for
its continuing invaluable work towards the effective
and complete implementation
of the Declaration and
the other relevant resolutions of the United Nations.
39. Iwish also to take this opportunity to congratulate
the administering
Power for its co-operation
and
active participation in the relevant work of the Special
Committee, as well as its continued readiness in the
recent past to receive United Nations visiting missions
to Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. My delegation
is happy to note that Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
is embarked, along with other members of the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States that was established in June 1979, on new mechanisms for the
achievement of the economic and social development
of the peoples of the member States.
40. We also extend our best wishes to the Caribbean
Community, of which Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is a member, as that organization sets out to
improve the individual
and collective well-being of
the peoples of its community.
41. In expressing the ardent hope of my delegation
that the unanimous recommendation
of the Security
Council in favour of the admission to membership
in the United Nations of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines will also be approved unanimously
by the
General Assembly, I am confident that Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines will make a useful contribution
to the work of the United Nations. It is in this light that
I should like to congratulate the people of Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines and to assure them of the wholehearted co-operation and friendship of the Philippines
in working together in the United Nations.
42. Mr. ALGARD (Norway): The Norwegian delegation was pleased to support the resolution just
adopted recommending
that Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines be admitted to membership in the United
Nations. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is the
second country from the Caribbean region to have
applied for United
Nations
membership
during
Norway’s present term on the Security Council,
following Saint Lucia’s entry into the United Nations
last year. We welcomed Saint Lucia’s application
for membership and we should also like to express
our satisfaction at the fact that Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines has declared itself ready to accept and to
undertake the obligations contained in the Charter of
the United Nations. Although Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, with a population of around 100,000, will

be one of the smaller Members of the Organization,
the Norwegian delegation is confident that it will fully
discharge all the responsibilities
connected
with
membership
in the United Nations and make a
valuable contribution to our activities.
43. On behalf of the Norwegian Government,
I take
this opportunity to congratulate the Government and
people of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
on
attaining independence on 27 October 1979. My own
delegation looks forward to working in close cooperation with the members of its delegation to the
United Nations in the years to come.
44. Mr. PETREE (United States of America): The
United States supports with great pleasure the
application of the Government of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines for membership in the United Nations.
45. Friendly
relations have traditionally
existed
between the United States and Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines. For a number of years the United
States has been happy to provide development assistance to Saint Vincent and the Grenadines through
various multiltiteral
agencies such as the Caribbean
Development Bank, Private United States investment,
which provides jobs and spurs economic development,
is growing. The United States also maintains a Peace
Corps programme in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. And in the wake of the tragic eruption of the
volcano Soufrikre last spring, we joined with others in
providing food, medicines and shelter for victims of
that natural disaster.
46. The United States has followed the progress of
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, as well as that of
its Caribbean neighbours, with great interest. The
people of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines have
attained their independence
through peaceful and
democratic means. We are confident that they and
their Government share our belief in the basic principles of peace and justice that are the corner-stone of
the Charter of the United Nations. The United States
therefore believes that membership
in the United
Nations for Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is fully
in accord with the relevant provisions of the Charter.
47. And so we welcome Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines as it takes its place in the community
of nations. We look forward to close co-operation with
this new nation both in the United Nations system and
in our bilateral relations.
48. Mr. MATHIAS
(Portugal): It is a privilege for
my delegation, on behalf of the Portuguese Government, to congratulate
the people and the Government of Saint Vincent and lhe Grenadines on their
accession to independence and lo extend to them our
best wishes for peace and prosperily. The Portuguese
delegation was happy to support the resolution the
Security Council has adopted recommending
that
country for membership
in the Organization.
It is

53. On behalf of my delegation, I wish to appeal to
the members of the international community to render
all possible assistance to St. Vincent to enable it to
overcome the constraints of being an island developing
country. In addition, St. Vincent has suffered many
disasters, including the eruption of a volcano last year.

therefore with great joy that we warmly welcome the
admission of a new Member State which has undertaken to accept and respect the principles and purposes
contained in the Charter and which, we are sure,
will with determination
assume its responsibilities
within the Organization.
May I also assure the representatives of that new country that my delegation is
looking forward to co-operating and working together
with them within the framework of the United Nations.

54. Finally, the Zambian delegation fully supports
the admission of St. Vincent and the Grenadines to
membership in the United Nations. The people of that
country have fully demonstrated their commitment to
the purposes and principles of the Charter. Zambia
will co-operate fully with the people, Government
and delegation of St. Vincent and the Grenadines in
the pursuit of peace and development in the United
Nations and elsewhere in the community of nations at
large.

49. Mr.
MUTUKWA
(Zambia):
Zambia,
as a
freedom-loving
State, warmly welcomed the accession
to independence of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
on 27 October 1979. Like the people of Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, we also suffered the humiliations
and degradations of oppression under colonial domination. That is why we have always supported all those
people that are struggling for their freedom and independence in Africa and elsewhere on this globe.

55. Mr. LEPRETTE
(France) (interpretntion fi*u/11
French): The Security Council has just unanimously
recommended to the General Assembly the admission
of St. Vincent and the Grenadines to membership in
the United Nations.

50. The admission of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to membership in the United Nations will crown
the sovereign aspiration .of that independent State
to participate in the United Nations on the basis of
equality with all States, both large and small. That is
a dream come true for all oppressed people. Zambia
strongly upholds the principle of the sovereign equality
of all States. That principle is indeed the quintessence
of our contemporary
international
relations, which
are based on a state system. There is no hierarchy of
States in the United Nations. The admission of Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines will also advance the cause
of universality of membership in the United Nations.
When admitted,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
will become the 153rd Member of the Organization.
It is significant that only last year, a sister State in
the Caribbean, Saint Lucia, was admitted to the United
Nations. It is in that vein that we also look forward
to the day when the Council will consider the application for admission to the United Nations of a free and
independent Zimbabwe.

56. Coming some months after the entry into the
Organization of Saint Lucia, which was itself preceded
by Dominica, this application has been presented by
one of the close neighbours of the French islands of
the Antilles; it is with the greatest sympathy therefore that my country welcomes it. Cultural, commercial and all other kinds of relsitions have flourished
between France and St. Vincent for four centuries.
There is every reason for supposing that those relations
will continue to develop harmoniously.
57. On 27 October 1979, the State of St. Vincent
and the Grenadines took its place among the independent and sovereign nations of the world. Since
that time it has applied for admission to the United
Nations, has undertaken to respect the provisions of
the Charter and fulfils the necessary conditions for
admission to membership
in the United Nations.
France therefore supports its admission as the one
hundred and fifty-third Member of the Organization,
and we are pleased that we have had an opportunity
to do that.

51. As the decade of the 1980s begins, the membership of the United Nations has virtually tripled. The
addition of new Members to the ranks of the United
Nalions could also contribute positively to the enhancement
of the democratization
of the system.
Democracy entails the full participation
of all, irrespective of military capability or the lack of it.

58. The admission of that country to membership
of the United Nations will enable it fully to take part in
the activities of the international
community.
In
admitting this new country among its Members, the
Organization will be fulfilling one of its fundamental
objectives, that of universality.

52. Zambia has a lot in common with the nations
and peoples of the Caribbean, including Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines. Although we are separated by the
Atlantic, we of Africa have strong bonds with our
brothers in the Caribbean, bonds which have been
maintained
for centuries despite the attempts by
imperialist
forces to separate us artificially.
The
limitations
of time and space do not permit me to
enumerate the range of our mutual ties. Suffice it to
state that Zambia is committed
to furthering these
links in the political and economic spheres.

59.

Before concluding,

the French delegation

like to welcome Mr. Hudson Tannis, Minister

would

of Home
Affairs and Tourism of St. Vincent and the Grenadines, who has come to New York for this occasion
and to convey its warm congratulations to the Prime
Minister and the other members of the Government.
To the young State and its people, we extend our warm
wishes for success and prosperity.
6

60, Mr. KHARMALOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) {interpretation
jkonr Russian): The Soviet
Union, faithful to its policy of principle in support of
the struggle of colonial peoples for freedom and independence, supported the application of St. Vincent
and the Grenadines for admission to membership
in
the United Nations. We should like to express our
profound satisfaction at the unanimously favourable
decision taken by the Security Council to recommend
to the General Assembly the admission of St. Vincent
and the Grenadines. It is our belief that this recommendation will prove to be one more step towards
the full and final elimination
of the colonial system
and that it will promote the development of relations
of equality and co-operation among all States, large
and small. The admission to membership of this young
State will undoubtedly be an important step forward
towards the implementation
of the principle of universality of the United Nations.

64. The admission of that young country is an irnportant event in the struggle for decolonization
and for
the implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
and cannot but serve to bring the Organization closer
to the objective of universality for which we have
worked so tirelessly.
65. New countries-such
as Palestine, Zimbabwe
and Namibia-whose
peoples have suffered colonial
occupation for far too long will, we hope, join us in
the near future. We are aware of the magnitude of the
obstacles still to be overcome, but we are sure that
the legitimate aspirations of those peoples to sovereignty and independence will finally triumph.
66. Mr. OUMAROU
(Niger) (interpreratiorz ,fPnm
French): It is always a pleasure for a country which
has itself thrown off the shackles of colonialism
and
is still fighting for the freedom of all peoples to learn
of a colony’s coming to independence and international sovereignty. In this spirit, the Niger and the
whole of Africa welcome the independence
of
St. Vincent and the Grenadines, a small Caribbean
country, whose identity as a nation has lost nothing
of its vitality in spite of several centuries of foreign
domination.

61, On the occasion of the notable event of the
proclamation in October 1979 of the independence of
the State of St. Vincent and the Grenadines,
the
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Soviet
Union, Mr. A. Kosygin, sent to the Prime Minister
Of that country, Mr. Milton Cato, sincere congratulations and best wishes for prosperity and success to
the people of St. Vincent and the Grenadines in the
successful, independent development of that country.
The telegram sent by Comrade Kosygin stated:

67. Our solidarity is today with the people of that
country, its leaders and its struggle for the promotion
of a new society with dignity, work and respect foi
man.

“The Soviet Government,
guided by the principles of equality and the self-determination
of
peoples and attaching great significance to the
development
of relations of friendship
and cooperation among all countries, hereby declares its
recognition of St. Vincent and the Grenadines as
an independent and sovereign State and expresses
its readiness to establish diplomatic
relations
with it.”

68. We can be assured in advance that St. Vincent
and the Grenadines, which is already keenly aware
of its international and domestic obligations, will fully
abide by the Charter of the United Nations and by
positive and sustained efforts strive for the peace of the
world and solidarity among nations. We therefore
most warmly welcome this country to the United
Nations and accompany these words of welcome with
very sincere wishes for a positive and enlightened
contribution
to the delicate but stirring work of the
United Nations.

62. The delegation of the Soviet Union would like,
to take this opportunity
to congratulate
the independent State and people of St. Vincent and the
Grenadines on the favourable decision taken by the
Security Council on its application for admission to
membership in the United Nations, and expresses the
hope that St. Vincent and the Grenadines will make a
worthy contribution
to the performance of the major
task of the United Nations, that is, the maintenance
of international peace and security.
63.

69. The PRESIDENT
(iI7fe~~~~ei(ltio/lJj’(~/77
Russicl/~):
The next speaker is the representative of Saint Lucia,
to whom the Council has extended an invitation under
rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.

Mr.

ESSAAFI
(Tunisia) (interprafrrtion
from
My delegation was pleased to support the
resolution just adopted by the Security Council on the
admission to membership in the United Nations of
St. Vincent and the Grenadines in implementation
of
one of the fundamental principles of the Charter,
namely, the inalienable
right of peoples to selfdetermination
and freedom. We therefore welcome
their independence, greet that people and nation and
wish them all prosperity.

70. Mr. AUGUSTE
(Saint Lucia): Mr. President,
I should like to convey my appreciation to you and
the other members of the Council for the kind invitation to address this august body in welcoming the
application of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines foi
membership in the United Nations. I am speaking in
the Council on behalf of the West Indies Associated
States, of whose Council of Ministers Saint Lucia is
current Chairman, and also on behalf of Barbados.
In September 1979 [2166th u/zd 2167th n7ecfings]
my

F~~e~ch):

7

76. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines associated
itself with the spirit and the letter of the Caribbean
Free Trade Area, which later grew and developed into
the Carribbean Common Market. It is a member of the
West Indies Associated States, which was set up in
1967, and on 27 October 1979 assumed its independence within the said grouping. It is also party to the
Petit Saint Vincent Agreement with Saint Lucia, which
seeks to reduce the problem of inter-State relations,
particularly
in reference to freedom of movement for
the peoples of the area. The evidence is that Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines was in the forefront of the
movement in the Windward group to look seriously
at, and relate intelligently
to, the problems that
traditionally
beset the area.

country was considered for membership
by the
Security Council, and my presence here today reflects
the success of those deliberations,
71. A small State that seeks membership
in the
United Nations does so, as in the case of Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, because it has legitimately
met
and satisfied all the prerequisites necessary for selfand independence,
including
the
determination
handling of its own external affairs and defence.
Consequently,
in order to give meaningfulness to the
realization
of that sovereignty
and independence,
and to relate to the international
community
in a
proper and appropriate manner, that State desires to
take up membership in this prestigious Organization.
72. In conjunction
with Grenada, Saint Lucia and
Dominica,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines form
part of the Windward Islands group in the Caribbean
Sea. The traditions of this group go back through the
centuries and are reflected in the interplay of the
various cultures and racial combinations
in the island
States. These are the islands in which the Carib populations were centred, and their history bears evidence of
the innumerable battles and struggles with the colonial
Powers as a result of which a recognizable civilization
arose and remained
through
the movement
of
generations.

77. Every State that seeks admission to the United
Nations has already accepted, on its own terms, the
obligations and the spirit of the Charter. The aspiration to membership demonstrates the ultimate step
towards effectively relating to the problems of the
world. It points to assisting in the co-operative
efforts within the international
community
as seen
from a disciplined and central perspective and to
exercising some role in understanding and projecting
the objectives of the Organization in meaningful terms.
78. To look at the size of the State, to examine its
resources, to reflect on its ability to carry out the
responsibilities
and fulfil the objectives set for every
State Member
of the Organization-but
no less
similarly entertained by every independent State-is
an activity
only concomitant
with the decision
already taken that it is an independent State that seeks
admission. One must consider that the United Kingdom, in granting independence, knew and was convinced that Saint Vincent and the Grenadines was
capable of honouring and would honour the obligations
and accept the responsibilities inherent in the practice
of every Member State.

73. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is the last of
the group to attain independence and to seek a place
within the portals of the United Nations. But that in
no way reduces the role it can and will play within
this body politic. There is an English background;
there is a French background;
there is the motley
racial interrelation
of the islands themselves-the
proverbial pot-pourri, no doubt. Suffice it to say that
these islands share a common heritage exemplified in
their political relationships as well as in their sporting
and recreational pursuits at all levels.
74. Most of us Windward Islands people hold vivid
schoolboy memories and lasting friendships cemented
through the hospitality
rendered by each island in
turn in terms of both youth and adult sporting events.
This leads us now, in different forums, to forgather in
our camaraderie forged in different ways and in different places and projecting a unified attempt to meet
and disperse the vicissitudes
of international
intercourse. Not so long ago Saint Vincent underwent the
trauma of a volcanic eruption, which, while it did not
in total terms measure up to the ravages of hurricane
“David”
in Dominica, left that island and the group
in general with the stark reality of their excessive
vulnerability
not only to the ravages of nature but also
to the fluctuations of the world economic scene.

79. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is subject to
no less constraint than any other State in its attempt to
meet the prerequisites for membership. The expectancy that pervades the scene has been present with
regard to each of the sister States that have already
attained independence and membership in the United
Nations.
‘80. When visiting Ghana in 1956, Mr. Macmillan,
then Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, spoke of
years
a “wind of change” in Africa. Twenty-four
later that “wind of change” is blowing throughout the
Caribbean.
Small, vulnerable sovereign States are
coming of age and standing in the corridors waiting
to take their rightful places in this body. The United
Nations is the elixir of their dreams and -objectives;
it is the ultimate goal of their expectations.

75. That has not prevented Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines from sharing the common involvement
and common aspirations of this grouping in supporting
mankind’s quest for peace and in projecting a Westminster form of parliamentary
democracy suitably
ensconced in the protective custocly of law, order and
justice.

81. Saint Lucia readily welcomes the successful outcome of the candidacy of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines for membership in the United Nations. It has,
like every State, a role to play therein. We have no
doubt that the Council’s decision to recommend
to
8

the General Assembly that Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines be admitted to membership in the United
Nations will be well received, and we commend that
decision to the General Assembly for its favourable
consideration.

the one hundred and fifty-third Member of the Organisation has taken place during the month when the
German Democratic
Republic is President of the
Security Council. It is well known that the German
Democratic Republic has always favoured the universality of the United Nations. Today’s decision
represents a further step towards the attainment
of
that noble goal.

82. The PRESIDENT
(intopretrrtiotz jiom Russitu7).
The next speaker is the representative of Trinidad and
Tobago, to whom the Council has extended an invitation under rule 37 of its provisional rules of procedure.
I invite her to take a place at the Council table and
to make her statement.

88. On the occasion of the proclamation of the State
of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, on 27 October
1979, the General Secretary of the Central Committee
of the Socialist Unity Party of Germany and President
of the Council of State, Erich Honecker, and the
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the German
Democratic Republic, Willi Staph, sent cordial congratulations to the Prime Minister of Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Mr. Milton Cato, and stated
that the German Democratic
Republic recognized
Saint Vincent as a sovereign and independent State.
The independence of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, after overcoming more than 350 years of colonial
domination,
is one of the conquests of the tireless
struggle of peoples for their national and social selfdetermination
and the elimination
of all surviving
remnants uf colonial oppression.

83.

Mrs. DORSET (Trinidad and Tobago): I wish to
the Security Council for granting me the opportunity to speak. It is indeed an honour and a privilege
for my delegation to address the Council on behalf Of
the Latin American Group of States on the occasion
of the Council’s decision to recommend unanimously
to the General Assembly favourable consideration of
the application of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
for admission to membership in the United Nations.
We welcome this decision most warmly. The attainment of sovereign independence by Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines on 27 October 1979 was yet another
demonstration of the desire on the part of the international community
to give effect to the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter and, in
particular, to the principle of equal rights and selfdetermination. The admission of Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines to membership in the United Nations, as
has been recommended
by the Security Council, will
bring the Organization closer to its goal of universal
membership.

thank

84. The States of the Latin American region are,
accordingly,
pleased to welcome the newly independent State of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
being fully aware of the fact that it will lend its
efforts to those already engaged in building a just
and more equitable international economic and political order among States, and we look forward to
its full participation
within the group.

89. Twenty years ago, on the initiative of the Soviet
Union, the historic Declaration on the Granting of
Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
contained in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV),
was adopted, In accordance with that Declaration,
colonialism and racism were dealt severe and decisive
blows. Unfortunately,
we have to note that in connection with the imperialist forces’ policy of establishing strong points, a number of peoples, particularly
in small territories in which imperialist military bases
are situated, are still illegally deprived of the right to
self-determination
and independent development.
My
delegation once again confirms here its unswervitig
solidarity with the struggle of those peoples and with
the peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia. We are sure
that their liberation is an irreversible historical process.

85. The PRESIDENT
(i,rrerpr~tatio/? jkonr Russians):
AS there are no further speakers on my list, I shall
now make a statement in my capacity as the representative of the GERMAN
DEMOCRATIC
REPUBLIC,

90. In conclusion, the delegation of the German
Democratic Republic would like once again to congratulate the youngest independent State and its people
and wish them prosperity and success in their national
development.

86. Guided by the goals of its foreign policy designed
to strengthen international
peace and security and
achieve respect for equality, self-determination
and
the territorial integrity of States, and also establish
an atmosphere of friendship and co-operation among
States, the German Democratic Republic voted in
favour of the decision of the Security Council to
recommend to the General Assembly the admission
to membership in the United Nations of Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines,

91, Speaking once again in my capacity as PRESIDENT of the Security Council, I wish to say that the
list of speakers on this item having been exhausted
I take it that the Council has concluded its consideration of this item.

NOI%

87. We note with particular satisfaction that the
recommendation
on the admission to membership of
9

HOW

TO OBTAIN

USITED

United
Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

NATIONS

PL’BLIC:\TIONS

may
br obtained
your bookslorc

LES PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
and distributors
or write
to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Units
sent on venta dans les librsiries
et les agences
d&x&t&es
du mondo entier. Informcz-voue
nuprh
dc votre librnire ou adreeaez-vous
B : Nations
Unies. Section des ventea, Kew York ou Gcnive.
XAK

COMO

IIOJIYYHTh

CONSEGUIR

IX3AAHHII

OPrAFXH

PUBLICACIONES

3AIl(lIlX

DE LAS

Las publicaciones
de ins Naciones
Unidns
esln
buidoras
en todas partes
de1 mundo.
Consultc
Unidas. Secci6n de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United

Nations,

New York

00300

OWbE~UHEHHbIX

NACIONES

HAVIXFf

UNIDAS

en venta en librerias
y casas distria su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones

83-61462-December

1985-2.925
