S/2005/584

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
13 September 2005
Original: English

Letter dated 12 September 2005 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to convey the report of the High Representative for the
elections in Côte d’Ivoire, Antonio Monteiro, on his first visit to the area, from 8 to
18 August 2005 (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

05-51082 (E) 160905

*0551082*

S/2005/584

Annex
Report of the High Representative for the elections in Côte d’Ivoire
1.
The present report, which you may wish to convey to the members of the
Security Council, describes my initial visit to Côte d’Ivoire, following my
appointment as High Representative for the elections in that country. This visit was
planned as the first step in setting up the Office of the High Representative for the
elections in Côte d’Ivoire, and a means of establishing contact with all the
significant actors in the process.
2.
I visited Côte d’Ivoire from 8 to 18 August 2005, accompanied by part of the
core staff of my office, as well as a staff member from the Secretariat (Electoral
Assistance Division). It was my concern during the visit to establish contact with the
widest possible range of actors, and to establish with them that transparency would be
the hallmark of my approach to my assignment, the very foundation of my working
methodology. I was further interested in taking the pulse of the situation, and to
determine whether there was a genuine commitment to proceed towards elections. In
this regard, I am happy to report on a positive evolution, as you will note below, in
particular on the two main sticking points requiring priority resolution — the LinasMarcoussis legislative reforms and the reconstitution of the Independent Electoral
Commission (IEC). This, of course, is not to oversimplify matters. There are
difficulties that must be acknowledged. The very issue of holding elections is closely
interconnected to and will ultimately depend on progress on other fronts, especially
the security front.
3.
In the course of the visit, I met with a wide spectrum of actors, including the
national authorities (President Laurent Gbagbo, Prime Minister Seydou Diarra, the
Constitutional Council, Cabinet Ministers, the existing Independent Electoral
Commission and other agencies whose work has an impact on the electoral process),
political parties and movements (G-7, PIT, Forces nouvelles), entities of the United
Nations system (ONUCI and the agencies), as well as diplomatic representatives of
several countries and international organizations.
4.
In terms of the subject matter, two principal issues preoccupied me as I
approached this visit — the issue of the conformity of the legislative package
recently adopted by President Gbagbo with the relevant agreements, and the urgency
of appointing a reconstituted Independent Electoral Commission. As you are aware
there are links between the two issues, both a direct one, to the extent that the IEC
law is part of that package, and an indirect one, the laying down of conditions by
some of the parties: if those conditions were not met, they would not designate their
representatives on the new Independent Electoral Commission.
5.
During this initial mission, and at the invitation of the South African
authorities, I also visited South Africa to meet with the African Union Mediator,
President Thabo Mbeki. I was accompanied by your Special Representative for Côte
d’Ivoire, Pierre Schori, who has personally and through the services of ONUCI
provided significant assistance to me and my staff on this mission. The visit
afforded the opportunity to further review with the Mediator the issue of the
legislative package, as well as his earlier determination on it.
6.
In all my meetings while in Côte d’Ivoire, I seized the opportunity to remind
my interlocutors of the High Representative’s mandate as stated in Security Council

2

S/2005/584

resolution 1603 (2005), and to point out the crucial juncture that the Ivorian peace
process had reached, especially as it concerns the chances of conducting the
presidential elections as scheduled. While always emphazing that elections were
not, in themselves, a panacea, I reminded my interlocutors that it was inconceivable
to resolve the Ivorian crisis without credible elections whose conduct and results
would command the respect of both national actors and the wider international
community.
7.
In order for such elections to be held, it is imperative to have, without further
delay, a functional IEC devoid of the problems of political legitimacy faced by the
existing one because its composition is not in accordance with the stipulations of the
Linas-Marcoussis and Pretoria agreements.
8.
Though I refrained from specifically addressing the issue of the feasibility of
holding elections as scheduled on 30 October, it inevitably came up several times. I
constantly made allusion to an analogy of the electoral process as a train that departs
the station, making several stops on its way to its destination — should it not leave
the station, it can never reach that destination. The important thing is for the train to
depart and, in order to do so, it needed its engine, the Independent Electoral
Commission, to be in place.
9.
This message was well received by my interlocutors, in particular the political
parties and movements. Among those that I had the opportunity of meeting, the G-7,
all of whose constituent members were in attendance, reminded me of their
dissatisfaction with certain aspects of the legislative package adopted by President
Gbagbo, which they had communicated to the Mediator. Nevertheless, the four
political party members of this grouping (MFA, PDCI-RDA, RDR, UDPCI) made an
unambiguous commitment to designate their representatives on the reconstituted
IEC without further delay, while they would continue to exercise pressure regarding
the pending issues. The three Forces nouvelles movements demurred, preferring to
postpone any comments until I had met with them separately, which was planned for
the following day. The PIT leader had indicated, at a separate meeting with me, that
his party would not delay in designating its representatives.
10. In my meeting with the Forces nouvelles, in Bouaké, where your Special
Representative was also present, they concluded that they would undertake further
consultations among themselves and reach a decision on the nomination of their IEC
representatives before the end of my initial mission. However, prior to reaching this
conclusion, they re-emphasized their concerns, regarding not only the legislative
package and the mediation’s determination on it, but also the issue that they
consider to be the central contention at the source of the Ivorian crisis — that of
“identification”, the denial of citizenship rights to certain sectors of society, the
marginalization of the many who have been denied possession of identification
papers, with all the consequences that come with such a status in a society in which
the presentation of identity cards is an essential part of many procedures and day-today activities.
11. I am happy to report to you that the Forces nouvelles, following those internal
consultations, have since addressed correspondence to me, dated 18 August 2005, in
which they indicated their firm commitment to nominate their representatives to the
Independent Electoral Commission without further delay.

3

S/2005/584

12. The attendance on the Forces nouvelles side during our meeting with them was
in itself significant. According to ONUCI, this was the first time that Guillaume
Soro was receiving the United Nations with the full complement of all his civilian
and military collaborators, including the six zone commanders. This display of unity
would give guarantees, should the Forces nouvelles implement their positive
decision to participate in the Independent Electoral Commission, that it would be a
decision that all subscribe to.
13. While this issue goes far beyond that of the electoral process per se, it is
nevertheless pertinent, as it has an impact on who can register as a voter. In this
regard, I should mention my meeting with the Minister of Justice whose department,
in consultation with other relevant agencies, has been examining modalities for
organizing and conducting audiences foraines (field court sessions) for the issuance
of duplicate birth records, which are a requirement for obtaining nationality
certificates, themselves a prerequisite for the issuance of national identity cards. The
approach proposed would mobilize virtually all available lower court magistrates
over a period of a few months, thus providing an opportunity for the estimated
2 million to 2.5 million people said to lack the necessary documentation to obtain
their substitute birth certificates.
14. You will recall that there has been a flurry of letters exchanged between the
various Ivorian parties and the mediation since President Gbagbo issued a series of
decrees on 15 July. There was a major concern, especially in the PDCI-RDA, RDR
and Forces nouvelles camps, that that legislative package did not fully respect the
stipulations of the Linas-Marcoussis and Pretoria agreements. The mediation had
taken the view that the decrees in fact met in general the requirements, leading to
the Forces nouvelles, in particular, doubting the sincerity of the mediation. In the
course of our meeting with President Mbeki, we reviewed these pending issues, and
he was convinced that there were a few grey areas requiring further clarification, on
which he agreed to write to President Gbagbo. Prior to our meeting, he had already
issued a determination regarding the operational relationship between the
Independent Electoral Commission and the National Institute of Statistics — namely
that the latter is subordinate to the former. Those issues on which he now agreed to
write Mr. Gbagbo are:
• Some additional categories of people who should enjoy the right to Ivorian
citizenship and whose rights were either abridged or not recognized in the
decisions issued.
• The need to make it clearer that the Independent Electoral Commission is free
to organize itself in whatever manner at the local level and that by so doing the
concern about multiparty representation at those levels would be taken care of.
• The importance of not introducing any additional requirements in regard to the
manner of proof of Ivorian nationality (which the decisions of 15 July
effectively did).
• Definition of exceptional circumstances under which parties may recall their
designated representatives on the Independent Electoral Commission and
modalities for such recall (after consultation with the full IEC and the High
Representative and with the agreement of the Mediator).
15. While happy to report these two significant results of my initial visit, I should
bring to your attention my concern regarding some potential and actual impediments

4

S/2005/584

to progress in organizing the electoral process — and indeed the broader peace
process. These include:
(a) The delays in installing the new Independent Electoral Commission,
which are probably linked to lingering doubts about the presidential decisions issued
on 15 July. While these doubts were mostly addressed by President Mbeki’s further
démarches, other reasons could be invoked to create additional delays;
(b) Difficulty in reaching overall agreement among political parties on the
internal rules of the Independent Electoral Commission and the need to reach such
an agreement quickly; the installation and operationalization of the Commission is a
prerequisite to starting the electoral process;
(c) The passion-laden issue of national identification, and the need to
translate the unambiguous language of Linas-Marcoussis into reality on the ground
(sadly, the identification process remains paralysed, owing to a combination of
factors);
(d) Political and logistical obstacles to the deployment of around 300
magistrates in all territories to conduct the audiences foraines;
(e) The lack of progress on the security front (disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration, dismantlement of militias etc.);
(f)
process.

The rather worrying status of resource mobilization for the electoral

16. The meeting with President Mbeki points to the great possibilities that exist if
the cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union mediation were
to be intensified through constant consultation at the highest level. Such cooperation
will invariably help to minimize such problems as may arise with legislative texts or
other acts undertaken by the President or Government. The issue of identification is
a long-term operation on which emergency measures will have to be adopted in the
immediate future, if the Forces nouvelles are to be assuaged. The security situation
will also require redoubled efforts, both in the north and the south, if an appropriate
climate for the elections is to be created.
17. I would like to particularly emphasize the issue of funding of the electoral
process. Regardless of the efforts of UNDP, which has set up a project for the
mobilization and management of international community resources, there is still a
significant gap in the overall electoral budget. I should also add that there is in fact
no finalized electoral budget. This is the direct result of the institutional uncertainty
that has reigned over the process all these past months: an IEC that is not quite fully
legitimate, the designation of the National Institute of Statistics to take over
significant statutory responsibilities of the Independent Electoral Commission, the
reticence of donors to make commitments in such a context. This donor reticence is
also partly explained by the apparent lack of a genuine political commitment on the
part of the Ivorian parties to push the peace process forward.
18. The funding gap, according to the consolidated budget prepared by the Prime
Minister’s Office (based on the figures from the current Independent Electoral
Commission and the National Institute of Statistics, modified by the Prime
Minister’s office) and taking into consideration the announced intentions of the
Government and the European Commission, is approximately $31 million. It would
be unfortunate if we were to find ourselves in a situation in which, having pushed

5

S/2005/584

the Ivorian parties so much, we have an electoral commission in place but without
the resources to carry forward the electoral process. While it is understandable that
donors might be reticent, in the absence of some strong signal of genuine political
will, I strongly urge you to consider initiating démarches vis-à-vis the major donor
countries so that they will have the necessary resources ready to immediately get the
IEC operational once it is established.
19. As regards the timeline for the elections, as stated above, I have been cautious
not to lock this process into a logic of inevitable postponement, with the likelihood
that other aspects of the peace process will continue to stall, and the “train” never
leaves the station. I am advised by the technical experts that the feasibility of
holding elections by 30 October is increasingly problematic. However, it is
preferable to leave the debate on that question until after the establishment of the
new Independent Electoral Commission, by which time a decision can be taken on a
new date, if deemed necessary, and the mediation can look into the larger
implications of such a decision, given the deadlines imposed by the Ivorian
Constitution. In the meantime, a crucial task of IEC will be the drafting and
acceptance by all parties of an electoral code of conduct which will help to create
conducive conditions for campaigning and the holding of elections.
20. As indicated above, I sought to make my consultations as inclusive as
possible. In this regard, I note that I was unable to meet with the FPI President and
the Minister of Territorial Administration, both of whom were said to be on vacation
outside the country, and the President of the National Assembly, who was unable to
receive me because of scheduling problems. I hope to be able to meet with them
once I return to Abidjan.
21. It is my fervent hope that my appointment will contribute positively to the
Ivorian peace process. I take this opportunity to express my gratitude to you, to your
Special Representative and ONUCI in Abidjan, and to the UNDP Resident
Coordinator and country office. I intend to return to Côte d’Ivoire shortly, to
continue my efforts to bring about progress in the electoral preparations.
Meanwhile, the skeleton staff of my office remains in Abidjan, and will be joined by
additional personnel shortly. We intend to keep the office small and functional, with
the addition of short-term consultants as the pace and phase of the process demands.

6
