S/2020/682

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
10 July 2020
Original: English

United Nations operation in Cyprus
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report on the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus
(UNFICYP) covers developments from 19 December 2019 to 18 June 2020. It brings
up to date the record of activities carried out by UNFICYP pursuant to Security Council
resolution 186 (1964) and subsequent Council resolutions, most recently resolution
2506 (2020), since the issuance of my report on UNFICYP dated 7 January 2020
(S/2020/23) and on my mission of good offices dated 14 November 2019 (S/2019/883).
2.
As at 18 June 2020, the strength of the military component stood at 786 (709
men and 77 women, or 9.8 per cent women) for all ranks, compared with the global
peace operations target of 6.25 per cent women, while that of the police component
stood at 62 (38 men and 24 women, or 38 per cent women), compared with the overall
global target of 22 per cent women (see annex).

II. Significant developments
3.
From the end of December 2019 to early March 2020, similarly to in the
previous reporting period, limited political dialogue, cooperation or trust-building
occurred on the island. Midway through the reporting period, coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) emerged in Cyprus, generating significant challenges for the two
communities, as well as for UNFICYP. Nevertheless, several positive developments
were registered in terms of dialogue and cooperation between the sides.
4.
On 28 February, the Republic of Cyprus announced the decision to close four
crossing points for seven days as of 29 February as a mitigating measure against the
spread of the virus. The closures resulted in a series of demonstrations by both Greek
Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots on the following days. Some demonstrators demanded
the immediate reopening of the crossings, citing the fact that no confirmed cases had yet
been reported on Cyprus and pointing to the continued operation of ports of entry into
the island; others expressed the view that all crossings should remain closed. The initial
COVID-19 cases, which surfaced in mid-March, first in the south and then in the north,
led to further restrictive measures being put in place, including the closing by the Turkish
Cypriot authorities of two additional crossing points. The cases also resulted in the
postponement of campaign activities related to the Turkish Cypriot leadership elections
and the announcement, thereafter, that those elections would be postponed for six
months, until 11 October, with a possible second round on 18 October.

20-09020 (E)

140720

*2009020*

S/2020/682

5.
The two sides addressed the emerging crisis with a clear sen se of urgency, albeit
in separate, uncoordinated responses. Restrictive measures, such as school closures,
curfews, partial lockdowns and the cancellation of passenger flights, were imposed
as from March and, by month’s end, the few remaining open crossings were rendered
essentially impassable due to quarantine requirements put in place by both sides. As
a result, UNFICYP increased its support for humanitarian efforts to ensure, inter alia,
access to critical medical care and medicine across the divide. Eco nomic measures
were also put in place on both sides to mitigate fallout from the crisis.
6.
On 23 March, I launched my call for a global ceasefire, urging parties to put
aside their differences in order to jointly fight COVID -19 and appealing for the
opening of windows of diplomacy and dialogue in all situations of division and
conflict. The message was reaffirmed in Cyprus by my Special Representative.
Dialogue did take place in Cyprus and, when the leaders were involved, often resulted
in concrete, positive outcomes. Importantly, on 21 May, the leaders agreed on the first
phase of the reopening of the crossing points by allowing, as of 8 June, the crossing
of Turkish Cypriots who worked in the south and lived in the north, students and
medical patients, as well as Greek Cypriots and Maronites who lived in the north.
However, the authorities in the north postponed the implementation of the agreement,
possibly until 22 June, triggering a series of demonstrations in the north and in Pyla.
In some instances, responses to the pandemic on the island became politicized,
including an incident in the bicommunal village of Pyla, where a disagreement ensued
over who should be testing individuals from the two communities.
7.
As requested by the Security Council in resolution 2506 (2020), on 1 May, my
Special Representative shared a proposal with relevant parties for the establishment
of an effective mechanism for direct military-level contacts, with a view to alleviating
tensions along the ceasefire lines and in the buffer zone. During the reporting period,
I received letters from both leaders stating the readiness of their side and conditions
for the establishment of such a mechanism. Based on that response, my Spec ial
Representative and her team continued to shuttle between the sides to reach a
mutually agreeable modus operandi.
8.
Notwithstanding the call by the Security Council in resolution 2506 (2020) for
a reduction of tensions in the Eastern Mediterranean, tensions surrounding
hydrocarbons exploration persisted during the reporting period.

III. Activities of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force
in Cyprus
9.
As outlined in previous reports, the absence of progress in comprehensive
settlement negotiations since July 2017 contributed to a hardening of positions on
both sides and heightened the risk of political escalation, even from seemingly benign
day-to-day issues and challenges. During the period, unilateral actions in sensitive
areas near or in the buffer zone caused levels of political tension not seen in Cyprus
in years. In one instance, described below, the incident brought the opposing forces
close to engagement and necessitated sustained, all-of-mission de-escalation efforts
(see para. 20 below).
10. The outbreak of COVID-19 in Cyprus and the restrictions put in place by both
sides changed the operational context of the mission significantly. From the start of
the outbreak, UNFICYP worked to ensure the continued fulfilment of its mandate
while exercising the utmost care to avoid exposing its personnel to risks or
contributing to the virus’s spread on the island. Pandemic-related restrictions
presented a challenge to effective liaison, with less direct, face-to-face engagement
with political and government stakeholders, opposing forces and civil society,
2/15

20-09020

S/2020/682

affecting all aspects of the mission’s work. With restrictions imposed on the
population on both sides, civilian activity in the buffer zone dropped significantly
and, with crossing points closed and curfews in place in both communities, trust building activities moved online from mid-March onwards, continuing at a muchreduced pace. Growth in humanitarian requests generated by the closing of c rossing
points resulted in significantly increased demand for facilitation by UNFICYP.
11. Before the outbreak, UNFICYP had developed contingency plans to ensure that
the mission would continue to implement its mandated tasks and that all precautions
would be taken to prevent contagion among its personnel and the population.
UNFICYP took a number of practical preventive measures based on international
guidelines, including those of the World Health Organization, and developed a robust
pandemic response plan and an updated business continuity plan, including for the
quarantine of incoming personnel. During the reporting period, UNFICYP recorded
three COVID-19 cases among its personnel. Those individuals isolated themselves
and fully recovered. By 22 May, the last of the three had returned to duty.
12. On 12 April, one day after UNFICYP had announced its first case of COVID -19,
the Turkish Cypriot authorities implemented a new set of measures barring United
Nations personnel, including those of UNFICYP, and representatives of the
international community from crossing to the north. As a result, UNFICYP activated
measures to ensure that its operations in the north of the island were not unduly
affected, while remaining mindful of the need to not put its own pers onnel or others
in Cyprus at unnecessary risk. Turkish Cypriot restrictions, nevertheless, negatively
affected the mission’s activities north of the buffer zone by isolating the two
UNFICYP camps located in the north, although an arrangement was found to p rovide
the camps with supplies as necessary. At the time of writing the present report,
restrictions on UNFICYP operations in the north remained in place in spite of the
direct engagement of my Special Representative, including in writing.

A.

Prevention of tensions in and around the buffer zone
13. Since 2018, my reports on UNFICYP have described the challenges to the status
quo triggered by actions of the Turkish forces along the northern ceasefire line, in
particular construction violations, as well as moves forward by military personnel in
disputed sections of the buffer zone. Taken together, those actions amounted to
challenging the United Nations delineation of the northern ceasefire line in some areas.
The current period also saw challenges to the military status quo along the southern
ceasefire line in the form of an increased military and police presence along the line
(officially linked to irregular migration), as well as military construction violations.
14. UNFICYP observed several incidents of threatening behaviour in relation to its
authority during the reporting period, including physical aggression towards its
peacekeepers by the Turkish Cypriot security forces during demonstrations in
Nicosia, as well as in the context of isolated criminal incidents elsewhere in the buffer
zone (see sect. C below).

B.

Prevention of a recurrence of fighting and maintenance of the
military status quo
15. Compared with the previous reporting period, there was a slight decrease in
military violations, partly as a result of the winter weather and, as fro m March 2020,
the COVID-19 outbreak and associated restrictions. There were 389 military
violations recorded, compared with 414 during the previous reporting period and 249
in the same period in 2019.

20-09020

3/15

S/2020/682

16. UNFICYP observed several violations along the ceasefire lines, including two
occasions on which the Turkish forces cocked weapons near UNFICYP patrols in the
area of Nicosia. Although the overall number of move forward violations by the
Turkish forces decreased, several serious cases were observed in term s of the number
and posture of the military personnel involved (see para. 21 below).
17. A high number of changes of status quo violations (152) were recorded in the
special status area of Strovilia, along with a hardening of the stance of the Turkish
forces vis-à-vis UNFICYP. The checkpoint constructed by the Turkish Cypriot side
in 2019 resulted in the near permanent presence of an additional Turkish forces soldier
in Strovilia, occupying a separate military position, which continued to be recorded
as a violation. Although UNFICYP continued to implement its activities unhindered
in Strovilia, since 21 January, it has received more than 340 written protests from
Turkish forces objecting to its activities and freedom of movement in the village.
18. Varosha again gained prominence during the reporting period primarily as a result
of public statements by several Turkish Cypriot political representatives and a highprofile “round table” event organized within the fenced-off area on 15 February
involving Turkish and Turkish Cypriot officials and members of the media to discuss the
prospects of reopening the area. Despite ongoing restrictions on its movement,
UNFICYP continued to monitor and report on the situation and changes to the status quo
in Varosha, as well as on breaches of relevant Security Council resolu tions. The United
Nations holds the Government of Turkey responsible for the status quo in Varosha.
Members of the Council recalled the importance of the status of Varosha in a Council
press statement of 9 October 2019, reiterating that no actions should b e carried out in
relation to Varosha that were not in accordance with relevant Council resolutions.
19. Construction violations along the southern ceasefire line in the form of
approximately 153 prefabricated concrete firing positions placed at a total of 26
National Guard positions, including in Nicosia, were a new and significant
development during the reporting period. Such construction is considered a violation
of the military status quo under the aide-memoire and is therefore recorded and
protested by the mission. The Turkish forces continued to enhance some of their
positions by means of new antennae, binoculars and closed -circuit television, as well
as maintenance to positions along the northern ceasefire line, which were also
protested by UNFICYP as violations.
20. In areas of Nicosia where the delineation of the buffer zone is disputed,
unauthorized civilian activity generated tensions. On 28 December 2019, the mission
protested the installation by the Turkish Cypriot authorities of an omnidirection al
closed-circuit television in the area of the Ledra Palace Hotel, which is contrary to
the unmanning agreement of 1989. On 5 February, the Republic of Cyprus Nicosia
municipality deployed a contractor team to the buffer zone to rehabilitate a building
located on and north of the northern ceasefire line, known as the “Spitfire Café”. The
action prompted a move forward by the Turkish forces that in turn triggered moves
forward by the National Guard, bringing the two opposing forces in proximity to one
another in the buffer zone. The involvement of my Special Representative with the
sides allowed for a progressive de-escalation of tensions. Finally, despite repeated
demarches by UNFICYP, the unauthorized construction of a shelter by the Turkish
Cypriot side in the area between the two crossing points at Ledra Street Crossing
remained in place.
21. There was no progress during the reporting period regarding the clearing of the
island’s 29 suspected hazardous areas. The United Nations Mine Action Service
continued to research options for the next phase of clearance activities to be presented
to the two sides, with a special focus on the buffer zone and its four mined areas.

4/15

20-09020

S/2020/682

C.

Management of civilian activity and maintenance of law and order
22. UNFICYP continued to manage civilian activity in the buffer zone with a view
to preventing tensions. A total of 635 permits (both new and renewed) were issued for
civilian activities in the buffer zone, including farming and/or grazing, construction
and utility maintenance, compared with 563 issued during the same period in 2019.
23. In the latter part of the reporting period, coinciding with the start of the seeding
season, unauthorized farming activity close to the northern ceasefire line in Avlona
and Dhenia generated tension and required intense engagement with individuals and
authorities on both sides to maintain the calm. Tensions were the most acute in
Avlona, where unauthorized farming activity resulted in move forward violations by
the Turkish forces and, at times serious, tensions between civilians. The politicization
of such incidents through the media continued, including the distortion of facts on the
ground by some media outlets. The apparent tacit approval of one or the other side
for unauthorized farming activity and intrusions into the buffer zone remained an
aggravating factor.
24. In line with the mission’s mandate and the Action for Peacekeeping agenda,
UNFICYP continued to implement community-oriented policing activities, albeit with
less interaction with the population as from the beginning of the COVID -19 outbreak.
The mission focused its police and joint police/military patrols on targeted, sensitive
areas of the buffer zone and reported 581 civilian incidents, including 73 instances of
unauthorized farming activities, compared with 663 in the same period in 2019.
25. Hunting and related activities engaged in by civilians in the buffer zone
continued, amounting to 385 recorded incidents during the reporting period. Such
activities caused particular concern in cases where Greek Cypriot hunters and
members of the Turkish forces were involved, and in several instances when intruding
civilians displayed threatening behaviour towards unarmed UNFICYP personnel,
resulting in increased tension.
26. UNFICYP continued to play a critical role in liaising between the police services
on both sides. The Joint Communications Room remained an essential vehicle for such
liaison, demonstrated by 144 exchanges of information facilitated between the sides.
Although the inability of the Joint Communications Room to meet formally from mid March onwards resulted in fewer exchanges of information, informal contacts did
occur, enabling certain humanitarian activities to take place across the divide.
27. The demonstrations held in central Nicosia starting on 29 February for or against
the closing of crossing points posed heightened challenges for UNFICYP. During one
such demonstration, on 9 March, three UNFICYP police officers suffered minor
injuries as members of the Turkish Cypriot police and security personnel entered a
disputed section of the buffer zone and proceeded to physic ally push United Nations
police personnel deeper into the zone. My Special Representative subsequently
protested the incident, which constituted the first physical aggression against
peacekeepers in Cyprus since 1996.
28. In late March, UNFICYP supported the Cyprus police in ensuring that the 10
illegal establishments that had been operating in the bicommunal village of Pyla were
effectively shut down, in line with COVID-19 restrictions. In the absence of effective
cooperation between the sides, the establishments began operating again on 21 May.
Criminality in Pyla remains a major concern for residents, local authorities and
UNFICYP alike. On 12 May, an explosive device exploded in front of an
establishment known for illegal activities. Although no one was injured in the blast,
the incident and the tensions that ensued in the village and between the police services
served as the latest manifestation of the persistent law and order problem in Pyla.

20-09020

5/15

S/2020/682

Meanwhile, the university in Pyla continued to operate without authorization from
UNFICYP, and no progress was registered to resolve the matter of the large
unauthorized construction project associated with the university despite the mission ’s
ongoing efforts in that regard.

D.

Intercommunal relations, cooperation and trust-building
29. The closure of crossing points and COVID-19 restrictions implemented by both
sides as from mid-March further complicated the mission’s efforts to facilitate
connections and cooperation between members of the two communities, br inging to
a halt all physical gatherings of grass-roots and civil society organizations. With the
exception of a few virtual gatherings, intercommunal contact and rapprochement
reverted to a situation reminiscent of the period prior to the opening of the f irst
crossing point in 2003.
30. During the reporting period, UNFICYP nonetheless supported or facilitated the
holding of 182 intercommunal activities that brought together 3,859 participants from
both sides. The beginning of 2020 saw the implementation of several noteworthy
trust-building initiatives, as described below. Furthermore, the mission continued to
expand the geographic scope of its bicommunal activities and engagements, 58 per
cent of which were conducted outside Nicosia between January and Mar ch. Notable
progress was registered, particularly in sector 4, in the east, where UNFICYP focused
primarily on women and youth groups.
31. UNFICYP continued to concentrate its intercommunal work in four key areas:
peace education; the environment; youth and entrepreneurship; and gender equality
and the participation of women. On 22 May, UNFICYP launched an environmental
peacebuilding initiative involving 24 Cypriot youth from both communities coming
together to learn about environmental issues and peacebuil ding in the framework of
the promotion of the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations and based on the
Sustainable Development Goals. UNFICYP also supported several educational
events, including those gathering youth from both sides to discuss issu es of mutual
concern while also supporting opportunities to study the other community ’s language.
32. The bicommunal technical committees, operating under the auspices of my
mission of good offices with UNFICYP support, were obliged to reduce their
activities as from mid-March due to the outbreak. Nevertheless, encouragement from
the leadership on both sides resulted in contact and activity increasing again towards
the latter part of the reporting period. The Technical Committee on Humanitarian
Matters met formally once during the reporting period and convened virtually once
more to help a Turkish Cypriot individual to access medical care across the divide.
The Technical Committee on Crisis Management met regularly, albeit without being
involved in the crisis emergencies related to COVID-19 or the large forest fires of the
end of May. Although construction at sites across the island was temporarily
suspended, the Technical Committee on Cultural Heritage continued to meet weekly
virtually, focusing on the preparation of designs and tenders for future activities. With
the support of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the
European Commission, the Committee began preparations for, inter alia, the
restoration of seven fountains, eight mosques and eight churches, as well as the
launching of tenders for two cemeteries.
33. The Technical Committee on Environment met monthly, including virtually. On
13 May, and for the first time in several years, the Technical Committee on Gender
Equality met, a week after it had released a press statement on 6 May to warn against
the increased risks of domestic violence during the COVID -19 confinement period.
As in recent reporting periods, the Technical Committee on Crossings did not meet.

6/15

20-09020

S/2020/682

My most recent report on my mission of good offices in Cyprus (S/2020/685) provides
further details on the work of all of the committees.
34. Religious representatives of Cyprus sustained their commitment to
peacebuilding and reconciliation within the framework of the Religious Track of the
Cyprus Peace Process, under the auspices of the Embassy of Sweden. They reinforced
their cooperation with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, advocating inclusion and support for refugees, migrants and asylum
seekers. The representatives continued to support online language courses in Turkish
and Greek for clerics and staff of religious institutions, which has become an
important confidence-building exercise. They also came together to denounce the
desecration of a mosque in Limassol on 1 June.
35. The leaders and representatives of Turkish Cypriot and Greek Cypriot political
parties continued to attend meetings under the auspices of the Embassy of Slovakia
until their efforts were interrupted by the outbreak. In January and February, the
platform maintained informal contacts with representatives of the youth wings of
political parties from both sides and widened the scope of its activities to bui ld
support for the idea of bilingualism on the island.

E.

Facilitation of access and humanitarian functions
36. Despite the challenges posed by the pandemic, UNFICYP, in cooperation with
the Cyprus Red Cross Society, managed a large number of request s from authorities
on both sides of the island to facilitate access for Cypriots to essential services. Most
of the requests were accepted by the other side, putting politics aside in favour of
addressing humanitarian needs. The requests included the crossing of 27 Turkish
Cypriots to the south to receive essential medical treatment, often several times per
month, and the weekly delivery to Turkish Cypriots, and Greek Cypriots and
Maronites who live in the north, of essential medicine that can only be obtai ned in
the south. The closing of the Limnitis/Yeşilırmak crossing point resulted in
restrictions on the crossing of ambulances, requiring the urgent intervention of
UNFICYP on several occasions. The mission also facilitated the crossing to the north
of Turkish Cypriots who had landed in Larnaca from overseas. On five occasions,
UNFICYP facilitated the transfer of deceased persons across the divide. Significantly,
UNFICYP assisted in the repatriation of 447 foreign nationals during the lockdown.
37. UNFICYP continued to monitor the well-being of, and ensure access to essential
services for, Greek Cypriot and Maronite communities and individuals in the north
and Turkish Cypriot individuals in the south. Members of those communities used
visits from UNFICYP as an opportunity to raise issues of concern. With the closure
of crossing points in March, and entry restrictions of imposed on the international
community in the north in April, UNFICYP suspended home visits, school visits and
visits to the detention facilities in the north. The mission also adapted its methods of
making humanitarian deliveries to reach Maronite communities and deliver medical
supplies and welfare checks to the Greek Cypriot communities in the Karpas
Peninsula. Visits to detention facilities were replaced by the facilitation of phone calls
by detainees to their family members.
38. UNFICYP continued to liaise with both sides, facilitating 23 Greek Cypriot
requests for religious services in the north, 18 of which were agreed by the Turkish
Cypriot authorities. Following the outbreak, however, in -person religious services
were prohibited on both sides of the island.
39. The crossing of persons and goods between the two sides continued to be
facilitated through European Council regulation (EC) N o. 866/2004 of 29 April 2004
(the Green Line Regulation) until March. According to European Union statistics,

20-09020

7/15

S/2020/682

trade across the Green Line increased by 12 per cent in 2019 compared with 2018,
for a total value of 5,464,237 euros. Various obstacles to further trade persisted,
however, inhibiting this commercial activity from reaching its full potential to the
benefit of both communities. Although updated figures for the number of Cypriots
crossing the Green Line during the reporting period are not presently a vailable,
current information suggests that, until the outbreak of COVID -19, the upward trend
in Greek Cypriots crossing to the north that has been registered since 2019 continued,
while the number of Turkish Cypriots crossing to the south also increased. The
substantial increase in the number of Greek Cypriots crossing in 2019 is thought to
be linked to the favourable exchange rate of the euro against the Turkish lira during
that period, which has continued thus far in 2020.

F.

Refugees and asylum seekers
40. Throughout the reporting period, both sides’ concerns about irregular migration
and arrivals of asylum seekers contributed to shaping their approach to and posture
near the buffer zone, resulting at times in an increased security and m ilitary presence
along both ceasefire lines, particularly in central Nicosia.
41. In 2019, 13,259 persons applied for asylum in the Republic of Cyprus, and the
number of asylum seekers awaiting the outcome of their applications reached an
unprecedented 18,731 persons, with Cyprus continuing to rank first in the pro rata
number of asylum applications among European Union member States for a third
consecutive year. During the first three months of 2020, the number of asylum
applications continued to increase, with 2,999 new applications submitted to the
authorities of the Republic of Cyprus. Four boats that sailed from Turkey carrying 291
Syrian asylum seekers arrived in the south in the first three months of the year. Given
the great disparity between the number of asylum requests registered at the crossing
points and those registered in the relevant institutions in the Republic of Cyprus,
UNFICYP assesses that most of the asylum seekers and irregular migrants who cross
from north to south do so undetected through the porous areas of the buffer zone.
42. Following the outbreak of COVID-19 in Cyprus, access to asylum procedures
in the Republic of Cyprus was suspended altogether. Access to the territory for
persons seeking asylum was also suspended, including one notable case on 20 March,
in which a boat carrying 175 Syrian asylum seekers, including 80 children and 25
women, was prohibited by coastguards from landing.
43. In the north, asylum seekers’ access to the territory continued to be restricted.
During the reporting period, approximately 271 asylum seekers were identified in
pre-deportation quarantine facilities, including the 175 Syrian asylum seekers
mentioned above. According to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, some 252 persons were returned to Turkey, including 79
unaccompanied and separated children whose parents or other close family members
were in the south of the island.
44. With crossings closed and the processing of asylum applications by the Republic of
Cyprus temporarily suspended, on several occasions UNFICYP faced an unprecedented
situation whereby a number of irregular migrants and asylum seekers were stranded
temporarily inside the buffer zone, unable to either cross south or return north.

G.

Gender, and women and peace and security
45. UNFICYP provided technical and advocacy-related support to the Cypriot
antennae of the Mediterranean Women Mediators Network to broaden and enhance

8/15

20-09020

S/2020/682

the group’s social media impact. The mission also continued to facilitate the “Women
walk and talk” initiative, a forum for intercommunal trust-building driven by
women’s civil society organizations in Cyprus and a vehicle through which women
can deliberate on and gain insight into the peace process. Furthermore, UNFICYP
helped to consolidate new networks among women’s groups in the Turkish Cypriot
and Greek Cypriot communities, supporting opportunities to build coherence and
cohesion among women activists based on shared issues of concern. Following the
outbreak, UNFICYP focused on raising awareness of the gender implications of the
pandemic, particularly in relation to increased cases of gender-based violence.
46. On 17 February, UNFICYP supported my mission of good offices in Cyprus to
launch the gender-sensitive socioeconomic impact assessment requested by the
Security Council in its resolution 2453 (2019). Furthermore, UNFICYP and my
mission of good offices continued to liaise with the bicommunal Technical Committee
on Gender Equality.
47. Internally, UNFICYP refined its delivery of training to uniformed personnel,
creating virtual training modules on the women and peace and security agenda.
Furthermore, UNFICYP, together with my mission of good offices, held a virtual
workshop on the gender implications of the pandemic for personnel as part of both
missions’ efforts to enhance gender mainstreaming across all areas of work and increase
accountability for the implementation of the women and peace and security agenda.

IV. Committee on Missing Persons in Cyprus
48. The bicommunal teams of scientists of the Committee on Missing Persons in
Cyprus, supported by the United Nations and mandated to recover, identify and return
the remains of persons who went missing during the events of 1963/64 and 1974, had
exhumed the remains of 1,208 persons on both sides of the island, including two
during the reporting period. In June 2019, the Committee was granted access to 30
additional military areas in the north that could contain burial sites. Thus far,
excavations in seven of the military areas have led to the recovery of the remains of
one person. To date, the remains of 974 missing persons, of a total of 2,002, have
been identified and returned to their families, including 5 during the reporting period.
Due to the pandemic and the subsequent restrictions put in place by authorities, the
Committee’s contacts with witnesses, as well as excavations and laboratory analyses,
were suspended as of 13 March 2020. The Committee has maintained regular online
work and meetings and reviewed all pending cases to prepare for a sufficient caseload
once operations can resume.
49. In an effort to locate additional possible burial sites of missing persons, the
Committee continued its efforts to secure cooperation with regard to the archives of
countries and organizations that had a military, police or humanitarian presence in
Cyprus in 1963/64 and 1974. During the reporting period, little archival information
on possible burial sites from the parties directly involved was received. The
Committee conducted extensive research in the classified archives of the United
Nations in New York and Nicosia. A four-week research mission to the Archives and
Records Management Section of the United Nations in New York in March had to be
cut short after only two weeks due to the outbreak and the resulting travel restrictions.

V. Conduct and discipline and sexual exploitation and abuse
50. UNFICYP remains committed to encouraging strict adherence to the United
Nations policy of zero tolerance for sexual exploitation and abuse. In coordination
with the Regional Conduct and Discipline Section of the United Nations Interim Force
20-09020

9/15

S/2020/682

in Lebanon, responsible for supporting UNFICYP, the mission implemented activities
related to prevention, enforcement and remedial actions regarding misconduct,
including sexual exploitation and abuse, and to the enforcement of the policy of zero
tolerance. Twenty-seven training sessions on United Nations standards of conduct,
including on the prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse, were delivered to
incoming military, police and civilian personnel, as well as to UNFIC YP contractors.
Due to the pandemic, some of the training sessions were conducted online. Appropriate
support was provided to UNFICYP personnel who were temporarily in isolation
because of COVID-19, enabling them to attend the briefing sessions virtually.
51. During the reporting period, UNFICYP did not receive any allegations of sexual
exploitation and abuse or other serious misconduct cases.

VI. Financial and administrative aspects
52. The General Assembly, by its resolution 73/314, as well as its decision 73/555
of 3 July 2019, appropriated the amount of $50.8 million for the maintenance of
UNFICYP for the period from 1 July 2019 to 30 June 2020, inclusive of the voluntary
contribution of one third of the net cost of the mission, equivalent to $17.1 million,
from the Government of Cyprus and the voluntary contribution of $6.5 million from
the Government of Greece.
53. As at 3 June 2020, unpaid assessed contributions to the Special Account for
UNFICYP amounted to $17.4 million. The total outstanding assessed contributions
for all peacekeeping operations as at that date amounted to $2,124.6 million.
54. Reimbursement of the costs of troops and formed police personnel, as well as
of contingent-owned equipment, has been made for the period up to 31 December
2019, in accordance with the quarterly payment schedule.

VII. Observations
55. Midway through the period under review, the COVID-19 outbreak occurred,
becoming the main focus of the authorities on the island. The outbreak affected not
only the health of many Cypriots but also their livelihoods. In the face of the crisis,
each side took the measures that it deemed appropriate to safeguard and preserve the
well-being of its community, others present on the island and Cypriots stranded
abroad. There was a robust response to COVID-19 on both sides. I commend the sides
for having cooperated with UNFICYP facilitation on the humanitarian -related issues
linked to the pandemic and detailed in the present rep ort.
56. While I welcome the positive examples of cooperation outlined in the present
report, I note that other important opportunities for a more coordinated response were
not seized. As the secondary effects of the pandemic are only now beginning to be f elt
on the island, there are still ample opportunities for mutually beneficial cooperation
across the divide. More systematic reliance on the bicommunal technical committees,
with appropriate political and technical support from the sides, could enable the
committees on economy, crisis management, health, humanitarian affairs and others
to play a constructive role in these uncommon circumstances as the aftershock of
COVID-19 on Cyprus calls for even greater practical cooperation than before.
57. Indeed, the public health consequences of the virus are only one aspect of the
multilayered crisis. A large-scale socioeconomic impact is being felt worldwide and
will be particularly challenging for a small island and, most notably, the most
vulnerable individuals. Faced with a situation that is unprecedented in recent history,

10/15

20-09020

S/2020/682

I have repeatedly emphasized that solidarity is essential for societies to recover and
that mutually beneficial cooperation is preferable to unilateral action.
58. The assistance provided by the Republic of Cyprus to the Turkish Cypriot
community to extinguish the forest fires in late May was commendable, while
requiring political intervention at the highest levels on both sides, as well as UNFICYP
coordination. Had the crisis management mechanism agreed by the Greek Cypriot and
Turkish Cypriots leaders in 2008 been established, under the auspices of the Technical
Committee on Crisis Management, as foreseen, it could have assisted in streamlining
and facilitating the process. I once again urge the sides to proceed with implementing
the leaders’ agreement of 2008 and render the mechanism effective.
59. While acknowledging the exceptional circumstances, I note that the decision by
both sides to restrict passage at crossing points was made without consultation with
the other community. I am, however, encouraged by the leaders’ joint decision in May
to work on the reopening of crossing points for certain categories of individuals, in
spite of the postponement of the agreement’s implementation by the authorities in the
north. Moving forward, I encourage the leaders to develop a comprehensive plan for
the full reopening of the crossings.
60. I continue to believe that the absence of a resolution of the Cyprus problem is
increasingly unsustainable. The lack of negotiations since July 2017 does not mean
that the situation on the island remains unchanged, either at the political level or in
the buffer zone. As outlined in the principles of my Action for Peacekeeping initiative,
there is a direct link between peacekeeping and peacemaking, and therefore, between
the activities of the peacekeeping and good offices missions in Cyprus. I note with
concern that, since the closure of the Conference on Cyprus in Crans-Montana,
tensions on the island have progressively increased over time, including during the
reporting period, in the capital, Nicosia.
61. Tensions in the region, in particular in relation to hydrocarbons, were palpable
once again during the reporting period. I have repeatedly stressed that the natural
resources found in and around Cyprus should benefit both communities and constitute
a strong incentive for all parties to find a mutually acc eptable and durable solution to
the Cyprus problem. Bearing in mind that all parties have expressed their commitment
to that objective, I reiterate my call for serious efforts to avoid any further escalation
and defuse tensions.
62. In terms of dialogue and reconciliation in Cyprus, some concrete achievements
in the implementation of previously agreed confidence-building measures were made
in 2019. I now encourage the sides to put forward proposals and ideas in good faith
for possible new measures, or to review the past proposals, so that discussions and
progress can be further pursued. Given the tense regional climate and its impact on
Cyprus, I further call upon relevant regional actors to pursue restraint, explore
confidence-building and take constructive approaches to the Cyprus problem. It is
important that the parties continue to demonstrate their good will and make greater
efforts to create conditions conducive to a successful negotiation process.
63. The Security Council has repeatedly called upon the leaders to refrain from
using rhetoric that might deepen the mistrust between the communities, insisting on
the importance of improving the public atmosphere and preparing the communities
for a settlement while also highlighting the importance of peace education. Forty-five
years after the ceasefire and de facto division of Cyprus, most of those pillars of
reconciliation, unfortunately, remain to be built. Consequently, I echo once more the
calls of the Council in this regard, including its request to the two leaders to increase
their support, and ensure a meaningful role, for civil society actors in peace efforts. I
urge the sides to do more themselves to promote and support people -to-people
initiatives as evidence of their genuine commitment to a solutio n.
20-09020

11/15

S/2020/682

64. I call upon other opinion leaders on the island, be they from the political,
commercial, religious, artistic or other spheres, to contribute to bringing the
communities together as a necessary element of building a constituency for peace and
laying the foundation for a sustainable solution to the Cyprus problem. Regional
dynamics notwithstanding, in the light of significant societal scepticism and
disengagement with regard to the peace process, coupled with an estrangement
between the communities that has now run over three generations, redoubled efforts
are required for Cypriots to re-engage for peace and bridge the divide between them.
Conversely, acts that are aimed at provoking the other community or inciting hatred
need to be addressed and clearly denounced by political and other leaders.
65. Even in these difficult times, and despite repeated calls on my part and on the
part of the Security Council, efforts in Cyprus to achieve greater economic and social
parity between the two sides and to broaden and deepen economic, cultural and other
forms of cooperation remain limited. The full implementation of European Council
regulation (EC) No. 866/2004 (the Green Line Regulation) would help significantly
to increase the volume of trade and should be pursued with renewed vigour. Increased
cross-island trade, as soon as the current situation permits it, together with deeper
economic, social, cultural, sporting and other ties and contacts, would promote trust
between the communities and help to address the concerns of the Turkish Cypriots
regarding isolation.
66. In their efforts to promote closer cooperation between the communities, local
and international actors continue to be confronted with challenges and obstacles
linked to the status of the north and concerns relating to “recognition”, even in this
exceptional period. While United Nations policy on Cyprus is maintained and
decisions of the Security Council on the matter are upheld, concerns about recognition
should not in themselves constitute an insurmountable obstacle to increased
cooperation. As the sides explore further opportunities for confidence -building and
cooperation, I urge them to devise creative ways of overcoming obstacles with a view
to achieving meaningful progress and delivering tangible benefits to their
communities. The United Nations remains fully committed to providing them with
the facilitation and support necessary.
67. I welcome the parties’ stated commitment to seeing a military contact
mechanism established. I sincerely hope that, beyond general statements, con crete
action can now be taken following the tabling by my Special Representative of a
proposal on 1 May. I remain convinced that progress on the issue would allow the
parties to effectively alleviate day-to-day tensions and be an important military
confidence-building measure. I urge the parties to work with my Special
Representative to establish the mechanism, thereby also meeting the expectations of
the Security Council.
68. As the United Nations prepares to commemorate in 2020 the twentieth
anniversary of the landmark Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) on women and
peace and security, I applaud the tenacity and continuing efforts of women ’s groups
and activists on Cyprus in this regard. I am encouraged by the renewed efforts of the
Technical Committee on Gender Equality and urge the leaders to fully support the
work of the Committee and that of civil society and to encourage a linkage between
the two in order to pursue a sustainable solution to the Cyprus issue for all.
69. In the Action for Peacekeeping framework, it is emphasized that the success of
peacekeeping operations depends largely on the political contract between Member
States and the missions on the ground. The support of the relevant Member States,
including those in the Security Council, for the work of UNFICYP is essential,
therefore, to strengthen the mission’s capacity to de-escalate tensions. I remain
concerned, however, about the continuing disregard shown by the sides towards t he
12/15

20-09020

S/2020/682

mandated authority of UNFICYP, especially with regard to dealing with security related issues in the buffer zone. I refer particularly to changes to the military status
quo, unilateral actions in the buffer zone that increase tensions and unauthorized
construction in Nicosia, Pyla and Strovilia. In addition to the 1989 unmanning
agreement, the mission’s aide-memoire, as repeatedly highlighted by the Council, is
the document of reference to describe the arrangements put in place by UNFICYP to
supervise the ceasefire, contribute to the maintenance of law and order and contribute
to a return to normal conditions. I would like to echo the clear stance of the Council
and urge all parties to abide by the aide-memoire, including by respecting the no-fly
zone status of the buffer zone and the UNFICYP delineation of the ceasefire lines.
70. In relation to the above, I continue to deplore the restrictions on the freedom of
movement of UNFICYP personnel imposed in, inter alia, Varosha and Strovilia and
request that the mission’s ability to patrol and implement its mandated activities be
fully restored. I further request that the decision to allow UNFICYP and the
international community to cross to the north be guided by public health
considerations only. I firmly and unequivocally condemn any physical aggression
against United Nations peacekeepers, as occurred at Ledra Street crossing in Nicosia
on 9 March.
71. UNFICYP records all observed violations and engages with the sides to resolve
the issues. However, some violations of the status quo and incidents in the buffer zone
and their impact are utilized politically and amplified through the media, further
increasing tensions and mistrust. I deplore any attempts to instrumentalize the
situation in the buffer zone in this respect and call upon the sides to work
constructively with UNFICYP to address violations and incidents and to refrain from
further increasing tensions.
72. The situation of asylum seekers and refugees across the island deteriorated
considerably during the reporting period and is of serious concern to the United
Nations. While appreciating the exceptional circumstances and pressures arising from
COVID-19, as well as the high volume of arrivals in Cyprus in relation to the size of
the population, I recall the critical importance of full adherence to international legal
norms in the handling of asylum seekers and refugees, wherever they may be found.
73. In the light of the continued contribution of UNFICYP to peace and stability
and the creation of conditions conducive to a political settlement, I recommend that
the Security Council extend the mandate of the mission for six months, until
31 January 2021. Looking ahead, UNFICYP will continue to monitor the evolving
situation and adapt its operations to implement its mandate effectively.
74. I would like to thank the partners, in particular the European Commission, that
have continued to provide support for the work of both United Nations missions in
Cyprus, UNDP and the Committee on Missing Persons in Cypru s and have
contributed to the implementation of various confidence-building measures. I also
thank the 36 countries that have contributed troops, police or both to UNFICYP since
1964, and I pay tribute to the 186 peacekeepers who have lost their lives in the service
of peace in Cyprus.
75. I express my gratitude to Elizabeth Spehar for her service as my Special
Representative in Cyprus, the Head of UNFICYP and my Deputy Special Adviser on
Cyprus. I also extend my thanks to all the men and women serving in UNFICYP for
their steadfast commitment to the implementation of the mandate of the mission and
the cause of peace on the island.

20-09020

13/15

S/2020/682

Annex
Countries providing military and police personnel to the
United Nations operation in Cyprus (as at 18 June 2020)
Country

Number of military personnel

Argentina

243

Australia

3

Austria

3

Brazil

2

Canada

1

Chile

12

Ghana

1

Hungary

12

India

1

Pakistan

2

Paraguay

12

Russian Federation

2

Serbia

3

Slovakia

241

Ukraine

1

United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland

247

Total a

Country

786

Number of police personnel

Bosnia and Herzegovina

6

China

6

India

4

Ireland

12

Italy

4

Jordan

3

Lithuania

1

Montenegro

1

Pakistan

2

Romania

5

Russian Federation

2

Serbia

2

Slovakia

5

Sweden

2

Ukraine

7

Total a
a

14/15

62

Of the military personnel, 709 are men and 77 are women. Of the police personnel, 38 are
men and 24 are women.

20-09020

20-09020

S/2020/682

15/15
