A/61/PV.31

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-first session

31

st plenary meeting
Friday, 13 October 2006, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Al Khalifa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Bahrain)

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Agenda item 104
Appointment of the Secretary-General of the
United Nations

acclamation resolution 1715 (2006) concerning the
recommendation for the appointment of the
Secretary-General.
I shall now read out the text of the resolution.
Resolution 1715 (2006) reads as follows:
“The Security Council,

Letter from the President of the Security
Council to the President of the General
Assembly (A/61/501)
Draft resolution (A/61/L.3)
The President: The Assembly has before it
document A/61/501, containing a letter dated 9 October
2006 from the President of the Security Council
addressed to the President of the General Assembly.
Members will recall that on that same day, I
transmitted copies of that letter to all Member States.
In this regard, I now call on the President of the
Security Council, who will report to the Assembly on
the work undertaken by the Council on this matter.
Mr. Oshima (Japan): It is an honour and
privilege for me, in my capacity as President of the
Security Council for the month of October, to address
the General Assembly in order to convey to it the
recommendation of the Security Council for the
appointment of the Secretary-General of the
United Nations.
At its 5547th meeting, held in private on
9 October 2006, the Security Council adopted by

“Having considered the question of the
recommendation for the appointment of the
Secretary-General of the United Nations,
“Recommends to the General Assembly that
Mr. Ban Ki-moon be appointed Secretary-General
of the United Nations for a term of office from
1 January 2007 to 31 December 2011.”
Since, early this year, the Security Council
pledged to conclude its part in the selection process by
October, the Council is pleased that, by adopting its
recommendation for the appointment on 9 October, the
Council met this goal. The Security Council believes
that early action upon the appointment by the General
Assembly would ensure ample time for transition
between the current and incoming Secretaries-General.
On behalf of the Security Council, I would like to
express appreciation to all Member States that
presented candidates as part of the selection process.
Finally, I would like to thank you, Madam, for
having convened this meeting expeditiously following
the recommendation made to the General Assembly by
the Security Council.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

06-56975 (E)

*0656975*

A/61/PV.31

The President: In connection with the
recommendation of the Security Council, the General
Assembly has before it a draft resolution issued as
document A/61/L.3, which was made available on the
initiative of the Chairman of the Group of Asian States
and which enjoys the support of the other four regional
groups.
The General Assembly will now take a decision
on draft resolution A/61/L.3. May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/61/L.3 by acclamation?
The draft resolution was adopted by acclamation
(resolution 61/3).
The President: I now request the Chief of
Protocol to escort His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon to
the platform.
The Chief of Protocol escorted the SecretaryGeneral-designate, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, to the
platform.
The President: I have the honour to announce
that His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon has been
appointed by acclamation Secretary-General of the
United Nations for a term of office beginning on
1 January 2007 and ending on 31 December 2011.
The General Assembly has just adopted the
resolution on the appointment of His Excellency
Mr. Ban Ki-moon as Secretary-General of the United
Nations. This is a historic day for the Organization as it
continues to evolve and live up to the values and
principles of the Charter.
On behalf of the General Assembly, I wish to
extend my sincerest congratulations to Minister Ban
Ki-moon on his appointment as the eighth SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations. I am deeply honoured
to welcome him to the United Nations, an Organization
which is not unfamiliar to him and to which he has
devoted a considerable part of his outstanding
diplomatic career.
He is one of the most prominent figures of the
Republic of Korea, a peaceful nation that has made a
remarkable transformation to become a stable
democracy and a vibrant economy during the past three
decades. His appointment comes at a time when the
Organization is deeply engaged in a wide-ranging
reform process, outlined by world leaders in September
last year.

2

We are grateful to Secretary-General Kofi Annan,
who has played a major role in shaping a clear and
comprehensive vision to address the many global
challenges confronting us. I am confident that the
Organization will build upon its past achievements and
move ahead to become an even more effective body
under the leadership of Secretary-General-designate
Ban Ki-moon.
We have still before us many challenges, from
extreme poverty and hunger to armed conflicts, disease
and international terrorism; and we have yet to find the
most appropriate ways to make globalization work for
all.
The credibility of this Organization will be tested
by our ability to continue to work in unity and meet the
expectations of the millions of people of the world.
Today’s decision gives us hope that we are ready to
take
collective
responsibility
and
act
with
determination on matters of common concern.
I appeal to all members to extend to SecretaryGeneral-designate Ban Ki-moon your utmost support
to ensure a smooth transition as he prepares to assume
his term in office. He can be assured of my full
cooperation to facilitate his work. May I take this
opportunity to wish him all success in his upcoming
endeavour.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Kofi Annan.
The Secretary-General: Let me extend my
warmest congratulations to my successor, Mr. Ban
Ki-moon. Let me also congratulate all of you, the
Member States, on this choice.
I am delighted that Mr. Ban’s election turned out
this way — early and orderly. Surely, this is the way
we would wish all Secretaries-General to be elected. I
would also say that the process worked well because
Member States were determined to achieve an early
outcome and because the winning candidate had
exceptional qualifications.
I think everyone here recognizes the depth of
Mr. Ban’s experience, the breadth of his connections
and his ability to cooperate effectively at the highest
levels. But, as someone who has known and worked
with him for several years, I think that others will soon
discover something else — something more — if they
do not see it already: a future Secretary-General who is
exceptionally attuned to the sensitivities of countries

06-56975

A/61/PV.31

and constituencies in every continent; a man with a
truly global mind at the helm of the world’s only
universal Organization.
Mr. Ban’s early election will give us a head start
in ensuring the smoothest possible transition. I recall,
at the beginning of the process, I said “I wish the
General Assembly and the [Security] Council do not do
to my successor what they did to me”. I was elected on
Friday, 13 December.
I would presume to give him only one piece of
advice for when he takes office next year: try to make
full use of the unparalleled resource found in the staff
of the Organization. Their commitment to the United
Nations is the greatest asset of the United Nations and
has been the surest source of strength for me in my
work as Secretary-General.
More than 50 years ago, the first SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, Trygve Lie, used the
following words in greeting his successor, Dag
Hammarskjöld: “You are about to take over the most
impossible job on Earth”. While that may be true, I
would add that it is also the best possible job on Earth.
There will be time to wish him well more fully as
we reach the moment of transfer of authority towards
the end of the year. Until then, my colleagues and I
will do all we can to assist him as he prepares for the
road ahead.
As he readies himself to take over, I wish him
both strength and courage. He will need those
attributes, but, equally, he will need a healthy sense of
humour — which I know he possesses in abundance.
So he must not forget to have fun along the way. I wish
him the very best of luck.
The President: I give the floor to the
representative of Gambia, who will speak on behalf of
the African States.
Mr. Grey-Johnson (Gambia): The Group of
African States heartily congratulates Mr. Ban Ki-moon,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Korea,
on his election by acclamation as the eighth SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, replacing Mr. Kofi
Annan, who will be retiring from the Organization at
the end of December 2006.
Mr. Ban Ki-moon brings to the position a wealth
of experience as an accomplished diplomat,
administrator and scholar. In fulfilling those roles in

06-56975

his native land, he was exposed to a mix of experiences
that has prepared him well for the job of SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations. In less than 40 years,
the Republic of Korea rose from the status of least
developed country to become an industrialized, highly
developed nation. Today, it is the eleventh largest
economy in the world. Mr. Ban Ki-moon lived through
that period of transformation and in fact contributed to
it in no small measure. That experience will surely
come in handy as he leads us forward with the
implementation of the Millennium Development Goals.
Since the end of the Korean War, which Mr. Ban
Ki-moon lived through, his country has been involved
as an active partner in peacebuilding and conflict
prevention and resolution. He has played important
roles in that process and I am sure will bring his handson experiences to bear on the work of the Organization
in those very important areas, which are at the very
heart of the mandate of the United Nations. His coming
on board at a time when developments in his own
region of the world call for wisdom and cautious
diplomacy can also augur well for our efforts to
mediate the very complex security situation that is now
unfolding in the Korean peninsula. I am sure he will
also help us make progress more generally on the
disarmament issues and move us forward on the
denuclearization agenda.
The immediate preoccupation is with reform of
the Organization. As an astute administrator, Mr. Ban
Ki-moon comes to the job with the tools that should
make it easier for us to achieve faster results,
especially with management reform, but also with the
reform of the Security Council, the Economic and
Social Council and, indeed, the General Assembly. He
knows the house well, having served in his country’s
delegation and having been the chief adviser and
manager of the office of the presidency of the General
Assembly at its fifty-sixth session.
Africa looks forward to working with him on the
many issues of priority and concern to us, from
peacekeeping and peacebuilding to poverty and all the
other areas identified under the special needs of Africa
chapter of the Outcome Document that was adopted by
the Summit of heads of State and Government last
year. We will lend him all the support and cooperation
he requires as he takes on his important
responsibilities. We congratulate him once more and
wish him the very best.

3

A/61/PV.31

Let me seize this opportunity to commend our
outgoing Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, for his
tremendous contributions to multilateralism and the
principles and purposes of the United Nations. We are
indeed proud and very grateful that, through his
exemplary service to the Organization for over a
decade, Africa was able to play a lead role in the
maintenance of world peace, the promotion of
sustainable human development, and the prevention
and resolution of conflict. We thank him for his many
years of invaluable service to humanity and wish him
well in his future endeavours.
The President: I give the floor to the
representative of Japan, who will speak on behalf of
the Asian States.
Mr. Oshima (Japan): It is indeed a great honour
for me today to address this body for a second time,
only through a coincidence. Nevertheless, it is a great
joy for me to do so as the representative of a country
that is one of the immediate neighbours of the Republic
of Korea, the country from which our next SecretaryGeneral hails.
On behalf of the States members of the Asian
Group, it is my great pleasure and honour to most
warmly welcome the appointment of Mr. Ban Ki-moon
of the Republic of Korea as the next Secretary-General
and to extend our most sincere and heartfelt
congratulations to him on his appointment.
The Asian Member States aspired from early on
in the selection process that one of our sons, daughters,
brothers or sisters from the region would be given the
opportunity to serve at the helm of our Organization,
35 years after the third Secretary-General, U Thant.
That aspiration has today been realized through a
unanimous decision of the General Assembly following
a recommendation unanimously arrived at in the
Security Council. And for that, the Asian Member
States wish to express their gratitude to the States
members of all regional groups for the understanding
and support they have shown for that aspiration and the
candidature of Mr. Ban Ki-moon.
In that connection, the States members of the
Asian Group wish to extend special thanks to the
African Group and the Group of Latin American and
Caribbean States for officially expressing, early in the
process, their strong and unflagging support for the
election of an Asian candidate as the next SecretaryGeneral. Likewise, we are grateful to the Non-Aligned

4

Movement countries for their consolidated support for
Asia’s position in that regard.
The Asian countries are confident that SecretaryGeneral-designate Ban Ki-moon will contribute
substantially to the further enhancement of the role and
prestige of our Organization, to reforms of the
Organization and the strengthening of the United
Nations system, to maintaining international peace and
security, to promoting economic and social
development and growth, and to protecting and
enhancing human rights.
Mr. Ban is a seasoned diplomat with long, rich
and extensive experience in the public service of his
home country, the Republic of Korea, including as
Minister of Foreign Affairs and Trade and at the United
Nations. His personal qualities, combined with his
diplomatic skills and a proven record of
accomplishment in management and administration —
all of which he now brings to the service of the United
Nations — show that all Member States will be in good
hands with him as the chief administrator of our
Organization as it struggles to address new tasks and
challenges.
The Asian region is proud of its many remarkable
developments and achievements in reducing poverty,
attaining economic growth, providing more education
to children, promoting democratic values and
institutions, and so forth — although, admittedly, there
are still many challenges. The country that Mr. Ban
hails from is a remarkable example of the phenomenal
growth and change witnessed in Asia. The Asian
Member States can say with pride that it is most
appropriate that such a country is sending one of its
most outstanding public servants to steer the course of
the United Nations at the beginning of the twenty-first
century.
Looking back over the selection process, several
talented, able and distinguished candidates besides
Mr. Ban were presented from the Asian region. We
should remember that the unanimous action to appoint
Mr. Ban, both in the Security Council and in the
General Assembly, was in the end made possible by the
considerate cooperation of those other candidates. I
would like to take the opportunity to thank them all, as
well as the Member States which presented their
candidatures, in that regard.
In conclusion, once again most warmly
welcoming the Secretary-General-designate, Mr. Ban,

06-56975

A/61/PV.31

and wishing him every success in fulfilling his highly
demanding mission at this crucial juncture in
international relations and in the work of the United
Nations in particular, the States members of the Asian
Group pledge their firm support to him in the discharge
of his formidable and weighty responsibilities in the
months and years ahead.
Finally, I am sure there will be another
opportunity to formally express our deep appreciation
to Secretary-General Kofi Annan, but allow me on this
occasion, on behalf of the Asian Group, to reaffirm our
respect for Secretary-General Kofi Annan and
reconfirm our commitment to continued cooperation
with him as he perseveres in tackling the mountain of
issues that remain to be addressed until his final day in
office.
The President: I give the floor to the
representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina, who will
speak on behalf of the Eastern European States.
Mr. Prica (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I feel
particularly honoured to speak today on behalf of the
Group of Eastern European States on this historic
occasion.
First of all, I would like to extend a warm
welcome and our congratulations to the newly
appointed Secretary-General of the United Nations,
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, on his appointment to the most
important post in today’s world.
The whole world looks to him today with
renewed hope that the Organization will continue to be
led in a way that will maintain its credibility,
independence and high efficiency, and to strive for the
best global solutions for the sake of the further
advancement of contemporary world society, calling
upon his well-known extraordinary qualities, broad
experience in international relations, and the
unanimous support he enjoys among Member States.
The world has changed dramatically during the
past decade, and new challenges have appeared on the
horizon. The activities of the Secretary-General will
continue to be challenging, taking into account difficult
unresolved conflicts, continuing threats to peace and
stability in the world, and the obstacles to further
reform of the Organization in order to make it more
efficient and capable of tackling important issues and
implementing the right and broadly acceptable
decisions.

06-56975

Mr. Ban has taken upon his shoulders the very
difficult, but at the same time very noble task of
leading our planet towards a better life and better
opportunities for all in a peaceful, secure and healthy
environment. We have no doubt that, under his prudent
leadership and with our full support, which he can
count on, we shall continue the process of renewing
and revitalizing the Organization. We are also
convinced that, during his mandate, the Millennium
Goals will reach the point at which we can proudly
announce to the world that they have almost been
achieved.
We firmly believe that his mandate will be
designed with many new innovative initiatives that will
result in a stronger and better United Nations, based on
tolerance, diversity and multilateralism, and acceptable
to the entire membership. His proven commitment to
the preservation of peace and security, the promotion
of sustainable development, the protection of human
rights, a healthy environment and social justice,
especially in the fight against poverty, is the best
guarantee for success.
Also, I would like to take this opportunity on
behalf of the Eastern European Group to express our
deepest appreciation to our current Secretary-General,
Mr. Kofi Annan, for his tireless efforts and enormous
personal contribution to the success of the United
Nations under his decade-long leadership. His legacy
will no doubt continue to be a foundation of our
Organization’s work for decades to come.
Let me once again, on behalf of the Group of
Eastern European States, congratulate Mr. Ban on his
election and wish him every success. We look forward
to friendly dialogue and cooperation, and he can count
on our full support.
The President: I give the floor to the
representative of Ecuador, who will speak on behalf of
the Latin American and Caribbean States.
Mr. Cordovez (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): The
Latin American and Caribbean countries avail
themselves of this solemn opportunity, of such
importance to the Organization, to reaffirm their faith
and hope in the United Nations. We believe that the
principles and purposes of the Charter are as valid and
current today as they were upon their adoption 61 years
ago in San Francisco. For that reason, we solemnly
pledge to continue to support the United Nations
efforts, to adhere to its objectives, and thereby to

5

A/61/PV.31

broaden the possibilities of a better life for present and
future generations.
We would like to convey our sincerest thanks to
Secretary-General Kofi Annan for his 10 years of
diligent work on behalf of peace and development.
With admirable tenacity, the Secretary-General has
been able to transmit to the peoples of the world a
message of serenity in moments of anguish, of hope in
moments of despair, and of strength in moments of
turbulence and adversity. His efforts in favour of
collective security and his desire to eliminate the
tensions generated by threats to international peace and
security cannot be denied. We would like to extend our
appreciation to his wife, Nane, for whom it was not
easy to adjust to the rigours of her husband’s tasks, but
who has stood by him in his service to the Organization
with exceptional loyalty and spirit.
We would like to hail the Secretary-Generaldesignate, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and wish him the greatest
success in the fulfilment of his duties. As he assumes
his high position with the support and the confidence
of the States Members of the Organization, his success
will be ours. His diplomatic talent and his peaceable
but firm temperament will enable him to fully
accomplish the tasks and duties entrusted to him upon
his designation. He can always rely on the support of
the Latin American and Caribbean region, which has
traditionally maintained with the United Nations since
its foundation an intense working relationship with
regard to the long list of matters whose outcomes have
been of vital importance to our countries.
This change in the leadership of our Organization
is taking place at a moment of uncertainty and even
confusion about the role that the United Nations plays
in today’s world. International public opinion demands
that the Security Council and other bodies of the
Organization do a much better job. We live at a time of
almost infinite opportunities, as well as unprecedented
risks. The United Nations, it is said, should be the
forum, the instrument and the model allowing the
international community to take advantage of those
opportunities and to foresee and neutralize potential
risks. For those reasons, it is important to insist on the
need for in-depth reform of the Organization, and that
will undoubtedly be the main task and responsibility of
our new Secretary-General.
Nevertheless, while the new Secretary-General
must be ready and determined to introduce the

6

necessary changes, the Member Governments must
also demonstrate the political will to approve them. It
is inconceivable that, although we have been debating
reform of the Security Council for decades — I recall
that we began discussing that issue in the 1970s —
proposing untold numbers of formulas and issuing
report after report on the item, that organ remains
immutable and impassive to its critics for its lack of
representativity and its diffident conduct in confronting
the world’s crises, such as the most recent crisis in the
Middle East. An equal affirmation may be made
regarding other aspects of the Organization’s work.
Thus, the political resolve of States will emerge
only if all reform efforts are defined and implemented
on the basis of consensus. That has been the way in
which the Organization has traditionally achieved its
great successes of the past, which have enabled it to
enjoy its current prestige and reputation. Let us all
pledge to work to achieve consensus in order to build
the bases for understanding and agreement that will
enable us to advance down the road to reform. Our
Organization will thereby become the more effective
mechanism for collective security and international
solidarity that all of us, from the powerful to the poor,
so sorely need.
We reiterate to our Secretary-General-designate,
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, our most sincere congratulations
and best wishes in the performance of the transcendent
mission that we have entrusted to him.
The President: I give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein, who will speak on
behalf of the Western European and other States.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): I have the
honour and privilege today to address this Assembly on
behalf of the Group of Western European and Other
States on the occasion of the appointment of Mr. Ban
Ki-moon as the Secretary-General of the United
Nations, starting 1 January 2007.
The Group of Western European and other States
warmly congratulates Mr. Ban Ki-moon on his election
and welcomes him at the head of the Organization. As
the chief executive of this Organization, he has the
twofold task of working with Member States for the
realization of the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, as well as of efficiently
managing the Secretariat. That is a complex and
daunting challenge which requires active support from
us, the Member States. The record and past

06-56975

A/61/PV.31

achievements of Mr. Ban give us confidence that he
possesses the required skills to carry out both those
functions efficiently and to steer the Organization
through the tasks ahead.
We look forward to the leadership of the
Secretary-General-elect at a time when the challenges
to the multilateral system are manifold and complex
and when the need for a strong United Nations is more
urgent than ever. At the same time, we realize that it is
we, the Member States, that are called upon to make
the right decisions for the future of the Organization
and that close, constructive and productive cooperation
between
the
Secretary-General-elect
and
the
membership is indispensable in order to maintain and
strengthen the place of the United Nations in the
international system. We therefore owe such
cooperation to the peoples that we represent and to the
Organization.
We welcome the fact that the appointment of the
new Secretary-General is taking place well ahead of
the end of the tenure of Secretary-General Kofi Annan,
and trust that the appointment today will ensure a
smooth transition and the necessary continuity in the
work of the United Nations. We also wish to emphasize
that we continue to count, until the very end of his
term, on the leadership of Secretary-General Kofi
Annan, which has served us so well over the past 10
years. We will all have a separate opportunity to extend
our deep gratitude for his long years of excellent
service to the United Nations and look forward to that
occasion.
The President: I give the floor to the
representative of the United States, who will speak on
behalf of the host country.
Mr. Bolton (United States of America): On
behalf of the United States, the host country of the
United Nations, I would like to welcome the
appointment of Foreign Minister Ban Ki-moon as the
Secretary-General of the United Nations. The United
States has had the privilege to work with Foreign
Minister Ban throughout his distinguished career in
Seoul, in Washington, D.C., and here in New York.
We believe that he is the right person to lead the
United Nations at this decisive moment in its history,
particularly as the United Nations struggles to fulfil the
terms of the reform agenda that world leaders agreed to
last fall. It will be up to Foreign Minister Ban to lead
us as we build upon and complete the modest steps of

06-56975

reform that we have achieved to date. It will be up to
all Member States to work with him to reform the
United Nations.
We encourage all Member States to give Foreign
Minister Ban the support he needs to act decisively to
strengthen the United Nations, including during his
first months, by shaping the Secretariat to meet the
challenges ahead.
We are confident that Foreign Minister Ban will
both represent and instil the highest standards of
integrity within the United Nations system. We
congratulate him on his appointment.
On behalf of the United States, I would also like
to extend our appreciation to the other candidates for
this position — President Vike-Freiberga, Deputy
Prime Minister Surakiart, Under-Secretary-General
Tharoor, Ambassador Dhanapala, Prince Zeid and
Ambassador Ghani — and to the Member States that
recommended them for consideration. We respect their
deep commitment to bettering the United Nations and
their continued leadership on world issues.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
express, on behalf of the United States, our deep
appreciation to Secretary-General Annan for his
tireless efforts during his many years of service to the
United Nations, especially the past 10 as SecretaryGeneral. I would also like to express our appreciation
for the work of his top team of advisers, who will also
be moving on to new challenges.
The President: I give the floor to the
representative of South Africa, who will speak on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): On behalf of the
Group of 77 and China, I am honoured to extend our
congratulations to Mr. Ban Ki-moon on his election as
the Secretary-General of the United Nations, starting
1 January 2007. The Group of 77 and China wishes to
convey our assurance to him of our support throughout
his term in office.
The United Nations has weathered many storms
over the past decades. The Organization has survived
because of the stewardship of a long line of strong
Secretaries-General who have always acted in the
interests of the Organization and remained neutral and
committed to the ideals set out in the Charter of the
United Nations. We are encouraged by the assurances
that we have received from Mr. Ban Ki-moon that he

7

A/61/PV.31

intends to build on the foundation set by SecretaryGeneral Kofi Annan and his predecessors.
In 2000, the heads of State and Government
committed themselves in the Millennium Declaration
to making this Organization stronger so as to be able to
respond better to the many demands that we continue
to place on it. Since then, we have made considerable
progress in meeting the ambitions of the people of the
world, especially the poor and the marginalized.
However, a great deal remains to be done.
The challenge for the new Secretary-General will
be to consolidate the progress made so far by ensuring
that the Secretariat implements the decisions and
mandates of the Organization, thereby maintaining the
momentum we have built so far, and well into the
future.
The Group of 77 and China believes that the
development agenda is an important pillar of this
Organization and one on which considerable effort is
still needed. It was therefore encouraging to us that
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, prior to his election, committed
himself to advancing the internationally agreed
development goals, including the Millennium
Development Goals. I wish to assure him that the
Group of 77 and China will support his efforts as
Secretary-General in strengthening the global
partnership on development.
The United Nations matters to us because it is
located at the crossroads of the needs and desires of
humanity. Without the United Nations, many people
throughout the world would not have any hope for a
better life. It is therefore in our interest to ensure that
the Organization be effective, well-managed and
accountable to Member States.
For that reason, it is imperative that the
Secretary-General-elect act in the interests of the entire
membership and listen to the views of each and every
Member State. It is also imperative that Member
States, in turn, “respect the exclusively international
character of the responsibilities of the SecretaryGeneral and the staff and not … seek to influence them
in the discharge of their duties”, as stated in Article l00
of the Charter of the United Nations.
Unlike at previous occasions, the General
Assembly has elected the incoming Secretary-General
well before he is expected to assume his
responsibilities. We trust that the election of the

8

Secretary-General in advance of his assuming office
will allow for sufficient consultations with Member
States and staff in order to prepare for the task ahead
and ensure a smooth transition.
It is indeed a pleasant irony that the decision of
the General Assembly to elect early the President of the
Assembly and other office-bearers was one of the
reforms undertaken at the time the Republic of Korea
occupied the presidency of the General Assembly, in
which Mr. Ban Ki-moon served as Chef de Cabinet. I
make that note for myself in case I should grow more
ambitious than I am now.
In conclusion, allow me to take this opportunity
to convey our warm wishes and congratulations to
Secretary-General Kofi Annan for his sterling service
to the United Nations. The Organization and its
membership owe Kofi Annan a tremendous amount of
gratitude and we will continue to support his efforts
until his last day with this Organization. At the
appropriate time, we will recall the contributions of
Mr. Annan to the Organization and pay tribute to him
for having kept faith with the poor and the
marginalized of the world despite all the pressures he
faced. For now, we wish once again to welcome
Mr. Ban Ki-moon and wish him the best.
The President: I give the floor to the
representative of Finland, who will speak on behalf of
the European Union.
Ms. Lintonen (Finland): On behalf of the
European Union, I would like to express our warmest
congratulations to Mr. Ban Ki-moon on his
appointment as the next Secretary-General of the
United Nations. We are convinced that his personal
skills and vast experience will enable him to
successfully lead the world Organization.
The European Union is a strong supporter of
effective multilateralism and the United Nations at its
core. Mr. Ban Ki-moon can rely on our continued
support for the world Organization and for him
personally as the new Secretary-General. I am
confident that, under his able leadership, the Member
States can work successfully together in promoting
peace and security, development and human rights. He
has our full support in advancing the ongoing
comprehensive reform of the United Nations.
On behalf of the European Union, I want to wish
him every success in carrying out the important

06-56975

A/61/PV.31

responsibilities of his future tasks as the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations. We look forward to
working in close cooperation with him. He is very
welcome.
The President: I now invite Mr. Ban Ki-moon,
Secretary-General-designate, to make a statement.
Mr. Ban Ki-moon: I stand before the members of
the General Assembly, deeply touched and inspired by
their generous words of congratulation and
encouragement. With boundless gratitude for the
confidence placed in me by the Member States, and
with an unswerving resolve to honour that trust, I
humbly accept the appointment as the eighth SecretaryGeneral of this great Organization, our United Nations.
I wish to extend my deepest respect and appreciation to
all the leaders and peoples of the Member States for
their strong support.
Thank you, Madam, for graciously preparing and
guiding the meeting today. I greatly look forward to
supporting you and working with you as you wisely
steer the Assembly towards a very successful session.
I follow in a line of remarkable leaders. They,
too, faced this moment, each at a critical juncture in
the Organization's history. Like me today, they must
have pondered what the years ahead would hold at the
helm of this dynamic institution. Each made important
and lasting contributions to our common enterprise in
upholding humanity's deepest values and highest
aspirations.
In particular, Secretary-General Kofi Annan has
astutely guided our Organization into the twenty-first
century. He has defined an ambitious agenda that has
made the United Nations truly indispensable to peace,
prosperity and human dignity around the world. Our
debt to his courage and vision is immeasurable. I
resolve to build upon his legacy.
By completing the appointment of the next
Secretary-General with such alacrity, the Members
have opened an unprecedented opportunity. Never
before has an incoming Secretary-General been given
sufficient time to prepare; they have given me more
than two months. I will use these weeks to consult
widely on how best to proceed with our common
agenda of reform and revitalization. I will listen
attentively to Member’s concerns, expectations and
admonitions.

06-56975

I am deeply honoured to become the second
Asian to lead the Organization, following Mr. U Thant,
who ably served the world four decades ago. It is quite
fitting that Members have now turned to Asia again for
the next Secretary-General to guide the United Nations
system through its seventh decade. Asia is dynamic and
diverse, and Asia aspires to take on greater
responsibilities for the world. Having come so far and
rising still, the region is living and shaping the full
range of achievements and challenges of our current
times.
Asia is also a region where modesty is a virtue,
but the modesty is about demeanour, not about vision
and goals. It does not mean a lack of commitment or
leadership. Rather, it is a quiet determination in action
to get things done without so much fanfare. That may
be the key to Asia's success and to the United Nations
future. Indeed, our Organization is modest in its means,
but not in its values. We should be more modest in our
words, but not in our performance. The true measure of
success for the United Nations is not how much we
promise, but how much we deliver for those who need
us most. Given the enduring purposes and inspiring
principles of our Organization, we need not shout its
praises or preach its virtues. We simply need to live
them every day, step by step, programme by
programme, mandate by mandate.
The surge in demand for the United Nations
services attests not only to the United Nations abiding
relevance, but also to its central place in advancing
human dignity. The United Nations is needed now
more than ever before. The United Nations core
mission in the previous century was to keep countries
from fighting each other. In the new century, the
defining mandate is to strengthen the inter-State system
so that humanity may be better served amidst new
challenges. From the Balkans to Africa, from Asia to
the Middle East, we have witnessed the weakening or
absence of effective governance, leading to the
ravaging of human rights and the abandonment of
long-standing humanitarian principles. We need
competent and responsible States to meet the needs of
"we the peoples" for whom the United Nations was
created; and the world's peoples will not be fully
served unless peace, development and human rights —
the three pillars of the United Nations — are advanced
together with equal vigour.
The road that we must pave towards a world of
peace, prosperity and dignity for all has many pitfalls.

9

A/61/PV.31

As Secretary-General, I will make the most of the
authority invested in my Office by the Charter and the
mandate the Members give me. I will work diligently
to materialize our responsibility to protect the most
vulnerable members of humanity and for the peaceful
resolution of threats to international security and
regional stability.
In order to meet those growing mandates and
expectations, we have engaged in the most sweeping
reform in the history of the Organization. The very
scope of the reform has taxed the attention and
energies of both the delegations and the Secretariat, but
we must stay the course. We need to muster the human,
institutional and intellectual resources, and to organize
them properly. We should do our part in meeting the
Millennium Development Goals, the expanding peace
operations, the threats posed by terrorism, the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
HIV/AIDS and other pandemics, environmental
degradation, and the imperatives of human rights.
Let us remember that we reform not to please
others, but because we value what this Organization
stands for. We must reform because we believe in its
future. To revitalize our common endeavour is to renew
our faith not only in the United Nations programmes
and purposes, but also in each other. We should
demand more of ourselves, as well as of our
Organization. To cut through the fog of mistrust is
going to require more intensive dialogue. We cannot
change everything at once, but if we choose wisely and
work together transparently, flexibly and honestly,
progress in a few areas will lead to progress in many
more. Only the Member States can revitalize this
Organization, but I will always be there to assist and
facilitate as needed.
(spoke in French)
As Secretary-General, I am resolved to manage
my Office openly and responsibly. I will seek to build
consensus through a free exchange of ideas and
critiques. Only through the candid, open testing of
ideas and proposals can we identify better means of
serving the peoples of the world. I will work actively
in reaching out to all stakeholders. In particular, in
order to bring the United Nations closer to the people, I
will widely engage civil society in dialogue. I will seek
the support and input of humanitarian advocacy
groups, businesses and other constituents of the global
citizenry for the good of the Organization. My tenure

10

will be marked by ceaseless efforts to build bridges and
close divides. Leadership of harmony, not division, and
by example, not instruction, has served me well so far.
I intend to stay the course as Secretary-General.
I will be fully accountable for the management of
this institution. Member States set the mandates and
provide the resources. If the resources are not
sufficient for the task at hand, I will not be shy about
saying so, but once we in the Secretariat have taken on
a task, we must accept full responsibility for its
achievement.
(spoke in English)
I am eager to join the ranks of the world’s
premier Secretariat. I have deep respect and admiration
for the able, dedicated and courageous men and women
who serve this Organization day in and day out, often
in the face of danger and personal sacrifice. To them, I
pledge my utmost support, dedication and solidarity.
Maintaining their proud heritage, while
vigorously holding them to the highest standards of
professionalism and integrity, will be a prime goal of
my tenure. The aim of Secretariat reform is not to
penalize but to reward, so that their talent and skill,
experience and dedication may be fully mobilized and
properly utilized. It will reward hard work and
excellence to boost morale, making everyone
accountable for his or her own action or inaction, and
pushing for greater gender balance, in particular at
senior levels.
That will be my guide as I rally the Secretariat
staff for our very best performance in serving the
Organization. As Secretary-General, I am far from
perfect, and I will need the unsparing support,
cooperation and trust of all represented here, but I
pledge to serve them well, with all of my heart and to
the best of my abilities. I will seek excellence with
humility. I will lead by example. Promises should be
made for the keeping. That has been my motto in life. I
intend to stick to it as I work with all stakeholders for a
United Nations that delivers on its promises.
My heart is overflowing with gratitude towards
my country and people who have sent me here to serve.
It has been a long journey from my youth in war-torn
and destitute Korea to this rostrum and these awesome
responsibilities. I was able to make the journey because
the United Nations was with my people in our darkest
days. It gave us hope and sustenance, security and

06-56975

A/61/PV.31

dignity. It showed us a better way. So I feel at home
today, however many miles and years I have travelled.
For the Korean people, the United Nations flag
was and remains a beacon of better days to come.
There are countless stories of that faith. One belongs to
me. In 1956, when the cold war was raging around the
world, as a young boy of just 12 I was chosen to read
out a public message on behalf of my elementary
school, addressed to the Secretary-General of the
United Nations, Mr. Dag Hammarskjöld. We urged him
to help the people of a certain faraway European
country in their fight for freedom and democracy. I
hardly understood the deeper meaning of the message,
but I knew that the United Nations was there for help
in times of need.
Fifty years later, the world is a much more
complex place, and there are many more actors to turn
to. During these years, I have travelled many times

around the world. I have been elated by the successes
of the United Nations in making life better for
countless people. I have also been pained by scenes of
its failures. In too many places, I could feel the dismay
over inaction of the United Nations or action that was
too little or came too late. I am determined to dispel
the disillusionment.
I earnestly hope that young boys and girls of
today will grow up knowing that the United Nations is
working hard to build a better future for them. As
Secretary-General, I will embrace their hopes and hear
their appeals. I am an optimist, and I am full of hope
about the future of our global Organization. Let us
work together for a United Nations that can deliver
more and better.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 104.
The meeting rose at 4.25 p.m.

06-56975

11
