General Assemhly-Twenty-third Session

4

2405 (XXIll). Report of the Security Council

The General Assembly
Takes note of the report of the Security Council to
the General Assembly covering the period from 16 July
1967 to 15 July 1968. 1 º
1743rd plenary 1neeting,
16 Deceniber 1968.
2406 (XXIll). Fourth International Conference
on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 2309 (XXII) of 13 December 1967 concerning the holding of the Fourth International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic
Energy,
H aving considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral11 outlining his proposals concerning the theme,
date, venue, scope and programme of the Conference,
l. Endorses the proposals contained in the report
of the Secretary-General;
2. Requests the Secretary-General, with the assistance of the United Nations Scientific Advisory Committee, in clase co-operation with the International
Atomic Energy Agency and in consultation with appropriate specialized agencies :
(a) To undertake preparations for the Fourth International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic
Energy to be held at Geneva for eight or nine working
days on convenient dates in 1971;
( b) To provide for a conference which would fully
achieve the objectives stated in General Assembly
resolution 2309 (XXII) but would be more limited in
size and cost than the one held in 1964 and at minimum
expense to the United Nations;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report
to the General Assembly at its twenty-fourth session
on preparations undertaken for the Conference, together
with cost estimates, so that the necessary funds for
the Conference may be considered for inclusion. in
the United Nations budget.
1743rd plenary meeting,
16 December 1968.

Recognizing also that during the last decade the
Agency lías acquired experience andc-competence that
are contributing to the attainment of these objectives,
Desirous of enabling the Agency to function smoothly
and to be in a position to carry out the new responsibilities which it will assume with the eventual entry into
force of.the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons,
l. Takes note of the report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency to the General Assembly for
the year 1967-1968 ;13
2. Takes note also of two resolutions adopted by
the General Conference of the Agency at its twelfth
regular session :
(a) Resolution GC(XII)/RES/241 of 30 Septern.
ber 1968 by which the General Conference requested
the Board oí Governors to review article VI of the
Statute of the Agency and to submit to the General
Conference at its thirteenth regular session a report
containing a study of ways and means by which the
membership of the Board will adequately reflect :
( i) The progress and developments in the peaceful
uses of nuclear energy achieved by many States
members of the Agency, including the developing
countries;
( ii) An equitable geographical distribution;
(iii) The continuing need for the effectiveness of the
Board as the executive body of the Agency ;
(b) Resolution GC(XII)/RES/245 of 30 September 1968 by which the General Conference requested
the Director-General of the Agency to initiate studies
of the procedures that the Agency should employ in
performing its role in connexion with the peaceful uses
of nuclear explosions and requested the Board of Governors of the Agency to review the results of these
studies and to report thereon to the General Conference
at its thirteenth regular session ;
3. Requests the Director-General of the Agency
to keep the Secretary-General of the United Nations
informed of action taken in connexion with the above
matters.
1751st plenary meeting,
20 December 1968.

2457 (XXIIl). Report of the lnternational Atomic
Energy Agency

2465 (XXIII). lmplementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of lndependence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples

The General Assembly,
N oting that great progress in the application of
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes has taken place
in many countries in recent years,
Recalling that the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear W eapons12 provides that potential benefits
from any peaceful applications of nuclear explosions
will be made available under appropriate international
observation and through appropriate international procedures,
Recognizing that the International Atomic Energy·
Agency, whose membership already includes more than
ninety non-nuclear-weapon States, was established to
accelerate and enlarge the contribution of atomic energy
to peace, health and prosperity throughout the world,

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples contained in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960,
Recalling its resolutions 1654 (XVI) of 27 November 1961, 1810 (XVII) of 17 December 1962, 1956
(XVIII) of 11 December 1963, 1970 (XVIII) of 16
December 1963, 2105 (XX) of 20 December 1965,
2189 (XXI) of 13 December 1966 and 2326 (XXII)
of 16 December 1967,
Recalling also its resolutions 2288 (XXII) of 7 December 1967 and 2425 (XXIII) of 18 December 1968
concerning the item entitled "Activities of foreign eco-

1-0 !bid.,

Twenty-third Sessio11, S11pple111ent No. 2 (A/7202).
11 [bid., Twenty-third Sessio11, An11exes, agenda item 21,
document A/7186.
12 General Assembly resolution 2373 (XXII), annex.

13 International Atomic Energy Agency, Animal Report of
the Board of Governors to the General Conference, 1 111/y 196í30 l1tne 1968 (Vienna, July 1968) and supplementary report;
transmitted to the Members of the General Assembly by notes
of the Secretary-General (A/7175 and Add.l).

· Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

nomic and other interests which are impeding the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples in
Southern Rhodesia, Namibia and Territories under
Portuguese domination and in all other Territories under colonial domination and efforts to eliminate colonialism, apa:rtheid and racial discrimination in southern
Africa",
Recalling further its resolutions 2311 (XXII) of 14
December 1967 and 2426 (XXIII) of 18 December
1968 concerning the implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples by the specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations,
Taking into acco1mt the Final Act of the International Conference on Human Rights,1 4 held at Teheran
from 22 April to 13 May 1968,
N oting with grave concern that eight years after the
adoption of the Dedaration many Territories are still
under colonial domination,
Deploring the failure of those colonial Powers, especially Portugal and South Africa, which have not
complied with the Declaration and relevant resolutions
on the question of decolonization, particularly those
relating to the Territories under Portuguese domination, Southern Rhodesia and Namibia, and gravely
concerned about the attitude of those Member States
which have not fully co-operated in the implementation
of the above-mentioned resolutions,
B earing in miná that the continuation of colonialism
and its manifestations, including racism and apartheid,
and the attempts of sorne colonial Powers to suppress
national liberation movements by repressive activities
against colonial peoples are incompatible with the
Charter of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Deploring the attitude of certain States which, in
disregard of the pertinent resolutions of the Security
Council, the General Assembly and the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples, continue to cooperate with the Governments of Portugal and South
Africa and with the illegal racist minority régime in
Southern Rhodesia, which are continuing to repress
the African peoples,
Gravely concerned about the development in southern Africa of the entente between the Governments
of Portugal and South Africa and the illegal racist
minority régime in Southern Rhodesia, the activities
of which endanger international peace and security,
Convinced that further delay in the speedy and effective implementation of the Declaration remains a
source of international conflicts and differences, which
are seriously impeding international co-operation and
endangering world peace and security,
Stressing once again the need to give widespread and
continuous publicity to the work of the United Nations
in the field of decolonization, to the situation in the
colonial Territories and to the continuing struggle for
liberation being waged by the colonial peoples,
Recalling that the year 1970 will be the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration,
l. Reaffirnis its resolution 1514 (XV) and all its
other resolutions on the question of decolonization;
1 4 United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.68.XIV.2.

5

2. Notes with satisfaction the work accomplished by
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
and expresses its appreciation to the Special Committee for its efforts to secure the complete and effective
implementation of the Declaration;
3. Approves the report of the Special Committee
covering its work during 1968,15 including the programme of work envisaged by the Committee during
1969, and urges the administering Powers to give effect
to the recommendations contained in that report for
the speedy implementation of the Declaration and the
relevant United Nations resolutions;
4. Reiterates its declaration that the continuation
of colonial rule threatens international peace and
security and that the practice of apartheid and all forms
of racial discrimination constitute a crime against
humanity;
5. Reaffirms its recognition of the legitimacy of the
struggle of the colonial peoples to exercise their right
to . self-~etermination and independence, notes with
sat1sfact10n the progress made in the colonial Territories by . the national liberation movements, both
through the1r struggle and through reconstruction programmes, and urges all ' States to provide moral and
material assistance to them;
6. Urg~s all States to comply strictly with the prbvisions of the various resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council concerning the colonial
Territories, and in particular to give the necessary
moral, political and material support to the peoples of
those Territories in their legitimate struggle to achieve
freedom and independence;
7. Requests all States, as well as the specialized
agencies and international institutions, to withhold assistance of any kind from the Governments of Portugal and South Africa and from the illegal racist minority
régime in Southern Rhodesia until they renounce their
policy of colonial domination and racial discrimination;
8. Decla,res that the practice of using mercenaries
against movements for national liberation and independence is punishable as a criminal act and that the mercenaries themselves are outlaws, and calls upan the
Governments of all countries to enact legislation declaring the recruitment, financing and training of mercenaries in their territory to be a punishable offence and
prohibiting their nationals from serving as mercenaries ;
9. Requests the colonial Powers to dismantle their
military bases and installations in colonial Territories
and to refrain from establishing new ones and from
using those that still exist to interfere with the liberation of the peoples in colonial Territories in the exercise
of their legitimate rights to freedom and independence;
10. Once again conde-mns the policies, pursued by
certain colonial Powers in the Territories under their
domination, of imposing non-representative régimes and
constitutions, strengthening the position of foreign economic and other interests, misleading world public
opinion and encouraging the systematic influx of foreign
immigrants while displacing, deporting and transferring
the indigenous inhabitants to other areas, and calls upon
those Powers to desist from such manreuvres ;
11. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
perform its task and to seek suitable means for the
immediate and full implementation of the Declaration
15 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-third
Session, Anne%es, addendum to agenda item 23 (A/7200/Rev.1).

6

G,meral. ,Assembly--,--Twenty-third Session

widespread and continuous publicity to the work of the
U nited N ations in the field of decolonization, to the
situation in the colonial Territories and to the continuing struggle for liberation being waged by the colonial
peoples;
18. Requests the administering Powers to co-operate
with the Secretary-General in promoting the large-scale
dissemination of information on the work of the United
N ations in the implementation of the Declaration;
19. Requests the Secretary-General to provide all the
facilities necessary for the implementation of the
present resolution.
1751st plenary meeting,
20 Decenz,ber 1968.

in all Territories which have not yet attained independence;
12. Requests the Special Committee to make concrete suggestions which could assist the Security
Council in considering appropriate measures under the
Charter of the United Nations with regard to developments in colonial Territories which are likely to
threaten international peace and security, and recommends the Council to take such suggestions fully into
consideration;
13. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
examine the compliance of Member States with the
Declaration and with other relevant resolutions on the
question of decolonization, particularly those relating
to the Territories under Portuguese domination, Southern Rhodesia and Namibia, and to report thereon to
the General Assembly at its twenty-fourth session;
14. Invites the Special Committee to pay particular
attention to the small Territories and to recommend to
the General Assembly the most appropriate methods
and also the steps to be taken to enable the populations
of those Territories to exercise fully their right to selfdetermination and independence;
15. Urges the administering Powers to co-operate
with the Special Committee by permitting the access
of visiting missions to the colonial Territories in accordance with decisions previously taken by the General Assembly and by the Special Committee;
16. Decides to establish a Preparatory Committee
for the Tenth Anniversary of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, consisting of the members of the Special Committee and six other members to be nominated by the
President of the General Assembly in consultation with
the Chairman of the Special Committee, and requests
the Preparatory Committee to prepare a special programme of activities in conne...v::ion with the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration with a
view to finding further ways and means of expediting
the achievernent of the objectives set forth in the Declaration, and to report to the General Assembly at its
twenty-fourth session;
17. Requests the Secretary-General, having regard
to the suggestions of the Special Cornmittee, to take
concrete measures through all the media at his disposal,
including publications, radio and television, to give

*
Other

*

*

*

Tlze Preside11t of the General Assembly informed the
S ecretary-Genera/ 1 6 that ALGERIA, CAN ADA, GHANA, INDOXESIA, 1foXGOLIA and TRIXIDAD A:-ID ToBAGo liad accePted the
invitatioa to ser,;e on the Preparators Committee for the
Tenth Amri·uersary of the Declara/ion on the Granting of
I11deprndence to Colonial C ountries anJ Peo ples established
mrder paragráph 16 of the ab(Tl}e reso/11tion.
As a resu/t, the Preparatory Committee wil/ be composed
of the fo/lowing 111 embcr Sta tes: AFGHANISTAN, ALGERIA,
AUSTRALIA, BULGARIA, CANADA, ECUADOR, ETHIOPIA, GHANA,
HONDURAS, IXDIA, INDONESIA, IRAN, IRAQ, hALY, IvoRY CoAsT,
MADAGASCAR, MALI, MoNGOLlA, NoRWAY, PoLAND, SIERRA
LEONE, SYRIA, TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO, TUNISIA, UNION OF
SOVIET SocIALIST filPUBLICS, UNITED KrNGDOM OF GREAT
BRITAIN AND NORTHERN lRELAND, UNITED filPUBLIC OF TANZANIA, UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, VENEZUELA and YUGOSLAVIA.
(

,)
2492 (XXIII). Credentials of representatives to
the twenty-third session of the General
Assemhly

Tite General Assembly
Approves the report of the Credentials Committee. 17
1752nd plenary meeting,
21 December 1968.
16 See A/7486.
1 7 Official Recards

of the General Assembly, Twenty-third
Sessio1,, Amre:.es, agenda ítem 3, document A/7228.

*

*

decisions

Notification by the Secretary-General under Article 12, paragraph 2, of the
Charter of the United Nations
(Item 7)

At its 1676th plenary meeting, on 27 September 1968, the General Assembly
took note of the communication dated 24 September 1%8 from the SecretaryGeneral to the President of the General Assembly. 18
Adoption oí the agenda

(ltem 8)
At its 1676th plenary meeting, on 27 September 1968, the General Assembly,
on the recommendation of the General Committee,19 decided to postpone to the
18 Ibid., agenda item 7, document A/7241.
10 Ibid., agenda ítem 8, document A/7250, para. 9.
