General Assembly-11drty-second Session

152

important part of comprehensive plans for economic
and social development,
Stressing the importance of the role that the United
Nations system should play in providing assistance to
countries in carrying out their economic and social
development plans, including those concerning the
elderly and the aged,
Taking note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General on the question of the elderly and
the aged, 77
1. Recommends to the Governments concerned, in
formulating their national policies and programmes, to
take into account the recommendations contained in
General Assembly resolution 3137 (XXVIII) and to
consider developing, as required and in accordance with
their national priorities, policies and programmes for
the welfare, including housing and social services, health,
humanitarian well-being and economic security, of older
people as well as measures aimed at maximizing their
economic independence and their social integration into
society, especially older people living in slums and uncontrolled settlements;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to continue and
to expand, within the limits of existing resources, activities in this field, in co-operation with the agencies
concerned, particularly:
(a) To consider measures for strengthening the activities of the regional commissions designed to assist
the planning, establishment and improvement of social
and health services for the aging;
( b) To assist Governments, at their request and in
accordance with their national priorities, in the planning,
establishment and expansion of programmes for the
older sector of the population in the context of their
over-all development programmes;
( c) To conduct seminars and workshops and to
undertake studies on special issues in this field, in particular those faced by the developing countries concerned with the problem;
( d) To conduct research into the possibility of
preserving and promoting the strengthening of the family unit with a view to facilitating, where appropriate,
the care of the elderly and the aged by their own
families;
(e) To collect, collate and disseminate the information on aging through the Information Exchange System;
3. Requests the competent and concerned specialized agencies to give continued attention to regional
and international meetings on the major problems of
concern to the aging and suggests that these organizations should engage in regular exchanges of information
about their plans and activities in this field, particularly
at the regional level;
4. Requests the concerned United Nations bodies,
organs and programmes, as well as the specialized agencies and interested non-governmental organizations in
consultative status with the Economic and Social Council, to join with the United Nations in well-co-ordinated
activities to assist all Governments concerned, especially
those of the developing countries, in formulating and
implementing policies and programmes for the welfare,
11 A/32/130

and Cor,r.1.

i?cluding housing and social services, health and protection, of older people, aimed at maximizing their eco?omic _ independence and maintaining a suitable role
m society;
5. Invites the United Nations Fund for Population
Activities, in accordance with its mandate and the recommendations of the World Population Plan of Action
and t~e guid_ance of its Governing Council, to provide
financ1~l assistance to developing countries, upon request, m improving the conditions of the aging;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
Economic and Social Council in 1979, through the
Commissio? for Social Development, a progress report
on the action taken on the present resolution and to
rep~rt to the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth
session;
. 7. . Decides to in~lude in the provisional agenda of
its thtrty-fourth sess10n an item entitled "The elderly
and the aged".
105th plenary meeting
16 December 1977
32/132.

International year and world assembly
on aging

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration on Social Progress and
Development78 and the emphasis therein on the dignity
and worth of the human being and the rights of the
aged,
Reaffirming its resolution 313 7 ( XXVIII) of 14
December 1973, entitled "Question of the elderly and
the aged", and the recommendation therein to Governments on the !1eed for well-designed policies and programmes relating to older people,
Noting Economic and Social Council resolution 2077
(LXII) of 13 May 1977, by which the Council approved the progress report of the Secretary-General on
the question of the elderly and the aged, 79
~ecognizing ~hat the concerns of aged persons in
nat10nal populat10ns must be addressed when considering economic and social development,
. Convin~ed of th~ need for interchange and international review of policy alternatives affecting the elderly,
l. Invites all States to make known their views to
the Secretary-General by 1 July 1978 concerning the
uselfulness of proclaiming an international year on aging
for the purpose of calling world-wide attention to the
serious problems besetting a growing portion of the
populations of the world;
2. Further invites all States to communicate their
:'iews to th~ Se~~etary-General by 1 July 1978 regardm~ th~ des1rabihty of c_onvening a world assembly on
agmg m order to permit national leaders and governT?ent specialis~s to exchange experiences, explore solut10ns and devise programmes for amelioration of the
problems unique to the elderly;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a
repo~ on the re~ctions _of Member States to the proclamation of an mternatlonal year on aging as well as
78 Resolution 2542
7 9 E/CN.5/531.

(XXIV).

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

------------------

to the convening of a world assembly on aging, including
appropriate proposals on ways in which either or both
of these undertakings might be carried out;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-third session an item entitled "Problems of the
elderly and the aged" under which the Secretary-General's report and pertinent observations by Member
States would be considered.
105th plenary meeting
16 December 1977

32/133.

International Year for Disabled Persons

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 31 / 123 of 16 December
1976, by which it proclaimed the year 1981 International Year for Disabled Persons and decided to devote
that year to the realization of a set of objectives, including:
(a) Helping disabled persons in their physical and
psychological adjustment to society,
( b) Promoting all national and international efforts
to provide disabled persons with proper assistance,
training, care and guidance, to make available to them
opportunities for suitable work and to ensure their full
integration into society,
( c) Encouraging study and research projects designed to facilitate the practical participation of disabled
persons in daily life, for example by improving their
access to public buildings and transportation systems,
(d) Educating and informing the public of the
rights of disabled persons to participate in and contribute to various aspects of economic, social and political life,
( e) Promoting effective measures for the prevention
of disability and for the rehabilitation of disabled persons,
Recalling, in particular, paragraph 4 of its resolution
31/123 in which it requested the Secretary-General to
elaborate, in consultation with Member States, the
specialized agencies and the organizations concerned,
a draft programme for the International Year for Disabled Persons,
Recalling its resolution 31/93 of 14 December 1976
on the medium-term plan, in paragraph 6 of which it
urged organs to refrain from undertaking new activities
not programmed in the medium-term plan and the subsequent programme budget unless a pressing need of
an unforeseeable nature arises as determined by the
General Assembly,
Having considered with satisfaction the report of the
Secretary-General on the International Year for Disa bled Persons 80 and the draft programme for the Year
annexed thereto,
1. Approves the proposals of the Secretary-General,
contained in his report, for preparatory work for the
period 1978-1979;
2. Authorizes the Secretary-General to undertake
the measures required to implement these proposals,
including the necessary information activities prior to
and during the International Year for Disabled Persons;
8-0 A/32/288.

153

3. Decides that the International Year for Disabled
Persons represents such a pressing need of an unforeseeable nature;
4. Decides to establish an Advisory Committee for
the International Year for Disabled Persons, composed
of the representatives of fifteen Member States to be
appointed, on the basis of equitable geographical distribution, by the Chairman of the Third Committee, in
concurrence with the regional groups; 81
5. Decides that the task of the Advisory Committee
shall be to consider, and to consult with Member States
and specialized agencies on, the draft programme for
the International Year for Disabled Persons prepared
by the Secretary-General;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to convene the
Advisory Committee no later than March 1979 at the
Headquarters of the United Nations and to submit the
report on that meeting to the General Assembly for
consideration at its thirty-fourth session;
7. Appeals to Member States to make in due time
generous voluntary contributions for the International
Year for Disabled Persons;
8. Encourages Member States and the organizations concerned to take specific action in the preparation of the observance of the International Year for
Disabled Persons;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fourth session the item entitled "International
Year for Disabled Persons".
105th plenary meeting
16 December 1977
32/134.

Youth in the contemporary world

The General Assembly,
Recalling that since 1965 numerous resolutions on
the situation, needs and aspirations of youth have been
adopted by both the General Assembly 82 and the Economic and Social Council, 83
Recognizing the profound importance of the direct
participation of youth in shaping the future of humanity,
Convinced of the imperative need to harness the
energies, enthusiasms and creative abilities of youth to
the tasks of nation building, the economic, social and
cultural advancement of peoples, the implementation
of the new international economic order, the preservation of world peace and the promotion of international
co-operation and understanding,
Considering it necessary to disseminate among youth
the ideals of peace, respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms, human solidarity and dedication
to the objectives of progress and development,
Convinced of the necessity of meeting the legitimate
needs and aspirations of youth and ensuring their active
participation in all fields of national life,
BI The composition of the Advisory Committee will be announced subsequently.
8 2 Resolutions 2037 (XX), 2447 (XXIII), 2497 (XXIV),
2633 (XXV), 2770 (XXVI), 3022 (XXVII), 3023 (XXVII),
3024 (XXVII), 3140 (XXVIII), 3141 (XXVIII), 31/129,
31/130, 31/131 and 31/132.
83 Resolutions 1086 J (XXXIX), 1353 (XLV), 1354 (XLV),
1407 (XLVI), 1752 (LIV),1922 (LVIII), 1923 (LVIII), 1966
(LIX) and 2078 (LXII).
