S/PV.9156

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9156th meeting

Wednesday, 19 October 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Biang. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Gabon)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Spasse
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Korbieh
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Moran
Mr. Olanda
Mr. Cisneros Chávez
Ms. Juul
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Ms. Jacobs
Mr. Wood

Agenda
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General on the Central African Republic (S/2022/762)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-63933 (E)
*2263933*

S/PV.9156

The situation in the Central African Republic

personnel and populations in need of humanitarian
assistance. And I should highlight that the ban on night
flights also deprives all of our pilots deployed in the
Central African Republic of the minimum flying time
they need to maintain their certificates, which they
have all lost as a result of de facto disqualification.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General on the Central
African Republic (S/2022/762)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of the Central
African Republic and Rwanda to participate in
this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Her Excellency
Ms. Sylvie Valérie Baipo Temon, Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Francophonie and Central Africans Abroad of
the Central African Republic.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Valentine
Rugwabiza, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for the Central African Republic and Head
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic,
to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2022/762, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the Central African Republic.
I now give the floor to Ms. Rugwabiza.
Ms. Rugwabiza (spoke in French): At the outset, I
would like to join the Council and the Secretary-General
in reiterating my deepest condolences to the families of
the Blue Helmets who have fallen victim to explosive
devices, as well as to the Government and the people of
Bangladesh. At the same time, I salute the memory of
all peacekeepers who have sacrificed their lives in the
implementation of the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) to restore
the country to peace and security.
I urge the Central African Government to lift the ban
on night flights. Night flights are essential to the safety
and security of peacekeepers, humanitarian actors and
all other partners on the ground, as well as civilian
2/22

19/10/2022

I appreciate the privilege of sharing with the
Council my observations on major developments that
deserve members’ attention, four months after our
previous review of the situation in the Central African
Republic (see S/PV.9074). We need a critical analysis of
the progress made in the implementation of the strategic
priorities of MINUSCA’s multidimensional mandate
in four areas — first, political and security dynamics;
secondly, safeguarding the achievements that have
been made in the implementation of MINUSCA’s
mandate; thirdly, the prospects for decentralizing the
political and peace process; and fourthly, the extension
of State authority for lasting political solutions to the
root causes of the political and security-related conflict
in the Central African Republic.
In terms of security, MINUSCA’s support has
been decisive. While taking the exact measure of the
threats and risks, and always backed by our concept
of operations without prejudice to the Government’s
primary responsibility, MINUSCA has indeed played
a key role in protecting civilian populations and
facilitating the delivery of humanitarian aid through a
robust, preventive and proactive posture, in response
to alerts received from communities. This posture is
illustrated by our operations that have enabled us to
pre-emptively deploy MINUSCA forces to the northeast of the Central African Republic to restore an
environment conducive to the protection of civilians,
humanitarian assistance, the advancement of the
national disarmament, demobilization, reintegration
and repatriation (DDRR) programme and the
functioning of the territorial administration, and to
cut off the armed groups’ supply routes, accordingly.
We will continue to support the redeployment of the
internal defence and security forces in accordance with
the policy of due diligence on human rights.
We note with concern, however, that the protection
of the civilian population from abuse and physical
violence continues to be challenged by persistent threats
caused by the renewed activities of armed groups in the
border localities of the western sector of the country,
which are the most affected by landmines and explosive
devices, from which our own force suffered casualties
22-63933

19/10/2022

The situation in the Central African Republic

S/PV.9156

earlier this month. Currently, our force is engaged in a
joint operation with the national defence and security
forces to address threats from armed groups, protect
populations, facilitate humanitarian assistance and
support the DDRR programme in the centre of the
country. The resurgence of armed-group activity and
the use of explosive devices in the north-western border
areas of the country make it difficult or impossible
to reach populations in critical and urgent need of
humanitarian assistance.

groups with a view to their disbanding pursuant to the
political commitments of the Political Agreement; the
adjustment of capacities to respond to the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration needs expressed by
certain armed groups; the structural reforms relating to
the establishment by decree dated 28 September 2022
of the committee for integrating former combatants; the
resumption of inspections as part of efforts to strengthen
monitoring of the defence and security forces; and the
adoption of a code for marking arms and ammunition.

This confirms that the absence of deliberate mass
attacks against civilians during the reporting period
does not preclude the return of such attacks until all
parties to the conflict have renounced violence. Central
African populations, particularly the most vulnerable,
continue to pay the highest price for the conflict.

This is the time to recall the consensus established
through the coordination meetings chaired by the Prime
Minister on the primacy of the political component of
the timetable for a lasting solution to the political and
security crisis in the Central African Republic, whose
costs and consequences for the civilian population
are devastating. For this reason, we continue to
encourage the Government to implement its strategy
of re-engaging the armed groups bound by the Luanda
road map to ensure the effectiveness of the ceasefire
and the renunciation of violence and the completion
of the talks already under way, with the support of the
ICGLR representatives, Angola and Rwanda, in perfect
harmony with the African Union and the Economic
Community of Central African States, and of course
with the continued support of MINUSCA working in
coordination with international partners.

It will take more than MINUSCA’s robust posture
and the Government’s security capacity to restore lasting
security throughout the Central African Republic.
It will also be necessary to create the conditions for
a political resolution of the Central African crisis
and for armed groups to renounce armed-offensive
action and violence to assert their claims. It is in this
regard that MINUSCA welcomes the development and
launch of implementation of the shared timetable of
the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation
in the Central African Republic and the joint road
map for peace in the Central African Republic of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
(ICGLR), under the effective coordination of the Prime
Minister and Head of Government and the leadership
and personal commitment of the Head of State, as well
as the commitment of the guarantors and facilitators of
the Political Agreement and that of Angola and Rwanda
on behalf of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region.
We now have no alternative but to seize the
emerging opportunity to transcend the formality that
has at times characterized the peace process in order
to make it a perceptible reality that leads to tangible
results. This is the ambition of the Government and the
hope of the international partners that are committed
to supporting the implementation of the Government’s
timetable. In this respect, I would like to point out the
multiplier effect that the Government’s implementation
of this timetable is already generating: for example,
to name just a few of the many developments, the
President of the Republic’s opening on 14 September
2022 of the dialogue with the leaders of 11 armed

Since I took office in April 2022, I have met several
times with the Central African population — from every
generation and affiliation, from different religious and
traditional backgrounds, with opinion leaders and
representatives of different associations in the hinterland
beyond Bangui — and the discussions I have had with
these populations have struck me with the unanimity of
the peoples’ expectations and hopes: the return of peace
and security for all citizens throughout the Central
African Republic and the tangible decentralization
of services and opportunities to be enjoyed by all
populations, regardless of their location or community
of origin. In other words, security and inclusion are
at the heart of the population’s expectations. These
demands from and expectations of the Central African
populations must be the mantra of all parties to the
conflict and the mission to be fulfilled by all partners
in the Central African Republic peace process.
The unanimous support of the Security Council
is more necessary than ever to leave the parties no
alternative but to fulfil their obligations under the joint
road map and the Political Agreement. This is in the

22-639333/22

S/PV.9156

The situation in the Central African Republic

interest of peace and stability, given the fragility of
the security situation, which might still be subjected
to a sudden change in direction. Consequently, any
delay in the implementation of the political component
of the joint road map is likely to compromise the
gains made and expose the population to new risks
of massive violence depending on how the balance of
power shifts throughout the vast territory of the Central
African Republic. This Governmental timetable for the
implementation of the joint road map and the Political
Agreement, if effectively and fully executed by the
Central African Government, offers the political means
to prevent the resurgence of violence. This is the time
to call on all the regional and international partners of
the Central African Republic and the guarantors and
facilitators of the Peace Agreement to provide their
support and contributions to the implementation of the
timetable in a coordinated manner and in accordance
with all their comparative advantages, under the
effective coordination of the Prime Minister and the
strategic direction of the President of the Republic.
The progress made in restoring the authority
of the State, including the redeployment of the
defence and security forces and civil servants, the
strengthening of the judicial system and the promotion
of transitional-justice mechanisms, such as the Special
Criminal Court, is noteworthy and should be reinforced.
In this regard, I would like to welcome the start of the
first trial before the Special Criminal Court. I invite
the Government to renew the Court’s mandate and
call on Council members and other States Members of
the United Nations to increase their financial support
and lend their expertise in the judicial investigations
so as to favour the effective functioning of this Court,
thereby helping to break the cycle of impunity, which is
an absolutely essential step for the social reintegration
of victims and national reconciliation.
With regard to human rights violations, in
addition to the publication of periodic reports and
the annual report mandated by the Council, we have
established a framework for constructive dialogue
and accountability, both with regard to the follow-up
of documented violations and to the implementation
of the recommendations made in the public reports of
MINUSCA and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights. I also welcome the
commitment of the Government of the Central African
Republic, during the forty-ninth session of the Human
Rights Council, to invest more in the follow-up and
4/22

19/10/2022

implementation of the recommendations of public
reports and treaty organs. I reiterate our appeal to
the Council and to the Member States to mobilize the
necessary support to strengthen national mechanisms
for the promotion and protection of human rights. In
the same vein, I would like to note with satisfaction
the high-level dialogue initiated by Ms. Ilze Brands
Kehris, Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights,
during her visit to the Central African Republic in
early October.
With regard to security sector reform, I welcome
the efforts of the Government of the Central African
Republic to move forward in its process of strengthening
the institutional capacity of the security sector, which
is essential to protect its population. MINUSCA
will continue to support that national process, which
requires the coordinated and transparent support of all
partners in the Central African Republic. I would like
to emphasize that those reform efforts are also in line
with the priorities of the Luanda road map, contributing
to the restoration of State authority and securing
the borders.
The respect by the institutions, people, Government
and opposition of the Constitutional Court’s decision
of 23 September annulling the decrees on the creation,
functioning, composition and appointment of the
members of the drafting committee for the constitution
on the grounds that they were unconstitutional, as well
as the withdrawal of said decrees by the Government, are
to be commended. I salute the maturity of the political
actors who continue to uphold the supremacy of the law,
and I encourage both the Government and the people of
the Central African Republic to fiercely preserve that
institutional heritage, which is a guarantee of political
stability and a symbol of democratic anchoring. On the
other hand, I must call the Government’s attention to
the imperative need to put an end to the manipulation
of information, the stigmatization of institutions and
people, including public incitements to violence. The
perpetrators and instigators must be held accountable
for such actions, which threaten the fragile balance of
a society in search of cohesion and are susceptible to
manipulation due to their various flaws.
The calm observed in some parts of the country
thanks to the redeployment of national defence and
security forces and the proactive and preventive
posture of MINUSCA enables freedom of movement
and an increase in the return of displaced persons and
refugees to areas recently freed from the grip of armed
22-63933

19/10/2022

The situation in the Central African Republic

groups. However, the humanitarian needs of the people
living in those areas remain alarming and call for the
continued mobilization of humanitarian partners.
It is also important to consolidate the security
and political gains observed in some of those areas
through the increased engagement of development
partners. In particular, I call for the remobilization
of partners to support sustainable efforts in the
socioeconomic reintegration of ex-combatants and
the extension of State authority. Durable solutions for
the reintegration of displaced persons and refugees
into local communities, combined with those for the
socioeconomic reintegration of ex-combatants, will
strengthen the new decentralization policy currently
being developed and increase the contribution of local
elections to the process of democratization through
inclusion and national reconciliation. Elections have
not been held since 1988, and they are a crucial step
towards decentralized governance, the full restoration
of State authority and greater legitimacy for local
authorities among the people who have elected them.
In the light of the foregoing, hope for peace in
the Central African Republic persists and is real. It
requires ongoing political efforts aimed at renouncing
violence as a means of resolving the political conflict
in the Central African Republic, the continuation of the
optimization of MINUSCA’s mandate, the resumption
of the inclusive dialogue with the democratic opposition
and the support of the guarantors and facilitators of
the peace process in the Central African Republic,
as well as the continued backing of regional and
international partners.
There is therefore room for hope. It calls for our
collective efforts to mediate among the conflicting
parties for the primacy of a political solution to the
crisis. In parallel and as a complement to political
action, the Mission’s ability to dissuade all actors who
want to find a solution through violent action in the
Central African conflict will depend on the Council’s
effective and ongoing support by maintaining a robust
and flexible mandate, as well as access to the necessary
resources and capacities for its implementation.
To conclude my introductory remarks, I would
like to commend the foresight of the Security Council,
which has given MINUSCA a mandate commensurate
with the challenges and concerns arising from the
situation in the Central African Republic. The latest
report of the Secretary-General (S/2022/762) bears

S/PV.9156

witness to the immeasurable contribution and the evercritical contribution of MINUSCA’s multidimensional
mandate, on which the people, the host Government
and the subregion depend in our collective quest for
lasting political solutions to the crisis in the Central
African Republic.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Rugwabiza for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative for her briefing. I welcome
the presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Francophonie and Central Africans Abroad. The Special
Representative can count on France’s full support.
I would like to begin by paying tribute to the
personnel of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) and, specifically, the three
peacekeepers killed on 3 October. France extends its
condolences to Bangladesh and to the United Nations.
MINUSCA’s commitment is remarkable. The
resolute approach that the Special Representative has
taken, has strengthened MINUSCA’s territorial base.
Wherever it is deployed, MINUSCA supports the
forces of the Central African Republic in the fight
against armed groups. France welcomes the improved
coordination between MINUSCA and the country’s
armed forces, as well as the decrease in violations
of the status-of-forces agreement. However, we are
concerned about the maintenance of certain restrictions,
particularly those imposed on night flights, which can
have dramatic consequences, as we saw on 3 October.
France welcomes the increasing ownership of the
peace process by the authorities of the Central African
Republic. The establishment of a committee to monitor
the implementation of the joint road map is evidence
of that. It is essential that women participate in the
process. The holding of the first trial of the Special
Criminal Court is also an important step in that regard.
This progress is essential. Peace is in the hands
of the people of the Central African Republic. We
encourage the countries of the region, with the
support of the African Union, the European Union, the
Economic Community of Central African States and the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region, to
continue their support for this encouraging momentum.

22-639335/22

S/PV.9156

The situation in the Central African Republic

However, the peace process cannot move forward
without respect for human rights and democracy. The
information in the Secretary-General’s report on the
growing number of violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law by the Central African
forces is disturbing. It shows, as if it were necessary,
that the installation of the Wagner Group’s mercenaries
has contributed to a widespread practice of violence.
We cannot tolerate the crimes committed by the Wagner
Group’s mercenaries, which are widely documented,
some of which could constitute war crimes and crimes
against humanity.
Respect for international humanitarian and human
rights law is an essential condition for MINUSCA’s
continued operational support to the Central African
forces. The Security Council will pay close attention
to that.
France invites the Central African decision-makers
to firmly commit themselves to democracy, respect
for constitutional order, the independence of the
judiciary and freedom of the press. We are concerned
about the growing polarization in the country caused
by the draft revision of the Constitution, the drafting
of which continues despite the recent decision of the
Constitutional Court and the increasing incitement to
violence and hate speech.
France will soon submit a draft resolution that
would renew MINUSCA’s mandate and maintain the
reinforced troop ceiling.
The situation in the Central African Republic
remains fragile. MINUSCA needs the unanimous
support of the Security Council to continue its action
against the armed groups together with Central African
forces and in support of the peace process. We hope to
be able to count on the support of all Council members.
Mr. Spasse (Albania): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Rugwabiza
for her insights and welcome the presence of Her
Excellency Ms. Baipo Temon, Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Francophonie and Central Africans Abroad of
the Central African Republic, as well as the presence of
the representative of Rwanda.
In our effort to revitalize the peace process and
address the volatile security situation in Central Africa,
I would like to share the following five points.
First, Albania is encouraged by the Government’s
efforts to accelerate the implementation of the Political
6/22

19/10/2022

Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic through the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region joint road map and with
defined time frames. We welcome the follow-up
meetings for measuring progress, as agreed during
the strategic review meeting held on 4 June in Bangui,
as well as the meetings with representatives of armed
groups to chart a course for their dissolution. However,
we believe the peace process should be more inclusive
and open to other social groups, mainly women, whose
current participation is very limited.
Secondly, we are very concerned about the security
situation, which shows an increase in breaches of the
Political Agreement, with the consequent deterioration
of the human rights situation in the country. Albania
strongly condemns the continued human rights
violations and abuses, including conflicting-related
sexual violence perpetrated by armed groups, national
forces and Wagner Group mercenaries during their
operations, as well the recruitment and use as proxies
of demobilized fighters, which have led to reprisals
against the population and the targeting of communities.
Those practices must stop. They run the risk of
reversing the progress made in the framework of the
national disarmament, demobilization, reintegration
and repatriation programme.
Thirdly, Albania also echoes the call of the
Secretary-General for the ongoing support of
development and financial partners in order to sustain
reintegration initiatives. That provides the fundamental
basis for long-term reconciliation and peace efforts,
along with the continued efforts to advance justice for
victims of serious crimes through the Truth, Justice,
Reparation and Reconciliation Commission.
Fourthly, the use of explosives by armed groups
is equally deplorable, posing life-threatening risks to
civilians, humanitarian partners and peacekeepers, who
provide life-saving assistance. Albania expresses its
deepest condolences to the families of the three fallen
peacekeepers who paid the ultimate price on 3 October,
as well as to Bangladesh. We expect the Government
to honour its commitment by thoroughly investigating
the tragic event and subsequently prosecuting those
involved in it.
That unacceptable attack comes at a moment
when progress is being made in tackling the targeted
disinformation campaigns against the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
22-63933

19/10/2022

The situation in the Central African Republic

S/PV.9156

the Central African Republic and in reducing violations
of the status-of-forces agreement. That agreement
should be fully respected, and the unrestrained
movement of the Mission’s supply chain and personnel
must be guaranteed.

is vital. Regional partners such as Angola, Rwanda, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region,
the African Union and the Economic Community of
Central African States have been and will continue to
be invaluable in supporting the peace process.

Lastly, Albania applauds the completion of the
electoral mapping exercise. We expect the swift
adoption of the legislation critical for local elections.
Nevertheless, we stress our discontent about the
limitations of democratic space and freedom of
expression within the constitutional reform debate.
We reiterate the need for every effort to be focused on
finding solutions to the real problems affecting people’s
daily lives, including the rise of commodity prices and
the persistent fuel shortages.

Progress on disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration is encouraging. It is important that this
process take place in accordance with the national
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation programme. The recruitment by national
defence forces and other security personnel of
demobilized former members of armed groups as
proxies is extremely worrisome and must cease. The use
of proxies inflames intercommunity tensions and risks
reversing hard-won gains. The actions of mercenaries,
including the Wagner Group, in the Central African
Republic is of deep concern.

Ms. Moran (Ireland): I want to welcome the
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Francophonie and Central
Africans Abroad of the Central African Republic and
the representative of Rwanda to this meeting. We look
forward to hearing from them.
I thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for his briefing, which was very helpful. I want
to acknowledge the progress that has taken place under
her leadership. She has our full support. Ireland fully
supports the role of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) and its work.
I would also like to extend Ireland’s sincere
condolences to the families of the peacekeepers who
lost their lives on 3 October after a MINUSCA patrol hit
an ordnance device. Explosive ordnance is a worrying
threat in the Central African Republic, affecting
civilian lives frequently. The work of MINUSCA and
the national defence and security forces in countering
that threat is vital.
We welcome progress in the political situation,
including the timeline to accelerate the implementation
of the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation
in the Central African Republic. The engagement of the
Government with representatives of armed groups is vital.
We encourage all parties to continue to communicate.
We appeal to all signatories to the Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic to commit fully to the agreement.
The renewed impetus towards the peace process
shown by the Government is encouraging. Ireland knows
from experience that this work can be challenging, but it

We welcome the Government’s commitment to
hold elections in 2023, separate from any potential
constitutional referendum. Those elections must be
free and fair, with women engaged at every stage — as
voters, as candidates and as elected officials.
The humanitarian situation is of deep concern and
has been exacerbated by violence and the challenging
economic situation. The levels of protection and
humanitarian needs are staggering. Humanitarian
personnel are saving the lives of Central African
civilians, often in difficult and dangerous circumstances,
and they must never be the targets of violence.
We are deeply concerned regarding the
deteriorating human rights situation in the country.
We note that armed groups have responsibility for
44 per cent of documented abuses. However, State
agents were responsible for 45 per cent of documented
violations and abuses during the reporting period.
Any and all violations of human rights by State agents
is unacceptable. Civilians must be able to trust the
State forces.
We welcome the investigations and the
commencement of war crimes and crimes against
humanity trials by the Special Criminal Court in the
Central African Republic. The recent commencement
of the trial of Mahamat Said Abdel Kani, a former
Séléka commander, at the International Criminal Court
should also serve as a reminder to all parties that severe
crimes must not go unpunished.

22-639337/22

S/PV.9156

The situation in the Central African Republic

We are concerned about further allegations of
sexual exploitation and abuse involving peacekeepers
in the Central African Republic. We welcome the
recent visit of the Special Coordinator on Improving
the United Nations Response to Sexual Exploitation
and Abuse and encourage continued efforts to improve
prevention and to hold perpetrators accountable.
We welcome the decrease in violations of the statusof-forces agreement. However, they remain a concern.
Challenges to the freedom of movement of the Mission,
including continued restrictions on night flights, make
it difficult for MINUSCA to fulfil its mandate. I echo
the Secretary-General in urging the Government to
uphold its commitment to taking appropriate measures
to prevent status-of-forces violations.
I would once again like to commend the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the Mission
for their excellent work in the Central African Republic.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I thank Special Representative Rugwabiza for her
briefing. I welcome the presence of the Foreign Minister
of the Central African Republic and the representative
of Rwanda at this meeting.
Currently, the political and security situation in
Central Africa is generally improving, and the peace
process is moving ahead. At the same time, there
still remain many difficulties and challenges. The
international community should increase its support in
the following areas.
First, we should accelerate the implementation of
the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation
in the Central African Republic. The Government
of the Central African Republic has been actively
implementing the outcomes of the republican dialogue,
demonstrating a positive attitude in the dialogue with
armed groups, promoting comprehensive disarmament
and striving to revitalize the peace process. China
welcomes that.
We appreciate the positive role played by Rwanda,
Angola and other countries of the region, and we support
the efforts of the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region to strengthen communication and
coordination with the Government of the Central African
Republic and jointly implement the peace agreement
road map in the light of the priorities and needs of the
country. In providing assistance to the Central African
Republic peace process, the international community
8/22

19/10/2022

should respect the sovereignty and ownership of the
Central African Republic and support its people in
independently choosing a development path that suits
their national conditions.
Secondly, we should strengthen security capacitybuilding. In recent years, with the active deployment
of security forces by the Central African Government,
the security situation throughout the country has
continued to improve and the scope of the activities
of armed groups has continued to shrink. Facts have
shown that only by establishing a professional, efficient
and strong security sector can we effectively deal with
the security threats. President Touadera recently issued
a national security policy and security sector reform
strategy. International partners and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) should
provide constructive support for the implementation of
that policy and strategy, help the country to strengthen
its capacity to independently maintain stability and
respect its right to engage in security cooperation.
Security Council sanctions still have an impact on the
security capabilities of the Central African Republic
and should therefore be completely lifted.
Thirdly, we should enhance efforts to build
peace. The Central African Republic faces financial
constraints, energy and food shortages and a grave
economic and livelihood situation. Sixty per cent of the
country’s population needs humanitarian assistance.
Local elections and the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process also require considerable
financial resources. The current peace in the country
is hard-won, and the support of the international
community cannot diminish. The relevant countries
and international organizations should resume aid as
soon as possible to help the Central African Republic
address its economic and humanitarian difficulties. The
international community should increase investment in
the development of the Central African Republic, help
enhance its endogenous development momentum, turn
resource advantages into development benefits and
break the vicious cycle of poverty-induced chaos and
chaos-induced relapse into poverty.
Under the leadership of Special Representative
Rugwabiza,
MINUSCA
has
strengthened
communication and coordination with the Government
of the Central African Republic and proactively
responded to security threats. The implementation of the
status-of-forces agreement has continued to improve,
22-63933

19/10/2022

The situation in the Central African Republic

and the Mission has made progress in discharging its
duties. The relevant practices are worth replicating
elsewhere. China will continue to support the work
of the Mission and the Special Representative, and we
hope that they will play a greater role in promoting the
peace process in the Central African Republic.
Mr. Cisneros Chávez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I too thank Special Representative Valentine
Rugwabiza for her briefing. I welcome the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Central African Republic and the
representative of Rwanda.
Mexico welcomes the progress made in recent
months towards the revitalization of the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic. At the same time, we express our
support for the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) and its important work. We
deeply regret the recent deaths of three Bangladeshi
peacekeepers. I will focus my statement on three issues.
First, with regard to the peace process, we
acknowledge the work of the Central African authorities
to establish the priorities, the timetable and the followup mechanism for the implementation of the Luanda
joint road map. We urge them to open up more space
for women’s participation in those efforts.
We reiterate that justice is essential to national
reconciliation. The work of the Special Criminal Court
and the International Criminal Court in that area is
encouraging. Mexico echoes the call for the mandate
of the Special Criminal Court to be renewed. At the
same time, we call on the authorities to expedite the full
operationalization of the Truth, Justice, Reparation and
Reconciliation Commission.

S/PV.9156

the right conditions for their peaceful and sustainable
reintegration in order to prevent them from taking up
arms again.
Armed groups are the primary reason for the
continuing deterioration of the humanitarian situation. It
is simply unacceptable that, in a country with the wealth
of natural resources that the Central African Republic
has, more than 60 per cent of the country’s population
is in need of humanitarian assistance. International
solidarity is crucial to addressing that grave situation,
but only peace will provide a comprehensive solution
to that problem.
Furthermore, we reiterate our call to neighbouring
countries and regional organizations to step up the fight
against illicit flows of arms, which fuel the conflict and
are used in attacks against civilians, peacekeepers and
national security forces. In that regard, we welcome
the marking and weapons collection campaign of the
National Commission to Combat the Proliferation of
Small Arms and Light Weapons. The support of United
Nations agencies is important for that campaign to
achieve its objectives.
Thirdly, Mexico calls on the national authorities
to demonstrate their leadership in order to address the
many pending challenges and advance towards a lasting
peace. We urge them to conduct themselves responsibly
in the current delicate situation so that Government
action can build consensus and hope among the
population. Initiatives that foster political polarization
should be avoided at all costs because that will only
exacerbate instability.

Secondly, the activities of armed groups remains the
main threat to the stability of the country and is a risk
for the whole region. We therefore strongly condemn
the attacks against civilians, who are the main victims
of those groups.

We recognize that the national authorities bear the
primary responsibility for the protection of the civilian
population. We therefore urge them to respect and
guarantee the human rights of Central Africans and
to investigate and prosecute all cases of human rights
abuses and violations. MINUSCA can support the
authorities in that task.

We recognize the importance of the agreement
reached for the disbandment of 11 armed groups
signatories to the Political Agreement. We urge regional
actors, which were instrumental in bringing about that
new dynamic, to exert their influence over the remaining
armed groups in order to achieve their permanent
demobilization. As the Special Representative pointed
out, members of those groups need to be provided with

In conclusion, I would like to underline that the
2023 local elections will be a unique opportunity to
strengthen governance and move towards the political
inclusion of all components of Central African society.
We are confident that the political actors will cooperate
to make the elections an exemplary exercise that will
pave the way for a prosperous and peaceful future after
almost 10 years of armed conflict.

22-639339/22

S/PV.9156

The situation in the Central African Republic

Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): We thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Rugwabiza for her efforts at the head of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA),
which have created more favourable conditions in the
Mission’s dialogue with the Government. They have
also resulted in an improved, more proactive approach
to tackling issues on the ground, especially in the
area of security. We believe that renewed emphasis
on strategic communications could contribute further
to that improving trend. My delegation welcomes Her
Excellency Ms. Baipo Temon, Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Francophonie and Central Africans abroad
of the Central African Republic, to today’s meeting.
We also welcome the participation of the delegation
of Rwanda.
The developments we have seen are particularly
welcome at a time when challenging circumstances
persist. The human cost of restoring security and
ensuring State control over the territory of the Central
African Republic continues to increase and spares
neither the local population nor United Nations
peacekeepers. Brazil would like to once again take this
opportunity to pay tribute to all victims of the attacks
that occurred near Koui on 3 October. Despite the
difficulties in the security and the humanitarian fields
caused by the current shortage of fuel, we must keep up
with the work to bring the fighting to an end. The first and
most effective measure in that direction is to expedite
the follow-up process to the republican dialogue. We
commend the authorities of the Central African Republic
for setting up a committee to implement the dialogue’s
recommendations and encourage the swift completion
of its work. In addition, Brazil echoes the reiterated
calls of the Central African Republic configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission for ensuring that the
peace process is inclusive. If we are to find a durable
solution it will be essential to bring all stakeholders to
the table, including opposition parties and women.
Another point we want to underscore is the key
role played by the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) programmes in the implementation
of the 2019 Political Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic.
We encourage the Central African authorities to
persevere in their work in that area. We hope that the
collaboration between the Government and MINUSCA
to put in place violence reduction programmes in local
10/22

19/10/2022

communities will continue to have a positive impact on
the DDR efforts generally. My delegation believes that
it is equally important to strengthen the rule of law,
especially in the light of the various reports on human
rights and international humanitarian law violations
that are committed in the context of ongoing clashes
between the Forces armées centrafricaines and armed
groups, including the recruitment of child soldiers.
In that regard, we would like to show support for the
efforts of the local authorities since April to deliver
justice, in particular through the work of the Special
Criminal Court, and for the action by MINUSCA to
assist in the operationalization of the Truth, Justice,
Reparations and Reconciliation Commission.
My last point concerns the contribution of regional
organizations to the peace process in the Central
African Republic. We reiterate our full support for the
renewed engagement of the International Conference of
the Great Lakes Region in favour of the implementation
of the September 2021 road map. We hope that the
monitoring mechanisms led by Angola and Rwanda
will be successful in enabling further international
support to the implementation of the peace agreement.
Brazil remains committed to collaborating with
other Council members to support the fulfilment of
MINUSCA’s mandate.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): First let me
welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Central
African Republic and the representative of Rwanda.
I thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Rugwabiza for her briefing, which was quite
comprehensive. Her report highlights the essential
role the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) plays in protecting civilians and providing
stability in the Central African Republic.
I would also like to convey the deep appreciation
of the United States to the Mission’s leadership, its
peacekeepers and the troop- and police-contributing
countries for the sacrifices they make each and every
day in pursuit of peace in the Central African Republic.
Tragically, three Bangladeshi peacekeepers made the
ultimate sacrifice earlier this month. They were killed
by an explosive device while on patrol. While we do
not yet know who is responsible for laying the device
that took their lives and gravely wounded another,
their deaths were even more tragic because evacuation
options were limited by the Central African authorities’
restrictions on the Mission’s evacuation procedures.
22-63933

19/10/2022

The situation in the Central African Republic

If MINUSCA had been able to swiftly evacuate the
peacekeepers by air, rather than by a nine-hour journey
overland, they might still be with us today. In that regard,
the United States joins calls for a rigorous investigation
that identifies and brings to justice those responsible.
We also call on the Government of the Central African
Republic to adhere to the status of forces agreement
and lift its restrictions on MINUSCA’s movement. As
we approach MINUSCA’s mandate renewal, we must
ensure that it has all the tools necessary to protect the
safety and security of United Nations personnel.
The flow of illicit arms negatively affects regional
security as well as the safety and security of civilians
and peacekeepers. As this tragic incident demonstrates,
the current sanctions measures will remain critical
until the Central African Republic and the States of
the region can address cross-border smuggling and
diversions to armed groups. We are also concerned
about reports from the Panel of Experts on the Central
African Republic that anti-personnel landmines
continue to be found in the country. We urge all actors
to immediately halt the use of landmines, especially as
part of strategies to control illicit mining.
Despite those challenges, MINUSCA’s robust and
proactive posture protects civilians, helps push armed
groups to disarm and return to the peace process, and
safeguards communities, allowing displaced civilians
to return home. We commend the enhanced cooperation
between the Mission and the Central African
armed forces. Joint operations are a way to further
professionalize the Central African security forces and
support a durable restoration of State authority.
With that said, the military alone cannot bring
peace to the Central African Republic. A stable,
prosperous State can emerge only through an inclusive
political dialogue, the full implementation of the 2019
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in
the Central African Republic, the expansion of State
authority and justice for victims. Similarly, we stress
the importance of women’s full, equal and meaningful
participation and leadership in those processes.
Integrating women, youth and minority voices into all
levels of decision-making ensures that peace processes
are effective and sustainable.
We are encouraged by the Central African
Republic’s initiative to advance the peace process,
specifically through the leadership of Prime Minister
Moloua, but the Central African Republic cannot do

S/PV.9156

it alone. Constructive engagement by partners lends
further support to the peace process and overall
regional stability. Unfortunately, some entities continue
to destabilize and exploit the Central African Republic.
The Kremlin-backed Wagner Group, whose forces
are referred to as “other security personnel” in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2022/762), perpetrated
numerous incidents of human rights abuses during
the reporting period, often in the presence of national
defence forces. Independent investigations continue
to corroborate those reports and note that Wagner
Group forces are rearming ex-combatants, creating
proxy militias outside the Government’s authority and
stealing the country’s mineral wealth. Those egregious
activities exacerbate violence, restrict the development
of the Central African Republic and undermine regional
stability. The Central African people deserve better.
The United States remains a steadfast partner of
MINUSCA and looks forward to working with Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Rugwabiza,
the Central African people and Government and the
members of the Council in order to bring peace to the
Central African Republic.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I thank Ms. Rugwabiza for
her valuable and detailed briefing and welcome the
participation of Her Excellency Sylvie Valérie Baipo
Temon, Minister for Foreign Affairs, Francophonie
and Central Africans Abroad of the Central African
Republic, and of the Permanent Representative of the
Republic of Rwanda in today’s meeting.
The Central African Republic is facing many issues
that require the sustained attention of the Security
Council. At a time when the country is preparing to
hold local elections, it is facing constant armed attacks
and experiencing damage caused by floods and the
exacerbation of difficult humanitarian and economic
situations. In the context of the upcoming discussions
on the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), which
remains critical to the country’s security, we believe
it is important to take all those issues into account.
We hope the Council will send a clear message to the
people of the Central African Republic: that we will
stay by their side and support them in their plight and in
their quest for achieving security and stability.

22-6393311/22

S/PV.9156

The situation in the Central African Republic

We all agree that the primary goal is to protect
innocent civilians. Accordingly, we regret the continued
activities of armed groups that target civilians and
affect women and children in particular. Armed groups
also seek to spread hate speech among communities,
which in turn fuels intercommunal violence, especially
in rural and remote areas. As such, it is important
to work towards de-escalation and address those
challenges in a sustainable manner, through ceasefire
and continued dialogue between the Government and
armed groups. We are aware that it is not an easy
endeavour, but it remains essential. Moreover, building
on the gains made thus far in the areas of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration also remains key to
preventing the re-recruitment of ex-combatants. We
appreciate the good offices of MINUSCA in supporting
the efforts made in that regard.
We hope that the presidential endorsement of the
new national security policy and the draft national
security sector reform strategy will contribute to
strengthening the country’s security capabilities. We
emphasize the importance of strengthening regional and
international support for the Central African Republic,
especially in building its institutions and extending its
authority throughout the country.
On the political front, and as the relevant
stakeholders in the Central African Republic seek to
reach consensus on the necessary political and security
arrangements, it is important for that endeavour to
remain nationally led and owned, especially as the
country prepares for local elections. We reaffirm that
the commitment to revitalizing the Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic through the Luanda road map remains
essential for the advancement of the political process.
That also requires continued regional and international
support to the country in its quest to ensure security
and stability for its people. We must also emphasize
here the need to ensure the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women in the relevant discussions.
That also requires providing protection for women in
order to enable them to play their role in various areas.
In conclusion, we appreciate the efforts of the
peacekeeping forces and their courage in the face
of the risks to which they are subjected. The United
Arab Emirates regrets the continued targeting of
peacekeepers and humanitarian actors, which we
continue to condemn in Council meetings. Addressing
those attacks requires taking measures to protect them
12/22

19/10/2022

so that they can carry out their vital role, especially
in terms of the delivery of humanitarian assistance to
those in need. We reaffirm our support for the tireless
efforts of the Special Representative and the work
she is doing with her team in support of the Central
African Republic.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I would like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
her very valuable insights and welcome the Foreign
Minister of the Central African Republic and the
Permanent Representative of the Republic of Rwanda
to today’s meeting.
Let me turn directly to the tragic loss of three brave
peacekeepers of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) earlier this month. Their names
were Jasim, Sharif and Jahangir, and they were 31, 26
and 26 years old, respectively. They left dependants
and family behind. We pay our deepest respects to the
fallen and convey our heartfelt condolences to their
loved ones.
In concert with the relevant and major troopcontributing country, Bangladesh, we want to share
two recommendations.
First, there must be accountability. The Central
African Republic authorities and MINUSCA must
coordinate their investigations as closely as possible, so
that the perpetrators can be apprehended without delay
and charges can be pressed against them. In the interest
of the credibility, efficiency and effectiveness of the
investigation, MINUSCA must remain closely involved
during the entire process.
Secondly, the existing operating procedure for
evacuation should be re-evaluated and made more
effective and prompt. The missions must be provided
with adequate resources and capabilities to be able to
always ensure swift evacuation in case of attacks and
injuries to peacekeepers.
Turning now to the political situation, we recognize
some positive progress. The strategic review meeting of
the political process, held on 4 June, was an encouraging
step. And as the Central African Republic continues to
build on that and prepare for its first local elections in
34 years, inclusivity should be high on the agenda. We
know that including women, civil society, and other
groups in decision-making is a master key to lasting,
peaceful solutions — and successful elections. Both in
22-63933

19/10/2022

The situation in the Central African Republic

daily life and during the elections, it will be important
for the Government and MINUSCA to ensure that all
groups are heard and that no one feels threatened.
We are worried about the proliferation of hate
speech and incitement to violence, as well as the use
of manipulation, misinformation and disinformation in
traditional media and on social networks. It is especially
concerning that armed groups are threatening women
to intimidate and dissuade them from exercising their
right to participate in the electoral process. That could
further erode trust and hinder the reconciliation process.
We remain concerned about the security situation
in the Central African Republic. Over the past years,
we have seen the addition of elements of the Wagner
Group to the security space. It is clear that the use of
unreliable mercenaries cannot bring lasting peace and
security. The only realistic solution is a negotiated peace
through inclusive dialogue, with all affected parties.
We have also seen a worsening human rights situation,
including conflict-related sexual violence. The number
of reported violations of international humanitarian
law has also increased — and that must stop. We are
also worried about the continuing grave violations and
abuses of international law against children. We urge
all the parties to the conflict to release all children from
within their ranks.
On the positive side, we note the new national
action plan to combat trafficking in children, which
must be swiftly implemented with the support of the
United Nations.
In conclusion, we commend the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for her
leadership and her efforts to build a trust-based
relationship between MINUSCA and the host
Government. We hope it can help achieve progress
in all the areas mentioned, which will also be central
to MINUSCA’s upcoming mandate renewal. She can
count on our support.
Ms. Jacobs (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Representative Rugwabiza for her briefing, and I
also welcome the participation of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Central African Republic and
the representative of Rwanda in this meeting. I would
like to make three points in response to what we have
heard today.
First, the United Kingdom welcomes the progress
made on the political track, including steps to implement

S/PV.9156

the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in
the Central African Republic and preparations to hold
local elections in January 2023. We strongly encourage
the Central African Republic authorities, with the
support of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA), to build on political progress
and ensure meaningful engagement with civil society,
including women.
Secondly, freedom of movement is fundamental to
MINUSCA’s work. We welcome the recent reduction
in the number of violations of the status of forces
agreement, and, more widely, the positive relationship
that the Special Representative has established with the
Central African Republic authorities. We very much
hope that trend will continue. We also encourage the
Government of the Central African Republic to work
in partnership with the United Nations Mine Action
Service to tackle landmines and improvised explosive
devices with more urgency. Explosive devices are a
grave threat to civilian populations and their access to
humanitarian assistance, as well as to the safety and
security of peacekeepers. I join others in expressing
deep concern about the attack on 3 October in which
three Bangladeshi peacekeepers were killed and one
injured, and offer sincere condolences to their families
and to Bangladesh.
Thirdly, the United Kingdom is alarmed by the
dramatic increase in the number of human rights
violations and abuses reflected in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2022/762). The violence in the
Central African Republic, including conflict-related
sexual violence, continues to take a distressing toll
on the population. It compounds an already acute
humanitarian situation and risks undermining progress
on reconciliation. The targeting of civilians, not only
by armed groups but also by national forces and the
Russian mercenary Wagner Group, continue to play a
destabilizing role in the country and will not help longterm peace, as others today have also emphasized. We
call on the Government of the Central African Republic
to conduct full and timely investigations into allegations
of human rights violations and abuses to ensure that all
perpetrators are held accountable.
Finally, we welcome the Secretary-General’s
recommendation to extend MINUSCA’s mandate. It
is vital that the Security Council support MINUSCA’s
crucial efforts to help the Government of the Central
African Republic to build lasting peace. The Special

22-6393313/22

S/PV.9156

The situation in the Central African Republic

Representative of the Secretary-General and her team
have our full support.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): I thank Special
Representative Rugwabiza for her update on the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA)
and the recent developments in the country. I welcome
the presence of the Foreign Minister of the Central
African Republic at today’s meeting, as well as that of
the Permanent Representative of Rwanda.
I would like to begin by expressing condolences to
the families of the three peacekeepers from Bangladesh
who lost their lives earlier this month. We strongly
condemn the attack. We also hope for the swift recovery
of the injured peacekeeper and other injured civilians.
We are deeply concerned about the use of explosive
ordnance targeting peacekeepers and we look forward
to an update following investigations into the incident.
The overall political developments in the Central
African Republic are indicative of a move towards
stability. The national authorities have adopted a timeline
of priority activities to accelerate the implementation of
the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation
in the Central African Republic through the joint road
map of the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region. The Government has demonstrated political
will by continuing to engage with the representatives
of armed groups. The larger region, through regular
monitoring of the joint road map, continues to play
an important role by providing the necessary support,
which must continue.

19/10/2022

local elections in 2023, it will be important to ensure
that the necessary legislation is passed in a timely way
to enable other formalities to follow. We underline the
importance of the international community’s support
for those efforts and the need to provide the necessary
support for the elections to be held as planned.
Despite the progress being made, the security
situation remains volatile. Armed groups maintain
their relentless attacks on civilians, national forces and
MINUSCA peacekeepers. They continue to dominate
mining sites and to tax the civilian population illegally.
Security violations of the peace agreement by armed
groups have again increased in the past four months,
and we unequivocally condemn those violations and
attacks. It is important to be vigilant and ensure support
for the Government so that the political gains made are
not undermined by armed groups’ unlawful activities.
The disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation programme must see further success, for
which sustained financial and developmental support
by partners will be necessary.
We are concerned about the deterioration of
the humanitarian situation in the Central African
Republic, which has been aggravated by violence,
rising commodity prices, fuel shortages and recent
severe flooding. The displaced communities, including
those taking refuge in neighbouring countries, continue
to suffer. We urge for the scaling up of humanitarian
response efforts to expeditiously meet the needs of
those who are displaced and vulnerable.

We welcome the establishment of a committee to
follow up on the recommendations of the republican
dialogue and offer strategic guidance to the presidency.
We reiterate the significance of that process and underline
the importance of making it as inclusive as possible.
We also commend the increase in the deployment of
public officials throughout the prefectures and efforts
to gradually extend State authority. We welcome
President Touadera’s endorsement of a new national
security policy and a national strategy for securitysector reform emphasizing governance, accountability
and the coordination of actors in the security sector.

The implementation of the status of forces
agreement needs continued attention, particularly
in relation to the movement of peacekeepers. Both
the Mission leadership and the Government should
take further steps to ensure the safety and security of
peacekeepers. We also call for swift action on the part
of all stakeholders for the expeditious implementation
of the provisions of resolution 2589 (2021) in order to
bring the culprits to justice and establish accountability
for crimes against United Nations peacekeepers. In
that regard, we have taken note of the 28 ongoing
investigations by the national judicial authorities into
attacks on peacekeepers.

We commend the steady progress made towards
the holding of local elections with the conclusion of the
electoral mapping by the National Electoral Authority
of the Central African Republic. In line with the
commitment expressed by the Government to holding

In conclusion, the Central African Republic needs
our collective attention as it navigates a tenuous journey
in its pursuit of peace. The worsening economic and
fiscal situation, compounded by the global rise in
prices and shortages of essential goods, is bound to

14/22

22-63933

19/10/2022

The situation in the Central African Republic

make that task more challenging in the days to come.
For its part, India will continue to support the Central
African Republic and its people in their quest for peace,
stability and economic development.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to start by thanking the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Valentine
Rugwabiza, for her briefing. We also welcome the
participation in today’s meeting of Ms. Sylvie Valérie
Baipo Temon, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Central
African Republic, and the Permanent Representative
of Rwanda.
The situation in the Central African Republic,
according to our assessments, is relatively stable and
is generally under the Government’s control. The
country is working to consolidate the State presence,
strengthen
administrative
structures,
continue
security-sector reform, implement the demobilization,
disarmament and reintegration programme for former
combatants, develop the judicial system and prepare for
local elections.
Meanwhile, in some parts of the country,
Government forces are still being confronted by a
number of illegal armed groups. We are convinced that
the unnecessary bloodshed must stop and the militant
leaders must reject violent methods of struggle and
begin a full-fledged dialogue with Bangui, because
there is no alternative to a political and diplomatic
settlement in the Central African Republic.
We continue to view the full implementation of
the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation
in the Central African Republic — the Khartoum
agreement — and the Luanda road map as the basis
for achieving stability. We must stress that, despite
everything, the Central African authorities are ready for
an inclusive dialogue to overcome the security issues,
and the September meeting in the capital of the Central
African Republic was an important confirmation
of that.
We also note that the coordination mechanism,
launched on the initiative of the Central African
Republic, continues its work together with the United
Nations. That platform enables the monitoring of
progress on the political track and the coordination of
the efforts of Bangui and the international community.
We welcome the active involvement of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region

S/PV.9156

and the Economic Community of Central African States
in promoting a political settlement and the important
role played by the African Union.
We welcome the work of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA). MINUSCA
is an important factor in ensuring security in the
country and a key element in countering armed groups
and protecting civilians.
We are convinced that full implementation of the
mandate of the peacekeeping Mission is possible only if
there is a trusting dialogue on and mutual understanding
of the deployment with the authorities of the country.
We thank the military personnel of the troopcontributing countries, who risk their lives on a daily
basis in discharging their duties. We also extend our
condolences to the families and loved ones of the
Bangladeshi peacekeepers who lost their lives on
3 October and to the Government of that country.
Long-term stabilization and the advancement of
the political process are impossible without providing
support to the Central African Republic to enhance
the fighting capacity of the armed forces and law
enforcement. They bear the primary responsibility for
defending and protecting their country and its civilians.
We support and assist Bangui in that area.
We note that there is a need for further modifications
of the sanctions regime applicable to the Central African
Republic. We believe that the arms embargo should be
fully lifted. African representatives — both the three
African members of the Security Council and the
African Union, as well as the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region — are in favour of that. The
Central Africans themselves have repeatedly spoken
about that.
In conclusion, we would like to comment once
again on the statements made today by some colleagues
regarding the cooperation between Russia and
Central Africa.
Our position on that issue is well known to all.
We have voiced it on many occasions during Security
Council meetings. Military instructors were sent to
work in that country at the request of the Government
of the Central African Republic, in accordance with
international law and with the knowledge of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
2127 (2013) concerning the Central African Republic.

22-6393315/22

S/PV.9156

The situation in the Central African Republic

That cooperation is providing significant results in
training the country’s armed forces and stabilizing the
situation in the country.
As for States’ choice of partners in a given area,
that is the sovereign prerogative of national authorities,
as is the investigation of violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law.
As a diplomat, I understand the national interests
of France in Africa and the emotions that push its
representatives to make statements similar to what we
heard today. But I do not understand what France is
expecting to obtain by constantly repeating the same
disinformation, which sounds especially cynical
given France’s historic involvement in the region and
the accusations of crimes levied against the French
military, in particular in the Central African Republic.
Africans know and remember that very well.
I can say only one thing with certainty. While such
statements are endorsed by well-known supporters in
the Security Council, they do not help stabilize the
situation in the Central African Republic in any way.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Gabon.
I welcome at this meeting today the Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Francophonie and Central Africans
Abroad of the Central African Republic, Her Excellency
Ms. Sylvie Valérie Baipo Temon. I also welcome to
this meeting the Permanent Representative of Rwanda.
We thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for the Central African Republic, Ms. Valentine
Rugwabiza, for her enlightening briefing.
I must recall that I am making this statement on
behalf of the three African members of the Security
Council (A3), namely, Kenya, Ghana and my own
country, Gabon.
We would first like to express our sincere
condolences to the Government of Bangladesh and to
the families of the three peacekeepers of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA)
following their deaths on 3 October. We also wish a
speedy recovery to the wounded.
We condemn all attacks against MINUSCA
personnel, denounce the increasing use of explosive
devices in the Central African Republic by armed
16/22

19/10/2022

groups and recall that attacks on United Nations
peacekeepers may constitute war crimes. We call on
the Government of the Central African Republic and
MINUSCA to conduct investigations and ensure that
the perpetrators of those crimes are brought to justice.
The Central African Republic has made enormous
progress and is resolutely continuing its march towards
the lasting stabilization of the country. The support of
the international community remains crucial, given the
political, security and humanitarian challenges that
stand in its way.
At the political level, we welcome the strategic review
meeting held last June, which made it possible to define
the modalities and timeline for the implementation of
the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in
the Central African Republic through the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region’s joint road map.
The participation of national and international partners
gave greater legitimacy to its work.
The A3 also welcomes the meetings of the
coordination body for the follow-up of the process
for mutualizing the Luanda joint road map and the
Political Agreement, which were held in September
and October in Bangui. That regular monitoring of the
implementation of the peace agreement demonstrates
the commitment of the Central African authorities to
resolving the political crisis in the country.
We underscore the clear will to involve the
greatest number of participants — political actors,
civil society, men, women, young people and signatory
armed groups — in the effective implementation of the
peace agreement in order to sustain the peace efforts
initiated by the Government and supported by the
international community.
In that regard, the A3 welcomes the active role of
the African Union, the Economic Community of Central
African States and the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region in revitalizing the peace process in
the Central African Republic.
We are convinced that military action alone will
not be sufficient to pull the country out of crisis. The
existence of a political space for dialogue is essential
for the establishment of lasting peace. We welcome
the establishment of the follow-up committee for
the recommendations resulting from the republican
dialogue and the Bangui Forum. That body, which
plays a major role in the implementation of those
22-63933

19/10/2022

The situation in the Central African Republic

recommendations, is undoubtedly helping to establish
a climate of trust among all stakeholders.
We note with interest the progress in the area of
human rights, in particular the conduct of criminal
hearings in the Bangui and Bouar Courts of Appeal
and the Special Criminal Court. We also welcome
MINUSCA’s support for the Commission for Truth,
Justice, Reparation and Reconciliation.
We take note of the Constitutional Court’s
decision on 23 September to invalidate the decrees
establishing the committee responsible for drafting a
new constitution for the Central African Republic and
those ratifying the appointment of the members of the
committee. We welcome the Government’s decision to
respect those decisions.
The completion of the electoral mapping exercise
and the review of the integrated security plan for
the upcoming local elections underscore the clear
commitment of the authorities of the Central African
Republic to ensuring credible elections. Nevertheless,
the substantial financial and technical support of the
international community remains a major factor in
the holding of a peaceful, transparent and democratic
electoral process.
On the security front, the A3 encourages the
authorities of the Central African Republic to continue
its efforts to combat armed groups. The commitment
and gains on the ground made by the Forces armées
centrafricaines (FACA) are commendable. However,
it is essential that the support of the international
community to restore State authority throughout the
country be accompanied by the implementation of
quick-impact community-development projects capable
of improving the living conditions of the population
and breaking the cycle of dependency.
As we noted at the beginning of our remarks,
armed groups continue to undermine the security of
the people of the Central African Republic by sowing
chaos, regularly attacking civilians and, recently, using
explosive devices, particularly in the centre and west of
the country. We salute the work of MINUSCA, whose
concrete action is evident to the population. MINUSCA
is undeniably contributing to the protection of civilians
and to the stabilization of the country, in particular
through its robust posture and its rapid intervention
forces. We remain convinced of the need to strengthen
MINUSCA’s operational capacity with more human
resources and equipment commensurate with the new

S/PV.9156

threats on the ground. We also note that training and
capacity-building activities for the defence and security
forces need to be strengthened, particularly in the area
of demining.
As long as the supply of natural resources meets the
demand of buyers, the blood of the innocent people of
the Central African Republic will continue to flow. It is
time to put an end to that cycle of violence and to write a
new page in the country’s history. Ensuring certification
and the traceability of minerals and securing borders
are prerequisites in the fight against armed groups. The
Central African Republic cannot meet those challenges
without the support of its partners. We particularly
encourage cooperation between the Central African
Republic and its neighbours to counter illicit crossborder networks.
Civilians are the primary victims of the illicit
trafficking in minerals in the Central African Republic,
whereas they should be the primary beneficiaries.
It is essential to eliminate sources of financing for
armed groups that profit from the illicit trafficking
in natural resources in the Central African Republic.
Addressing their financing is critical, as reiterated at
the African Union Extraordinary Summit on Terrorism
and Unconstitutional Changes of Government, held in
Malabo in May.
We welcome the progress made in the implementation
of the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation (DDRR) programme — the surrender of
more than 4,500 of the target 7,000 combatants. We
call on all rebel groups to join the Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic unconditionally and to take part in the
DDRR programme. Peace in the Central African
Republic requires continued financial support from
the international community for the DDRR process.
It is crucial that the Government authorities have the
financial means to offer alternatives to ex-combatants.
We commend the efforts of the Security Council
that have led to a significant lifting of the arms
embargo. We welcome the many measures taken by the
Central African Government to strengthen its armsand ammunition-management system in a particularly
difficult economic context. We particularly welcome the
launch, on 29 July, of a weapons-marking and awareness
campaign by the National Commission to Combat the
Proliferation of Small Arms and Light Weapons.

22-6393317/22

S/PV.9156

The situation in the Central African Republic

It is up to all of us to support the FACA, because,
as we know, MINUSCA has an ad hoc mandate and
will eventually withdraw from the country. The
FACA should have the human, material and technical
capacities to ensure the sovereign mission of securing
the territory and protecting the population. The renewal
of MINUSCA’s mandate must be considered in the light
of the changing security context and the legitimate
expectations of the Government authorities.
The humanitarian crisis is becoming more complex
due to the effects of climate change, attacks by
armed groups and the rise of violent extremism. That
combination of factors fuels the poverty and inequality
inherent in the recurring socioeconomic crises in the
Central African Republic. Since June 2022, floods in
the Central African Republic have affected more than
85,000 people, destroying infrastructure and crops
and displacing thousands. We call on the international
community to continue to support the funding
of the humanitarian response plan in the Central
African Republic.
In conclusion, we reaffirm our commitment to
respect the territorial integrity and sovereignty of the
Central African Republic and reiterate our support to
Special Representative Rugwabiza and her team for
their tireless efforts on the ground.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Francophonie and Central Africans Abroad of the
Central African Republic.
Ms. Baipo Temon (Central African Republic)
(spoke in French): Let me begin by extending my warm
greetings. That is in response to those extended to me
by the participants in this meeting. I would like to thank
them for their statements, for the time they have devoted
to my country, for their encouragement and for the
expression of their justified and unjustified concerns.
I would also like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your presidency of the Security Council in this
month of October and to thank you for the statement
you delivered on behalf of the African countries on the
Council, commonly known as the A3, but also to thank
you for having convened, during your presidency,
debates on important issues for Africa, in particular on
the subject of armed groups and their financing.
18/22

19/10/2022

We are meeting today in the mythical Chamber of
the Security Council, where the great decisions of the
world on issues of peace and security are taken — a
Chamber that has become very familiar to the Central
African Republic as it has found itself at the centre of
discussions because of its chronic instability, a Chamber
where my country is either appreciated or depreciated,
depending on its prospects.
We are meeting today to discuss the SecretaryGeneral’s latest report on the situation in the Central
African Republic (S/2022/762). Before sharing with the
Council my country’s position on this report, I would
like first to take this opportunity to salute the tireless
efforts of Secretary-General António Guterres for the
sake of global peace, and in particular the efforts made
to restore peace in the Central African Republic.
I would also like, on behalf of the Government
and the people of the Central African Republic, to
express my deepest condolences to the people and the
families of the Bangladeshi Blue Helmets who lost their
lives recently.
I would also like to welcome the Special
Representative
of
the
Secretary-General’s
comprehensive briefing and overview. I encourage her
to continue her task to realize the mandate of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic to bring
safety to the people by stepping up efforts to create an
environment conducive, as she said, to the work of the
Central African authorities and once and for all destroy
the lethal capacities of the forces of evil.
We are pleased to note from the report that the
efforts of the Central African Government are gradually
beginning to bear fruit. That was rightly pointed out.
The political process for peace in the Central African
Republic remains a priority for the Government. The
subregional initiative of the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region, the Luanda road map,
adopted on 16 September 2021, has revitalized the
political process for peace in the Central African
Republic, endorsed in the Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic,
signed in February 2019. Attempts by armed groups to
destabilize the country were thwarted by the acceleration
of the political process for peace in the Central African,
particularly by the setting out of a common timetable
of actions to be carried out for each component of the
political process, such as the engagement of armed
22-63933

19/10/2022

The situation in the Central African Republic

groups, the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration
and repatriation programme, security sector reform, the
securing of borders and the restoration of State authority
throughout the country. There were also the meeting
with representatives of armed groups, who acted on the
urgent need to move towards disbanding armed groups
that had made the clear choice to put down their weapons
and thereby embrace peace; the establishment of a
committee to follow up on the recommendations of the
republican dialogue; respect for democratic principles
that enable the Republic’s institutions to act freely;
and the ongoing efforts to hold municipal elections by
2023, for which the Central African Republic is calling,
through me, for the Council’s concrete support in order
to hold them.
On the security front, we can note significant
achievements, such as the restoration of State authority
over a large part of the country, even if there are still
attempts by the enemies of peace, who continue to
commit atrocities and crimes. Despite all the difficulties,
the Government is committed to continuing its efforts
to ensure the security of its population. It is also worth
noting the reduction in the number of displaced persons
from 644,000 to 500,000 — a key fact that allows us
to assess the population’s assessment of the security
situation in the country. I would also note that there
has also been a reduction in disinformation campaigns.
The Central African Government will continue to work
on its campaigns against disinformation and hate. The
Central African Government also calls on its partners
to be consistent and truthful, and not give false reports
to their capitals in their wish to actively contribute to
damaging the image of the Central African Republic,
and therefore the efforts of the Government. Denigration
does not make a person great.
On the economic and financial front, the
Government is not relaxing its efforts. Everything
is being done to overcome the challenges that we all
share, such as the current inflationary pressures due
to the scarcity of basic commodities, the impact of the
coronavirus disease and the shortage of fuel, which is
not specific to the Central African Republic, as well as
the challenges that are specific to the Central African
Republic, in particular the illicit exploitation of the
country’s natural resources by armed groups and the
controls and restrictions on financial support due to
a system designed to leave the State in a situation of
dependence and dishonour.

S/PV.9156

Let me now point out the inconsistencies in the
report. The wealth of information in the report also
lies in a magnificent balance among correct, incorrect
and some unfair elements, thereby raising questions
about the common objective set in 2013, when the
peacekeeping operation was established. I would like
to start by refuting the violations of the freedom of
movement of MINUSCA troops through interference
with free movement and the continued restrictions on
night flights. There is no ongoing search or seizure
of MINUSCA equipment. There is simply a request
to respect the procedures of, and notifications to, the
Central African authorities. Freedom of movement with
regard to equipment and personnel must be exercised
in respect of the sovereignty of the Central African
Republic and the worrisome security situation in the
country. Are we to understand that we have no right
to respond when unauthorized equipment arrives in
the Central African Republic through MINUSCA
contingents? Are we to understand that we should
remain mere spectators on Central African soil and that
the fine phrase that it is the primary responsibility of
the Central African authorities to ensure the security
of its territory and its population are empty words?
Are we to understand that we have to accept irregular
entry routes into Central African territory and not react
when weapons that are not marked as United Nations
weapons are found in vehicles, and that we are not
allowed to know in advance the list of countries that
are being asked to provide reinforcements? Should we
be happy to be surprised?
Are we also to understand that enforcing a national
regulation, because of power failures at our airport,
means the continued restriction of night flights,
especially as the relevant services have suggested
sitting down to better understand and find a possible
arrangement for all stakeholders regarding the matter?
Do we have to accept that in the Central African
Republic everything is a matter of exemption at the
whim of one party or another? How are we going to
build the rule of law together if the rules have to be
tailored by need and the deals of the multilateral and
bilateral arenas are intertwined by design?
Just as the Central African authorities are being
asked to respect the agreement on the status of
MINUSCA personnel, the Central African Government
is asking for its sovereignty to be respected. There is a
very apt phrase from the late Nelson Mandela that says
“to deny people their fundamental rights is to challenge

22-6393319/22

S/PV.9156

The situation in the Central African Republic

their very humanity”. It is therefore important to be
fair in the collective quest in which we are engaged
by not tolerating violations. That attitude jeopardizes
the efforts to strengthen the fabric of the Central
African Republic.
Allow me also to respond to what was said,
particularly regarding the flow of illicit arms, which
the Central African Government has been condemning
for months, even years. I would also like to take this
opportunity to clarify the confusion surrounding the
latest incident, which resulted in the deaths of three
Blue Helmets from the Bangladesh contingent and
one injured. That crime was caused by the placement
of mines by armed groups. A vehicle on patrol hit
an explosive device. The three victims were killed
instantly, and the wounded person was brought back
to the capital within hours of the incident, not within
nine days, as was said. That is yet another incident that
supports the appeal of the Government of the Central
African Republic. We need to work together, putting
aside the political issues surrounding the reason for
the population’s vulnerability — the human rights
violations due to the ongoing violence by armed
groups. We must also work on the funding and supply
sources of armed groups. Let us not use the vulnerable
situation of the Central African Republic for an unfair
and discriminatory process. In paying tribute to the
Blue Helmets who lost their lives on Central African
soil, I would ask Council members to also pay tribute to
my Central African brothers and sisters who lost their
lives and who continue to fall, as well as, not to recall a
sad event, the young Lumière, a 16-year-old girl, who,
already forgotten, died due to the proven violation of a
peacekeeping vehicle.
Let us work together to restore peace in the Central
African Republic. Let us work together to find rapid
solutions to the plight of a population that is aware of
being a victim because of its geographical and strategic
position and the immense wealth of its subsoil.
On the subject of violations, it is important that
the voice of the Central African Republic be heard. We
must get out of the pattern whereby the violations of
some are tolerated and those of others are used as tools.
We must absolutely avoid losing the meaning of human
rights by promoting a world where some people have
rights over others.
I once again call on the Security Council to consider
the realities of war. It does not matter how one describes
20/22

19/10/2022

one’s executioner, whether they are terrorists, jihadists,
armed groups or individuals. Jihadist, armed group or
otherwise, a criminal is a criminal. Certainly, there are
similarities and dissimilarities among people, but in
the Central African Republic, there are human beings
who aspire not to peace, because we do not believe it to
be a peace that conveys dignity, but to stability — the
stability that has allowed others to have conditions
favourable to building their countries and to bringing
peace to their populations. We too could be capable
of that, if we could stop diverting our attention — the
attention of an entire people — from what is essential.
It is not a question of polarization or of politicizing
everything. Politics is not about speaking for the people,
but about putting people at the heart of our actions.
I would like to call for there being no confusion
between the need for the international community to
support a people in distress and the need for a mission
that is consistent with the principles and values of the
United Nations Charter. This meeting is an opportunity
for us to thank the multilateral and bilateral partners
who are assisting the Central African Republic in its
plan to emerge from the crisis and recover. I again
thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and encourage her to continue the efforts that
have been initiated and work towards a Mission that is
more adapted to the Central African context so that the
peace that is so sought after at the international level is
finally established, and stability in the Central African
Republic is maintained.
We must use time for our benefit, because the
longer the violence continues the more it becomes
entrenched. Social networks have become the place
for hate messaging and defamation. Council members
should believe me in this: all actors in the Central
African Republic are confronted with this phenomenon.
Looking through one window would be biased and
would only reflect a desire to corner the Government,
in which case it would have to be explained to us in
what capacity and for what purpose.
Violence breeds violence. This is why it is now
more than ever time to fight collectively against the
forces of evil, to fight against the causes of the Central
African crisis. These causes are the armed groups. It is
not necessary to dwell on the consequences. We do not
extinguish a flame from the tip, but at its source.
Instead of dwelling on counting crimes, let us focus
on being more concrete. Looking for scapegoats today
22-63933

19/10/2022

The situation in the Central African Republic

because we are unable to neutralize the real criminals
known and listed in the sanctions list since 2013 will
not make us more effective or achieve our goal, which
is the return to permanent peace. On the contrary, it
would force us to review the purpose of the mandate
of the groups of experts. Indeed, we are talking about
freezing assets, but it is not from the Central African
Republic that those on the Sanctions Committee list are
funded. We are talking about travel bans, but the leaders
of the armed groups are moving around in full view
of the international community. We are talking about
the Kimberley Process in areas controlled by the State,
but illegal exploitation does not stop in areas occupied
by rebels. We are talking about a draft resolution that
extends the embargo on the Central African Republic
and a text that does not apply to regular forces. Council
members will agree with me that seeking to fill a list
based on a blatant instrumentalization of the subject
of human rights to meet geostrategic and geopolitical
challenges and imposing it on the Central African
Republic is fraught with ambiguity. It is necessary
to review the text to gain coherence, credibility
and effectiveness.
As I have said, let us stop working on the
consequences of a conflict that has lasted too long
because of our procrastination. Let us work responsibly,
in solidarity and pragmatically on the causes, ceasing
to sell dreams to a people tired of so much injustice,
discrimination and so many crimes for decades.
The fragile situation of the Central African Republic
does not date from 2020, nor from 2021; 2020-2021 is
the date of when the Central African Republic appealed
for support in the bilateral framework. The fragile
situation dates back to a period when the country was
scarred by an aggression of its territory and population
by armed groups called Séléka in 2013 and Coalition des
patriotes pour le changement in 2020. For this reason, I
recommend that the upcoming renewal of the mandate
of MINUSCA take into account the recommendations
adopted in this very forum by resolution 2086 (2013),
more precisely on 21 January 2013, which states, in its
paragraph 3, that the Security Council:
“[r]eiterates its commitment to continue
to improve its consideration and reflection of
early peacebuilding tasks in the mandates and
composition of peacekeeping operations, and in
this regard, stresses the necessity for the Secretariat
to plan early peacebuilding tasks in phases with
clear objectives...”

S/PV.9156

In resolution 2086 (2013), paragraph 4, the Security
Council
“[s]tresse[d] the importance of grasping the
challenges of peacebuilding from the inception
of a peacekeeping mission through Integrated
Strategic Assessment and Planning processes, so
as to ensure coherence between, and integration
of, peacemaking, peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
development to achieve an effective response to
post-conflict situation from the outset...”.
In resolution 2086 (2013), paragraph 7, the Council
“[r]ecognizes that the mandate of each
peacekeeping mission is specific to the needs and
situation of the country concerned...”.
I have made the foregoing several reminders in the
hope that the voice of the patient will be heard by the
doctors who comprise the Security Council, so that a
diagnosis may be made that does not result in further
serious harm to the patient.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Rwanda.
Mr. Gatete (Rwanda): Let me start by
congratulating Gabon on its presidency of the Security
Council for this month of October 2022 and the way
it is comprehensively covering issues on the African
continent. I would also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ambassador
Valentine Rugwabiza, for her comprehensive briefing
this morning. I thank the Foreign Minister of the
Central African Republic for her statement.
Rwanda pays tribute to the Bangladeshi
peacekeepers who lost their lives while serving the
United Nations. The lives lost are a reminder that the
question of the safety and security of peacekeepers
should be viewed from a mission perspective. Justice
for the crimes committed against peacekeepers should
be given the weight it deserves.
Rwanda commends the Government of the Central
African Republic under His Excellency President
Touadera and welcomes the commitment demonstrated
to implement the joint road map of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR)
facilitated by Rwanda and Angola. We reaffirm our
commitment to strengthening our partnership with
the authorities of the Central African Republic to
build sustainable peace. We call on partners and the

22-6393321/22

S/PV.9156

The situation in the Central African Republic

19/10/2022

international community to support the Central African
Republic to sustain and scale up the gains achieved
so far.

regional and subregional partners, in support of Central
African Republic home-grown solutions suitable to the
local context.

Although challenges still exist, good progress has
been recorded on several fronts, including implementing
the aforementioned ICGLR joint road map, the
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation (DDRR) programme, and the extension of
the State presence across the Central African Republic.
In this regard, Rwanda appreciates the role of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA)
in facilitating this achievement in partnership with the
authorities of the Central African Republic.

Disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation (DDRR) are crucial aspects necessary to
ensure lasting peace. The uncontrolled proliferation
of arms threatens peace and security in the Central
African Republic. We are encouraged by the cooperation
between the national authorities and MINUSCA in that
regard, which resulted in a collection of 255 weapons,
11,738 rounds of ammunition, 12 grenades, 22 rockets
and 13 rocket launchers. DDRR is a long-term
undertaking that requires sustained funding. In that
regard, we urge partners to support the Central African
Republic in implementing the DDRR programme and
the capacity-building associated with the process.

As the largest troop- and police-contributor to
MINUSCA and as a bilateral partner of the Central
African Republic, Rwanda attests that bilateral
military intervention can complement the work of the
United Nations to restore peace and create a suitable
environment for the peace process. Troops deployed
under the bilateral arrangement between Rwanda
and the Central African Republic are mandated to
work in partnership with Government forces within
pre-identified areas of operation and in coordination
with MINUSCA forces.
We appreciate the efforts of the Government
in fighting misinformation and disinformation on
peacekeepers and bilateral forces. The international
community must assist the Central African Republic
in fighting misinformation targeting the Government,
peacekeepers
and
bilateral
partners.
When
misinformation spreads, the public loses trust in the
Government and the United Nations Mission.
Sustainable peace can be attained only through the
constructive participation of the people of the Central
African Republic. We must allow them to develop
their home-grown solutions organically. In that regard,
peace operations and bilateral support create space and
time for the peace process and the establishment of
the State and democratic institutions. In that respect,
we welcome the progress made thus far. Rwanda will
continue to cooperate with the Government of the
Central African Republic and other partners, including

22/22

DDRR needs to be accompanied by security sector
reform to transform security and justice institutions,
to create a secure and stable environment and to
enable economic development. Security sector reform
programmes should be resourced and Central African
Republic-supported to allow economic growth as the
country moves in that direction.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2022/762)
highlights positive progress in extending State authority
presence in the Central African Republic. We believe that
the State authorities will enhance confidence-building
and essential service delivery to people, which is an
integral part of the peacebuilding process.
Finally, complementarity in peace operations has
proven to make a positive difference. Although under
different arrangements, deployments of bilateral forces
in the Central African Republic played a reinforcement
role at the time of need. We hope that MINUSCA, the
authorities of the Central African Republic and other
partners will capitalize on that momentum to build
sustainable peace.
The President (spoke in French): I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

22-63933
