UNITED NA TIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OF.FICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FI-RST
.

YEAR

NEW YORK

DEC2 0 l%c\
CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/ 1893) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Expression of welcome to the representative

of the United States of America

1
1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . ..*..............*....................

1

Request by the Libyan Arab Republic and Pakistan for consideration of the
serious situation arising from recent developments in the occupied Arab
territories:
Letter dated 19 March 1976 from the Permanent Representatives of the
Libyan Arab Republic and Pakistan to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/12017) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

:

NOTE

.,

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.

L’

.The resolutions of the Sekuity~ Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1893rd MEETING
Held in New York on Monday, 22 March 1976, at 10.30 a.m.
President:

Mr. Thomas S. BOYA (Benin).

Adoption of the agenda

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan’
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socitilist Repubiics,‘United
Kingdom,
of Great Britain and Northem.Ireland,
United Republic
of Tanzania, United States of America.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

agenda (S/Agendail893)

.’

The agenda was adopted.
Request by the Libyan Arab Republic and Pakistan
.for consideration of the serious situation arising from
recent developments in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 19 March 1976 from the Permanent
Representatives of the Libyan Arab Republic and
Pakistan to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/12017)

,’

of ‘the agenda
3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
I wish to inform the Council that I have received
letters from the representatives
of Egypt, Israel,
Jordan, the Syrian Arab Republic and Yugoslavia
in which they ask to be invited to participate in the
debate, in accordance with.mle 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure. In accordance with the usual
practice I therefore propose, with the Council’s
consent, to invite those representatives to participate
in the debate without the right to vote.

Request by the Libyan Arab Republic and Pakistan,
for consideration
of the serious situation arising
from recent developments
in the occupied Arab
territories:
Letter dated 19 March 1976 from the Permanent
Representatives
of the Libyan Arab Republic
and Pakistan to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/12017)
The meeting

was called to order at 11.55 a.m.
4. As the members of the Council know, the letter
from the representatives of the Libyan Arab Republic
and Pakistan [s/12017] contains a request that representatives of the Palestine Liberation
Organization
(PLO) be invited to participate in the debate. That
proposal is not made under rule 37 or rule 39 of the
provisional rules of procedure, but, if it is adopted,
the invitation to the PLO will confer on it the same
rights of participation
as are conferred on a Member
State when it is invited to participate in a debate
under rule 37.

Expression of welcome to the representative
of the United States of America
1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
Before we begin our work I wish, on my own behalf
and on behalf of the Security Council, to express a
very warm welcome to our new colleague, Ambassador
William Scranton, the Permanent Representative
of
the United States, who today will be participating
at his first formal meeting of the Council.
2. Mr. Ambassador, your reputation as a man of
politics has preceded you here in the United Nations.
I am not referring to the effect of the press communiques and the biographical data which always accompany appointments to high State offices. I am merely
alluding to the respect and favourable response which
is evoked by a name such as yours in those who
are not personally acquainted with you but who from
near or far take a keen interest in the long political
careers of distinguished figures. I am convinced that,
by bringing to bear your considerable experience in
the service of your great country, you will make a
major contribution
to our efforts in the service of the
Charter of the United Nations. I wish to assure you
that you will receive from me and from all the other
members of the Council the most forthright and cordial
co-operation.

5. Does any member of the Council wish to speak on
that proposal?
6. Mr. SCRANTON
(United States of America): As
I understand it, the proposal is to have representatives
of the Palestine Liberation Organization speak before
this Council, but it is not clear whether that proposal
is being made under rule 37 or rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure. Is that correct?
7. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
I shall re-read, for the benefit of the United States
representative,
the relevant part of my statement:
“That proposal is not made under rule 37 or rule 39
of the provisional
rules of procedure, but, if it is
adopted, . ..” and so forth.
1

8. Mr. SCRANTON
(United States of America):
In those circumstances, the United States objects to
the proposal and will have to vote against it. I should
now like to make a statement in that connexion.

history, as I always have been, and I am committed
to its future. I hope to play a part in preserving the
Council for future generations and in developing its
lawful powers and procedures. That is why I have
called for the vote on the proposal before us, which
is not being made under rule 37, and why I shall vote
against that proposal.

9. I am sure that the members of the Council are all
aware that the proposal on participation
by the
Palestine Liberation Organization in the Council that is
before us today is the same as was made on 4 December 1975 [1859th meeting] and 12 January 1976 [1870th
meeting]. On those two occasions a move was made
to invite the PLO to participate in the debate with
“the same rights of participation
as are conferred
on a Member State when it is invited to participate
under rule 37”. .I am sure that members are equally
aware that the United States strongly opposed that
proposal when it was made on those two occasions.
There is a long-standing American tradition-in
which
we believe very thoroughlydf
giving a hearing to all
sides, and we would not oppose the Council’s granting
a hearing under the appropriate
provision of the
Council’s rules, that is, rule 39. But we do oppose the
proposal to grant a hearing under rule 37. For my
Government this position is based on principle--and
a
principle that cannot be eroded either by its continuing
violation,
no matter how many times, or by time
itself.
10. The
proposal

United

States

has twice

described

13. Mr. AKIIUND
(Pakistan): This is a subject that
we have discussed before, and we are familiar with the
position of the United States, which was just restated
by the representative of that country. I speak now only
because it is my delegation, along with that of the
Libyan Arab Republic, which has proposed that the
Palestine Liberation
Organization
be invited to participate in the debate, as on previous occasions. That
was your proposal also, Mr. President,
14. I wish to say a few words only to refute the
suggestion that in deciding to invite the PLO to
participate in the debate, the Council would be in any
way violating the provisional rules of procedure or
making an ad hoc departure from them. The situation
is of asui gene& nature, if one might say so. Rule 39
provides for a hearing being given to members of the
Secretariat or other persons, whereas rule 37 provides
for a hearing being given to any Member of the United
Nations. The present situation is, strictly speaking,
covered neither by rule 37 nor by rule 39. I would
submit that in such cases-which, for obvious reasons,
had not been visualized by those who drew up the
rules-the
Council should proceed on the basis of
common sense. That is what it has done in the past,
and that is why we have suggested that a previous
procedure should be followed. We are convinced that
in doing so the Council will not be departing from
the rules but, rather, will be ruling on a given situation
in the light of the particular circumstances of that
situation.

the

“as a concerted attempt to disregard the rules of
procedure and to accord to the PLO a role greater
even than that which over the years the Council
has granted to observer Governments,
and a role
greater by far than has in more recent times been
granted to the spokesmen of legitimate
national
liberation movements invited here under rule 39”
[1859th meeting, para. 14, and 1870th meeting,
para. 221.

15. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
.from French):
In view of the comments’which
have just been made in
connexion with the proposal to invite the Palestine
Liberation Organization
to participate in this discussion under the same conditions as at previous meetings,
I shall now put that proposal to the vote.

We made it clear then, as I am making it clear now,
that the United States is not prepared to agree, and
we do not believe the Council should agree, to an
ad hoc departure from the rules of procedure which
comports neither with the law nor with the political
requirements of the situation.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

11. We are of the view that the rules of procedure,
if applied, in rule 39 would have adequately provided
a hearing of the views of Palestinians on the subject
before the Council, and we would have supported
that. That this subject is of concern to Palestinians
is beyond question, just as is the fact that a comprehensive settlement must answer the question of the
future of the Palestinian people. The United States
position on these facets of the Middle East problem
is clear.

In favour: Benin, China, Guyana, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Republic
of Tanzania.
Against:

United

States of America.

Abstaining: France, Italy, United
Britain and Northern Ireland.

12. As I join in the deliberations of the Council-and
I appreciate very much, Mr. President, your kind
opening comments-I
am impressed by the Council’s

The proposal
3 abstentions.
2

was adopted

Kingdom

of Great

by I I votes to I, with

21. On the other hand, we have the greatest interest
in having the PLO participate in a debate on a question
which concerns the Palestinian people, and we are
looking forward to a constructive
debate on this
question. In this connexion, I should like also to
reiterate the fact that, as we wished in the past to
see Israel participate in the debate, we welcome the
move on Israel’s part to be allowed to participate in
this debate. I think this will serve a very useful
purpose for our work and deliberations.

16. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
I shall now call on those representatives wishing to
speak in explanation of their vote.
17. Mr. LECOMPT
(France) (interpretation
from
French): Mr. President, the French delegation would
first like to echo the congratuiations
which you
addressed on our behalf to Ambassador Scranton, the
new Permanent Representative of the United States.
We should like to offer Ambassador Scranton our
words of welcome and our most sincere and warmest
wishes for the success of his important mission.

22. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
Since the Council has invited a larger number of
representatives to participate in the debate than there
are places available at the Council table, it is not
possible to request all representatives to be seated
at the Council table during the entire debate. Of course,
they will be invited to take a place at the Council
table when their turn comes to speak. As was decided
as a result of consultations, I invite the representative
of Israel, as well as the representative of the Palestine
Liberation Organization,
to be seated at the Council
table.

18. As the representative of France said on 12 January
under similar circumstances, we are in favour of the
participation of the PLO in the discussion. We think it
is, in fact, desirable for the, voice of the Palestinians
to be heard in international
discussions dealing with
problems which affect the Palestinians. It is, therefore,
quite logical that they should be given an opportunity
to express themselves when their own rights are the
subject of our deliberations. However, as was the case
last January, my delegation had to abstain since the
invitation addressed to the PLO is in contradiction
to the provisional
rules of procedure. Outside the
context of rule 39, only representatives of Member
States may be heard here, as stipulated in rule 37.
So whatever relationships have been established with
the Palestinian organization,
we find that it is not a
State, nor does it claim to be one. In these circumstances, my delegation could only abstain, while at the
same time reminding you that this attitude does not
in any way challenge the idea of having the PLO
heard in the Council.

At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Herzog
(Israel) and Mr. Terzi (Palestine Liberation Organization) took places at the Council table.
23. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
I invite the representatives
of Egypt, Jordan, the
Syrian Arab Republic and Yugoslavia to take the
places which have been reserved for them at the side
of the Council chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Abdel Meguid
(Egypt), Mr. Sharaf (Jordan), Mr. Aliaf (Syrian Arab
Republic) and Mr. Petri6 (Yugoslavia) took the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

19. Mr. VINCI (Italy): Mr. President, before commenting on our abstention, I should like to join you
and my colleague of France in extending a warm
welcome, on behalf of my delegation, Italy and myself,
to Mr. Scranton the new Permanent Representative of
the United States. As you said, Sir, he has been
preceded by a long-standing and, at the same time,
outstanding political reputation. We are sure also, in
the light of his own statement, that we can rely on
his full contribution to our work in the Council.

24. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
I should like to draw the attention
to documents S/12000 of 1 March
15 March.

from French):
of the Council
and S/12012 of

25. Mr.. KIKHIA
(Libyan Arab Republic): Before
turning to the item on the agenda, and since I am
speaking in the Council for the first time during
March, I would like to express, on behalf of the Libyan
delegation, my sincere congratulations
to you, Sir, in
your capacity as President of the Council for the month
of March. It is a particular pleasure to see an eminent
son of Africa presiding over the work of the Council.
On this occasion I also salute your country, Benin,
for its firm stand of solidarity with the cause of liberation and with the cause of peace and justice. Your
country and mine, Mr. President, march hand in hand
in support of the just causes everywhere. I am certain
that, under your competent and wise leadership, our
deliberations will be crowned with success.

20. Turning now to the vote of my delegation, I do
not think I have to repeat what I said at previous
meetings. 1 have explained why the Italian delegation
has had to abstain on this question of the participati0.n
of the Palestine Liberation Organization in the Council’s debate. I made this clear at the 1856th and 1859th
meetings and summarized our position at the 1870th
meeting. I shouldjust like, in summing up this position,
to say that our reservations do not concern the participation of the PLO in the debate on the substance
of the issue. Our reservations are restricted to the
terms under which this invitation is to be extended.
In other words, we have doubts about the consistency
of this invitation with the provisions of the Charter
and the provisional rules of procedure.

26. I should also like to pay a tribute to your predecessor, the President of the Council for February,
3

the former Permanent Representative
States, Professor Moynihan.

of the United

These incidents underline once again the danger
inherent in ‘the present situation in the Middle East
and the’ urgent need for increased efforts in the
search for a just and lasting peace in the area.”
1
32. Those recent incidents were provoked by the
.ruling’of an Israeli magistrate last 28 January concerning prayer by Jews in the Al-Aqsa Mosque, which
is revered by Moslems throughout the world as one of
our holiest shrines. ,That ruling cannot be’ considered
in isolation but must be seen, along with recent
actions and aggressions, as part of the Zionist policy
of absorbing occupied Jerusalem and changing its
cultural .and demographic
character’ in wilful and
calculated defiance of Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions on the subject. The deliberate
Zionist policy aims at radically changing the cultural,
religious, demographic and political status of the land
and undermining the spiritual values of the Holy City
and its universal sacred character; in violation of
Council resolutions concerning the status of Jerusalem
and the profanation
and desecration
of the AlAqsa Mosque-resolutions
252 (1968), 267 (1969), 271
(1969) and 298 (1971)-as well as of Assembly resoiutions 2253 (ES-V) and 2254 (ES-V).
’

27. Allow me also to take this opportunity to address
our sincere welcome to Ambassador Scranton and to
congratulate him on assuming his important responsibility in the Organization.
Ambassador
Scranton
arrives at the United Nations at a very delicate and
crucial moment, particularly
in connexion with the
role bf the United States ‘inside the international
Grganization and its relations with peoples of the third
world’from
Africa, Asia and Latin America. As you
said, Mr. President, Ambassador Scranton arrives
preceded by his excellent reputation as a man of
great integrity, high morality and statesmanship. I hope
that as a devoted son of his great nation he will
contribute to the furthering of peaceful understanding
and co-operation between his country and our devel,oping nations and help to shape American policy in
the real and genuine interest of his country, as well
as in the interest of peace and justice in the world.
We hope that that super-Power, the United States of
America, in its bicentennial year, will be guided by a
new light. ,We promise Mr. Scranton our full cooperation to achieve these goals and we wish him good
luck.

33. The policy of Judaization of Jerusalem is being
implemented
by numerous measures, inter alla, the
expropriation
of Arab lands and the setting up of new
Jewish quarters, the continuation
of the policy of
alienation of the inhabitants from their Arab history,
civilization
and culture, the exploitation
of the economy of Jerusalem in view of its total absorption
the suppression of Islamic and Christian institutions
and measures designed to compel the Arab population
of Jerusalem to leave their homes and properties.

28. The delegation of. Pakistan and my delegation,
in our letter of 19 March [S/12017], requested an
urgent meeting of the Security Council in order to
consider the serious situation arising from recent
developments in the occupied territories of Palestine.
The situation has continued to deteriorate in Jerusalem
and other parts of the occupied West Bank.
29. In his letter dated 23 February [S/12000], the
Acting Permanent Observer of the Palestine Liberation
Organization drew attention to the widespread protests
‘and demonstrations against the terrorism of the occupation authorities by the Palestinians living in Jerusalem
and other major West Bank towns and to the largescale arrests and other repressive measures ordered
by the Zionist authorities.

34. The scandalous Zionist record of defiance of the
United Nations is well known.- In spite of the fact
that the Zionist entity was conditionally
admitted to
the United Nations, and that it based its existenceon
a .United Nations -resolution, the Zionist entity has
shown nothing but contempt for the international
Organization
and international
public opinion. This
defiant attitude is reflected in many declarations and
measures taken by the Zionist authorities.
For
example, following the war of June 1967, Mr. Levi
Eshkol stated that Israel would never execute, ‘the
General Assembly’s decisions even “if the United
Nations votes by 121 votes to 1”. Golda Meir cynicalIy
,said, “if a resolution is passed not to our liking, so
what? After all, it is not a tank firing at you,“’ An
under-secretary in the Israeli Foreign Ministry was
reported to have declared, “What does a United
Nations resolution amount to? Ninety votes, ninety
speeches. What else?” Recently, Mr. Herzog attacked
the United Nations and reaffirmed the Israeli attitude
to all United Nations resolutions when he declared
that “‘Council resolutions will join hundreds of other
United Nations resolutions in the waste-paper basket”.

30. Later, in his letter dated 12 March [S/12022]
to you, Mr. President, and to the Secretary-General,
Mr..Baroody,
Ambassador of Saudi Arabia, conveyed
a statement by the members of the Islamic Conference
concerning these serious developments in the occupied
Arab territories. The members of the Islamic Conference requested the Council to keep under urgent
attention the situation in Jerusalem and in the rest of
the occupied territories and warned that it might be
further aggravated.
. :.
31. On 19 March, the Secretary-General
expressed
his concern over the serious situation in the occupied
territories, and the following statement was issued:
z “The .Secretary-General
‘is concerned over the
‘. recent incidents in Israeli-occupied
territory which
have resulted in human suffering and casualties.

35. Since 1947-for a period of almost 30 years-the
Zionists have refused to comply with United Nations
4

2.

resolutions, decisions and appeals. The United Nations
has repeatedly condemned Zionist actions in Palestine
and in the occupied Arab territories. However, Israel
continues its arrogant disregard of the wishes and
decisions of the international community.
36. What should be the international community’s
answer to the stubborn Zionist defiance? We must find
the appropriate answer. In fact, the Zionists plot to
gain time while creating faits accomplis in the area.
Every Israeli aggression is also an experiment to
discover how much more the world will tolerate.
Every time Israel defies the United Nations without
receiving the appropriate response, the authority of the
Organization is further eroded. The international community must take effective measures by imposing
appropriate sanctions against the racist and aggressive
Zionist entity, which was illegally granted a home and
membership’in the United Nations and which persists
in disregarding the overwhelming will of the United
Nations and the international community. In fact, the
recent serious development in the situation in the
occupied territories is a logical result of the long
continued deliberate Israeli aggressive and racist
policies, since the Zionist entity is, by its very nature,
inherently racist, terrorist and expansionist.
37. From its inception, Zionism planned the creation
of a Jewish State which was to be exclusively Jewish.
Palestine was populated by Arabs, but that fact was
deliberately ignored. Zionists spoke in terms of
“people without a land to a land without people**.
According to the Zionist ideology, the establishment
of the Jewish State was from the outset based on
displacement of the Arabs. For the Zionists, Arabs do
not really count as people.
38. Thousands of examples, practices and quotations
can be used to illustrate the racism underlying the
Zionist movement and the Israeli establishment: These
examples confirm the- vicious anti-Arab propaganda
and the equally vicious glorification.of militarism that
cultivates hatred and racial aggression.
39. In keeping with the racist Zionist dogma incorporated ‘in the Declaration of the Establishment of
Israel in 1948, this racist entity is open for Jewish
immigration and for the gathering of exiles. Thus, any
Jew anywhere in the world may claim citizenship
and enjoy special ethnic and religious privileges.
According to an amendment to the citizenship law
adopted in 1971, the exercise- of that right. does not
necessitate immigration to Israel. The racist law of
return gives every Jew, regardless of present citizenship, the right to emigrate to Israel. In addition,
the law of nationality grants automatic citizenship.
At the same time, Arabs and other non-Jews are
denied that privilege. Palestinians whose ancestors
lived in Palestine for thousands of years are reduced
to second-class citizenship.
40. Many prominent Jewish and non-Jewish thinkers
and intellectuals oppose Zionism, exposing its fallacies

while condemning its inherent racism. The General
Assembly in its well-known resolution determined
.that Zionism is a form of racism and racial discrimination [resolufion 3379 (XXX)].
41. History teaches us that racism inherently involves
terrorism. Zionism, which is ,both a .racist and a
terrorist movement, has committed atrocities against
the Palestinian people. Zionist terror organizations
have massacred thousands of Arab men, women and
children. Arabs in the occupied territories are continually subjected to repressive measures and inhuman
laws and regulations that violate elementary human
rights.
42. The Special Committee to Investigate Israeli
Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Population of the Occupied Territories confirmed the violations committed by the Zionist authorities: collective
and area punishment; deportation and expulsion; illtreatment of prisoners and civilians; destruction and
demolition of houses and buildings; confiscation and
expropriation of properties; and looting and pillaging.
43. It is important to note that these racist and terrorist actions by the Zionists are consistently covered
up by an active propaganda campaign. Certain mass
media join forces with the Zionists to attempt to
cover up the atrocities committed by the Zionists
against the Palestinians. Major General Carl von
Horn, in his book Soldiering for Peace, l pointed out
the distortion of facts by the Zionists. He wrote on
page 95:
66*.. we were amazed at the ingenuity of the falsehoods that distorted the true picture. The highly
skilled Israeli Information Service and the entire
press combined to manufacture a warped, distorted
version that was disseminated with professional
expertise through every available channel- to their
own people and their sympathizers and supporters
in America and the rest of the world. Never in all
my life had I believed the truth could be so cynically,
expertly bent. *’
44. What should the United Nations do, then? What
should the Security Council do? What should the world
do with a racist movement and a racist expansionist
entity? Should they be treated differently from nazism
and apartheid? The world is now asking what .difference exists between the racist regime in South
Africa and the racist regime in Palestine. An honest
decision is needed. A courageous action is demanded.
45. Accordingly, we call on the Security Council
to take prompt and effective measures which would
halt the deterioration of the situation and put an end to
the Israeli criminal actions in the occupied Arab
territories.
46. The PRESIDENT (interprefution from French):
I call on the representative of the Palestine Liberation
Organization.

47. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization):
Mr. President, it is of great significance that you,
the representative of a liberated nation, should extend
an invitation to the representative of a people struggling
for its liberation to participate in the Council’s deliberations. My people follows closely the constructive
efforts undertaken in your country to secure its economic independence and sovereignty and to safeguard
the welfare and dignity of its people.

towns under Zionist occupation. The media could no
longer withhold the facts; they even highlighted the
fact that paratroopers were brought to help the border
police. It is common knowledge that border police are
a “fierce task force”. The Zionist forces of occupation
imposed a 24-hour--or rather a 22-hour and 30-minute-curfew on some Palestinian towns, allowing
a break of 90 minutes to allow residents-I repeat the
word “residents” -to buy food. Palestinians in their
homes are now regarded as residents. According to
the Zionist concept of the Palestinian, a Palestlnian is
a resident-not a citizen and not an inhabitant of that
land, but a resident, and possibly for them a transient
resident.

48. Allow me to thank in particular the representatives who voted in favour of the participation of the
Palestine Liberation Organization in these deliberations of the Council to consider the serious situation
in my country, at present under occupation.

52. Christian as well as Moslem mayors of a number
of Palestinian cities and towns, and cities under
Zionist occupation tendered their resignations as a
manifestation of protest against the brutality of the
methods applied by the occupation troops.

49. The situation in the Palestinian towns under
Zionist occupation is both alarming and encouraging.
It is encouraging because the Palestinians have stood
up to confront the forces of occupation and foreign
domination after long years of waiting-waiting for
the international community to do them justice and
redress the injustices committed against them a few
decades ago. The situation .is alarming because the
forces of occupation have resorted to brutal Hitlerite
measures of suppression to thwart the mass uprising,
in some cases described as riots, in others as disturbances, but in effect an unarmed uprising against the
forces of occupation.

53. In its bulletin of 19March the 3ewish Telegraphic
Agency reported that a rabbi by the name of Moshe
Levinger had appeared on television to “exhort the
townspeople to shoot to kill’“. The rabbi is reported
to have said also that he “issued the’ order because
the Arabs have to be taught a lesson and put in their
place”. To my knowledge, television in occuplied
Palestine isrun and controlled by the Zionist authorities
in Tel Aviv, and I have good reason to believe that
his appearance must have had the blessing of those
authorities.

SO. After weeks of a virtually complete -blackout
and malicious withholding of news about what was
really happening, the media poured out such items
as the following, on 19 March:

54. In its bulletin of 16March the Jewish Telegraphic’
Agency reported:

“Israeli troops with guns at the ready prevented
further rioting as Moslems left their mosques in
Jerusalem and the occupied West Bank of the
Jordan after Friday prayers. Border police and
soldiers patrolled the streets of Jerusalem and,paratroopers sealed off other West Bank towns to
forestall any new outbreaks of violence after seven
weeks of sporadic clashes between’ rock-throwing
Arab students and Israeli troops.”

“Arab students hurled rocks at Israeli soldiers
in Bethlehem... and raised-the Palestinian flag over
the local college building. The demonstration, the
first in years in that normally peaceful West Bank
town, was the latest manifestation of unrest and
militant nationalism that has been escalating all over
the West Bank during the past ten days... Israeli
authorities have tended to minimize the seriousness
of these disorders, despite several clashes.”

According to a report by Reuters on 19 March,
Israeli soldiers said their guns were loaded and ready
to fire. A young Zionist officer told Reuters, “We
are told to put a quick stop to any disturbance.”
Furthermore, Reuters reported that the northern city
of Nablus, a major site of recent disturbances, was
sealed off by police and paratroopers, who set up
road blocks and searched all vehicles entering the town.
Inside the town paratroopers cruised the street in
personnel carriers, carrying out spot checks of
residents and checking papers. In one incident,
according to Reuters, “some 80 men were lined ap
against the wall of the Central Post Office with hands
on the wall, while paratroopers searched them”.

The town referred to is the little town of Bethlehem,
where Christ, the Prince of Peace, chose to be born.
55. On I9 March the Secretary-General expressed
his concern over “the recent incidents in fsraelioccupied‘ territory which have re-sulted in human
suffering andcasualties”. He.added:
“These incidents underline once again the danger
inherent in the present situation in the. Middle East
and the urgent need for increased efforts in, the
search for a just and lasting peace in the area.”
56. My organization, on behalf of my people suffering
the inhumanity and brutality of the forces of occupation, cannot but express our great appreciation to the

51. On 19 March The New York Times carried a
relatively long story about the situation in Palestinian
6

.

Secretary-General for his genuine cumcem. The statement is viewed. IS a decIaration of support for the
just cause of our people in its struggle against occupation and foreign dommation and the Hitlerite atrocities
committed by the racist Zionist forces.

“Israel faced the threat of a double confrontation
as its Arab citizens mapped a nationwide general
strike for March 30 and Israeli security forces moved
to keep the lid on the strife-ridden West Bank.
The action by the Arabs has been called to protest
a government decision to requisition 1,625 acres of
Arab-owned land in Galilee, for new housing, most
of it for Jews.”

57. My organization is confident that the Council,
in fulfilling its responsibility as the organ entrusted
with the maintenance of international peace and
security, will not satisfy itself with the expression of
grave concern but will utilize the powers conferred
upon it by the Charter, powers to deal with such a
situation. The Council, we are certain, will deal
with the roots, with the cause of the incidents, and not
only with the existing situation and its consequences.

And here I ask,’ why that requisition? It was simply
because in that area the Arabs outnumber the Jews and
represent 58 per cent of the population.
61. The Arabs under occupation oppo~sesuch blans
-that is their right and their duty-+and they ,will
resort to all methods to defeat racist Zionist plans. One
Zionist member of the Knesset even went to the extent
of requesting that an Arab leader of the~opposition to
such plans should be piaced.on tria1 for “incitement to
violence”. When a Palestinian-or rather, an Arab
with Israeli passport and, citizenship-defends his
property, he-is accused of incitement to violence. Yet
when the State-run television is made available to those
who exhort others to shoot to kill-to shoot the Arabs,
the indigenous people of Palestine-nothing is said
to them.

58. It has been said that the disturbances+ gross
understatement, as the intervention of the paratroopers
proves-are a result of a court ruling pronounced by a
Zionist magistrate in Jerusalem, a ruling that constitutes a violation of Jewish religious law, a violation
of international law, a violation of resolutions of the
Security Council and, if we are disposed to believe, a
violation of a 1970.Israeli Supreme Court ruling, but
the disturbances and their immediate cause are not the
issue.
59. In its bulletin of 16 March the Jewish Telegraphic
Agency reported:

62. In a few weeks the world will be commemorating
one part of the heroic stand of the Polish people
against Nazi domination and the-presence of Hitierite
troops on the soil of Poland. It is in this context of
heroism and patriotism and in the spirit of national
liberation that we view the uprising of our people
against racist Zionist domination and foreign rule.
I am referring to the glorious Warsaw ghetto uprising.

“The Arabs were ‘further inflamed by the
seemingly equivocal attitude of the Government
towards illegal Jewish settlers on the West Bank.
A group of the militantly Orthodox Gush Emunim
has been permitted to remain in the Samaria region
under army protection and there are severe pressures
on the Rabin Government from religious and rightwing nationalist quarters to open the West Bank to
Jewish settlement.”

63. The Zionists have not failed to accuse the
Palestine Liberation Organization of inciting the
Palestinians under occupation; Is not this adear proof
that Palestinians, everywhere:and anywhere, including
those under Zioffist occupations ralIy to support their
soIe and legitimate representative, the 9LO? As a
matter of fact, the Palestinians organized a mass
demonstration on 27 January to announce their protest
against the hostile policy of the Government of the
United States when its representative here in the
Council utilized the veto to prove his Govemment’s.
loyalty to the Zionists and undermine a draft resoiution [S/119#.7]affirming the inalienable national rights
of the Palestinian people and the right of the Palestinian
to return to his homeland.

A Jewish settlement is established in the occupied
territories, and, while the Tel Aviv authorities would
like the world and the international community to
believe that they are opposed to such actions, we are
told that the army is there to protect the illegal settlers.
60. Despite their repeated denials, the Tel Aviv
authorities are still pursuing their persistent policy of
expropriation of Arab property and land for the
establishment of Jewish settlements. On 20 January,
the newspaper Yedior Ahawnor reported that the
Zionist minister of war, Shimon Peres, visited the
Gush Etzion settlement named Elazar, to the south
of Jerusalem. According to AI4Yamishmar of 11 January, Minister Peres was well received-when he visited
the Jewish settlements of Elan Moreh, nearsebastia,
and Ofra near RamaIlah. Again, the Tel Aviv Zionist
authorities would like to make the world believe that
they consider the establishment of these settlements
illegal. In addition to the illegal requisitioning of territory, these acts are designed to be racist in nature.
On Sunday, 14 March, the New York Sunday News
Magazine reported:

64. At this juncture I shall refrain from enumerating
the practices of the occupation-forces in my cuuntry,
practices which are violations of the Charter of the
United Nations, of resolutions adopted by the different
organs and agencies of the United Nations and of
human rights, practices and violations that have
prompted the United Nations to form a special committee to investigate the Israeli practices affecting the
human rights of the population of the occupied territories. As we. all know, the occupation authorities
7

refused to facilitate the task of that Special Committee
and prevented its members from fulfilling their task.
65. I shall not present to the Council a report of
conflicts that are derivatives. It is occupation and
foreign domination that should be considered. Occupation and foreign domination engender resistance. The
stronger the resistance, the more brutal and fierce are
the policy and the measures adopted by the occupation
force. In the case we are considering, the forces of
occupation rushed paratroopers and border police to
intervene in an attempt to contain and suppress the
uprising of my people. Shooting at demonstrators and
wounding of school children have been reported.
Prolonged occupation coupled with inhuman practices
affecting the human rights of the people has brought
the situation to its present grave state. At this stage it
is a confrontation between the occupation army, its
guns and paratroopers, on the one side, and mass
demonstrators and rock-throwing students on the
other; it is a confrontation between those who have
the power to impose a curfew and those who declare
general strikes in protest. It is a confrontation between
the military occupation authorities and the leadership,
the mayors, who resigned their posts in protest.
66. Again, the cause of all this is occupation, and it
is in this context that the Council should view the
present situation. A remedy should be sought through
the elimination of the cause, namely, termination of
occupation, the sooner the better.
67. One wonders whether the new wave of brutality
is-in any way connected with the proceedings and
deliberations taking place currently in the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People. A suggestion was made to the
Committee that it should initiate its work to enable the
Palestinians to exercise their rights by recommending
the return of the Palestinians to their homes and
property.. Is this latest wave a reply? Is it a signal,
is it the writing on the wall telling the Palestinian
people: “Stay away, otherwise paratroopers and guns
are awaiting your return”? One just wonders.
68. This Council is responsible. It must exercise its
powers, powers conferred upon it by the Charter,
powers cited in Article 36 or any other Article. It is
up to the Council to exercise its authority to fulfil
its responsibility.
69. On 12 January brother Farouk Khaddoumi,
member of the Executive Committee of the Palestine
Liberation Organization, addressed the Council and
declared:
“We want peace for us and for the Jews in
Palestine; we wish to stress, with the utmost sense
of responsibility, that the Security Council can
assume a basic and effective role if it applies the
Charter and compels the aggressors to put an end to
their aggressions. The time has come for the Security

Council to adopt a resolution which recognizes the
objective facts in the region, beginning with the
Pale.stine question and the necessity. of finding a
just solution to it so that our peop1.emay exercise
their inalienable rights in their homeland. The time
~hascome for the adoption of a ,resolution which
would rectify the error and which would rely on
practical, correct and effective means.for its implementation. Such a resolution would oontribute to
the relaxation of tension and to. the relization of
peace.
‘6. ..
“We wish to emphasize that a just and lasting
peace will not prevail in the Middle East unless and
until the historic, inalienable national rights of the
Palestinian people are fully realized and Palestine
resumes its historic role as a bridge between the
Arab States west and east of Suez and between
Africa and Asia.
“We await a decisive, effective resolution and
-meaningful measures from the Council, in accordance with Article 36 of the Charter, which would
consolidate, strengthen and implement General
Assembly resolutions 3236(XXIX) and 3376(XXX).
The PLO is prepared to participate in and contribute
to all international efforts based upon General
Assembly resolutions 3236(XXIX) and 3376 (XXX),
in order to bring peace with justice to all.
“Meanwhile, our people will continue its just
struggle by all legitimate means to attain its legitimate goals. When these are attained-hopefully with
this Council’s affirmative resolution-a just and
lasting peace will prevail in the Middle East.”
[1870th meeting,

paras. 180 and 187 to lS9.]

70. The PRESIDENT (interpret.ation from Fkvzch):
The next speaker is the representative of Egypt.
I invite him to take a seat at the Council. table.and to
make his statement.
71. Mr. ABDEL MEGUID (Egypt): A dangerous
situation of a very explosive nature prevails today in
the occupied Arab territories, especially in Arab
Jerusalem and the West Bank. This situation-has been
created by Israel’s intransigent policy of perpetuating
its occupation of Arab territories, in flagrant ,violation
of all. civilized international behaviour, as well as the
most basic norms of international law. A systematic
policy of terror and oppression is being carried out in
violation of the basic human rightsand freedoms of the
inhabitants of the occupied Arab territories, The
Palestinian population of the occupied territories is
once again being .subjected to the most brutal and
violent subjugation that has: ever befallen a whole
people. Curfews, mass arrests, detention without
trial and collective punishment have once more become
the daily lot of the Palestinian people in the occupied
territories. And yet, in spite of all these odds, including

the thousands of Israeli paratroopers and elite shock
troops being sent to Jerusalem and the- West Bank,
the people of the occupied territories are in open
rebellion against the tyranny of Israeli occupation.

tianity, acts such-as the arson of the Al-Aqsa Mosque
and various acts of vandalism directed at the AlQiyama Church, the oldest Christian church in
Jerusalem.

72. The Security Council has on many past occasions
been subjected to the hollow Israeli allegation that the
Palestinian people, the inhabitants of Arab Jerusalem,
the West Bank and Gaza, are in total harmony with the
Israeli occupation authorities, that they fully cooperate with them and are most content to live under
Israeli occupation and subjugation. The fallacy of such
contentions is self evident today, as it has always
been for those who cared to judge for themselves.
The uprising of the Palestinian people in the occupied
territories for the umpteenth time, in the face of
extreme military violence and repression, is the reply
of the valiant Palestinian people to such preposterous
Israeli allegations.

77. The Security Council in its resolution 237 (1967)
called upon Israel to ensure the safety, welfare and
security of the inhabitants of the areas where military
operations have taken place. and to facilitate the
return of those inhabitants who have fled the areas
since the outbreak of hostilities. What was the response
of Israel to this resolution? Only terror and reprisals
against the people of Gaza and the West Bank.
78. The General Assembly also decided unanimously,
with the exception of the lone vote of Israel, that the
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949,*
applies to all Arab territories occupied since 1967
and obliges Israel to respect the rights of the people
of those territories under occupation until .a peaceful
and just settlement is reached according to which
those territories may be returned to their lawful
owners. Accordingly, all measures undertaken by
Israel are null and void.

73. The world at large, and Israel in particular,
should have learned by now that there exists no such
thing as a benign occupation. The increasing resistance
to ‘occupation will continue until the rights of the
Palestinian people are vindicated. No amount of
terror, suppression and violence will ever put out
the flame of the ‘indomitable spirit of the Palestinian
people in their just struggle to attain their freedom.

79. The Security Council, by its various resolutions,
including resolution 298 (1971), has unequivocally
stated that all legislative and administrative actions
taken by Israel with a view to changing the status
of the city of Jerusalem, whether by the appropriation
of land and properties or by the transfer of populations,
were all totally null and void, for such actions that
stem from an illegal situation are in themselves
illegal.

74. The Government and people of Egypt fully support the just and glorious struggle that is now being
launched by the Palestinian people in the occupied
Arab territories with such courage and determination.
75. For the first time in the protracted history of the
Middle East conflict the Council is debating the situation existing in the occupied Arab territories. We deem
it to be of the utmost importance that in its deliberations the Council should bear in mind fully its grave
responsibilities of the maintenance of international
peace and security and pronounce itself categorically
opposed to the continuation of the illegal occupation
of the Arab territories. The international community
can no longer afford to acquiesce in the continuation
of the Israeli occupation of Arab territory.

80. Another aspect of the expansionist designs of
Israel is most clearly manifested in its policy of creating
new settlements in the occupied territories. After
forcibly evicting the inhabitants and embarking on a
relentless and ruthless policy of demolishing Arab
homes and whole villages, Israel establishes new
Israeli settlements in these vacated areas. In embarking
on such policies, Israel seems to be oblivious to
all the drastic changes that have taken place in the
world. Israel, a garrison-State society, has tried in vain
to create in Gaza a sort of bantustan integrated
within a Greater Israel. Israel and South Africa have
many things in common.

76. Since 1967 Israel has embarked on a systematic
policy of coercion and annihilation in the occupied
territories in order to change the demographic composition, physical character, institutional structure and
status of the occupied ,territories-in other words, a
policy of creeping annexation, As far back as l967
the General Assembly condemned Israel for the
actions taken to change the status of the city of
Jerusalem and called upon it to desist from any action
that would alter that status. Throughout this period,
both the General Assembly and the Security Council
have condemned and censured Israel for the acts and
measures taken by it that have caused very grave and
irreparable changesto the Holy City. Acts of vandalism
and sacrilege have been allowed to take place against
the sanctity of the Roiy Places of Islam and Chris-

81. During this time the world” has come to the
inevitable recognition. that the only viable way of
achieving a just and durable settlement in the Middle
East is by recognizing the inalienable right of the
Palestinian people to self-determination. Only through
the free expression of their own self-determination
can peace be achieved.
82. The problem before the Council in its real gravity
and scope extends beyond the harsh facts of Israel’s
policy of repression. It resides in the motive-indeed
the illusion-behind such a policy. Therein lies the
9

real danger. What is most beguiling and incredible is
that Israel to this present day and age still believes
that it can continue to repress the aspirations and deny
the rights of a whole people and at the same time claim
that it is in search of peace and is looking towards
the termination of the state of war.

88. The dangerous situation prevailing now in Arab
Jerusalem and the West Bank is a direct result of the
Israeli policy of intimidation and aggression against
the Palestinian people. The representative of the PLO
drew the attention of the President of the Council
to these acts in his letter of 23 February [S/12000].
In this letter he referred to recent Israeli violations
in occupied Arab Jerusalem, especially the irresponsible Israeli court ruling concerning the Al-Aqsa
Mosque, one of the holy places of Islam. Members
of the Israeli Municipal Council led groups of young
Israelis in their intrusion into the Al-Aqsa Mosque.
Needless to say, the inhabitants of Arab Jerusalem
strongly protested these events, but their protest was
met by ‘massive acts of reprisal and shooting at the
demonstrators by the occupation authorities.

83. Such illusions can only impede the processes of
peace, for at the core of the Middle East problem lies
the Palestinian question, and without the recognition
of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people
there can be no just and lasting settlement in the
Middle East. The world has recognized this reality
at last, though Israel still remains steadfast in its
negative attitude.
84. In its reolution 267 (1969) the Security Council
censured “in the strongest terms all measures taken to
change the status of the City of Jerusalem’* and, among
other decisions, determined that “in the event of a
negative response... from Israel, the Security Council
shall reconvene without delay to consider what further
action should be taken in this matter”.

89. One may expect that the Israeli Government
or its representative will try to minimize the indignation
of the international community concerning its measures
in Jerusalem and the rest of the occupied territories
by claiming that the Israeli Government appealed to
the Supreme Court regarding the decision of the
Magistrate’s Court and that the Supreme Court has
accepted this appeal. The problem,is not a decision of
the Supreme Court or a lower court, because the decisions of any of these courts could have been otherwise, which means that the tights of the Palestinian
people are at the whim or mercy of Israeli courts.

85. But less than two months after the adoption of
this resolution, the world was shocked by the burning
of the holy Al-Aqsa Mosque in Jerusalem on 21 August,
under the military occupation of Israel. The barbaric
act of arson was condemned in the strongest terms
in various quarters and by peace-loving countries. The
Council, in its resolution 271 (1968), recognized that

90. This is a clear-cut manoeuvre exactly like. the one
reported yesterday by news agencies, quoting Israeli
authorities, whereby some-I repeat, some--of the
Israeli troops in Al-Khalil have been withdrawn. Most
of us are sure that once the Security Council debate
ends, these same “some troops” will return to the city
with more brutality. Accordingly, the problem is riot a
court decision or the fictitious wlthdrawal of some
troops. It is more fundamentab it is the problem of
occupation-occupation by force and the denial of the
simpIest human rights to the inhabitants of theoccupied
territories. Israel has to face facts and reality and deal
with the core of the problem instead of reverting to
manceuvres. Let us put the record straight once and
for all.

“any act of destruction or profanation of the Holy
Places, religious buildings and sites in Jerusalem or
any encouragement of, or connivance at, any such
acts may seriously endanger international peace and
security.”
The Council further determined that
“the execrable act of [destruction] and profanation
of the Holy Al-Aqsa Mosque emphasizes the immediate necessity of Israel’s desisting from acting in
violation of [Security Council and General Assembly] resolutions and rescinding forthwith all
measures and actions taken by it designed to alter
the status of Jerusalem.”

91. In view of this dangerous development, a delegation representing 42 States members of- the Islamic
Conference met with the Secretary-General on 2,March
to discuss the serious situation, which is in complete
vioiation of numerous resolutions of the Security
Council and the General AssembIy concerning
Jerusalem.

86. Israel bears all the resbonsibiiitv for the dangerous situation it is still creatmg in the-occupied territories, responsibility for the death of innocent human
beings and for the wanton destruction and havoc it is
creating in the area, as well as responsibility for all
future developments that may arise out of such flagrant
violation of international norms.

92. But the situation deteriorated further as a result
of Israel’s continuing policy of ignoring the warnings
of the international community and United Nations
resolutions, It continued arrestinginhabitants of Arab
Jerusalem and other parts of the occupied West Bank.
This prompted the members ofthe.IsIamic Conference
to meet again, on 12 March, and to issue a statement
[S/120123 concerning the various aspects of Israeli

87. We have just heard the representative of the
Palestine Liberation Organization, whom we warmly
welcome into our midst, present the bare facts that
indict the Israeli policy in Jerusalem and the rest of
the occupied territories.
10

policy aginst the Arab inhabitants. of Jerusalem. They
requested in their statement that the President of the
Security Council and the Secretary-General
keep
under their urgent attention the situation in Jerusalem
and, in the rest of the occupied territories-a
situation which might be aggravated. They reaffirmed that
immediate steps must be taken in order to stop such
violations and defiance of Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions on Jerusalem and to rescind
measures already taken by the occupation authorities
in violation of those resolutions.
93. On behalf of the Egyptian people and Govemment, let me hail the glorious and heroic struggle of
our Arab brothers in the occupied territories, who
are acting in the true spirit of the firm Arab determination to liberate their sacred homeland from the yoke
of colonialism
and illegal occupation. They are not
alone; this is also our struggle. We firmly believe, with
them, in the inevitability
of victory in this most
sacred cause. Their heroic stand in the face of the
brutality and repressionof the Israeli occupation forces
forms a logical sequence to the spirit of the October
war and is further proof of our unrelenting determination to continue the just struggle against occupation
and repression. The courageous stand of the Palestinian
people has proven to be one of the most decisive
weapons against all Israeli mancnuvres aimed at
perpetuating the state of neither peace nor war in our
area. In October 1973 the world finally awakened to
the stark reaiization that the Arab people were intent
at all costs on liberating all their territories and restoring
the inalienable Palestinian rights. No sacrifice would be
considered too great for the achievement
of these
sacred goals.
94. It is evident that Egypt will spare absolutely no
effort in order to attain that national objective as soon
as possible by all means within its power, whatever
the sacrifices it may have to bear and the difficulties
it may have to encounter. In so doing, Egypt reiterates
its firm belief that peace cannot prevail in our region
unless Israel withdraws from all the occupied Arab
territories,
including Arab Jerusalem, and unless it
recognizes the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian
people. We are confident that the Palestinian question
should be considered in the context of the constant
and necessary efforts to preserve international
peace
and security, a question of top priority which must be
based on justice.
95. There can be no escaping the fact that if Israel
persists in its present policy of brutal repression and
coercion, then it will be solely responsible for the
deterioration
of the situation in the Middle East and
the disruption of the processes of peace. These Israeli
measures and coercive policies are in total eontradiction to the statements and declarations
by Israeli
leaders alleging that they are seeking an end to the
state of war and are desirous of achieving peace.
Ironically enough, these very measures and policies
succeed only in circumventing
and destroying all
potential for peace.

96. Egypt firmly believes in the necessity of achieving
a just and durable peace in the Middle East. And this,
in our view, cannot be achieved except through the
liberation of all the occupied Arab territories and the
restoration of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people. With this same firm belief, Egypt will remain
steadfast in its opposition to Israeli threats and policies
against our people in the occupied
territories,
especially in the West Bank.
97. A few years ago the Palestinian people in Gaza
had physically to endure similar Israeli brutalities.
Oppression, coercion and detention were then the
key words, as they are the grim realities of today.
98. The Palestinians are being driven from their own
land by the cruel policies of the Israeli Government.
They are forced to leave their homes or to remain in
what are. becoming veritable concentration
camps.
Shorn of their homes and farms for over 20 years, they
now face the prospect of being parcelled out in small
groups throughout the occupied territories, the tragic
by-product of the realization of Israel’s ethnic imperialism.
99. In fact, the story of the brutal Israeli policy is
not a new one. Upon the establishment
of Israel in
May 1948, the first legislative act of Israeli authorities
was the enactment of the Law of Administration
Ordinance, which empowered the Minister of Defence
to issue emergency regulations that would restrict
movement of the Arab inhabitants and control all other
human liberties.
100. We may recall here what happened in October
1948, when the villagers of Ikret in western Galilee
were removed from their village and told that their
removal was necessary for security reasons and that
they would be allowed to return to their homes within
15 days. But the 15-day period dragged on into months
and then into years. Tired of broken promises, the
villagers petitioned the court of justice, and the verdict
was an order to the Israeli army to permit the return
of the villagers. The army responded by destroying
every house in the village, choosing Christmas Day
1951 for their action. Even the church was not spared,
and, to add insult to injury, the church bell was
removed to a nearby Jewish settlement and used, not
to call people to prayer, but to announce the time for
meals. Archbishop George Hakim, head of the Greek
Catholic community in Israeli-occupied territory, made
a strong protest to the Israeli authorities against this
unwarranted
wholesale destruction
of a Catholic
village and the desecration of its church.
101. Two years later, in September
1953, the
Christian inhabitants of Kafr Bir’im suffered the same
fate. Other similar expulsions of the population and
demolition of Arab villages occurred in Sha’b, Birwa,
Umm El-Faraj, and Mujeidal. Other Christian churches
as well as Moslem mosques were destroyed in other
parts of the country without regard to the sanctity or

historical value of those holy places. Even the last
resting places of the dead were not left alone. In 1954
and 1959 the Christian cemetery in Jerusalem was
desecrated by vandals and crosses were smashed and
trampled underfoot.

103. In view of the dangerous situation that Israel
has created in the occupied Arab territories, in flagrant
violation of its legal obligations emanating from the
norms of international
law and the fourth Geneva
Convention,
we believe that the Security Council
should pronounce itself in no uncertain terms by
adopting a resolution calling for the exercise- by the
Palestinian people of the right to self-determination,
condemning Israel’s brutal and illegal actions in the
occupied Arab territories and calling for immediate and
effective steps to put an end to these violations and
to rescinding all previous measures taken by the.
occupation authorities in Jerusalem and in the West
Bank.

102. On the 20th of this month the Deputy Prime
Minister and Foreign Minister of Egypt, Mr. Ismail
Fahmy, declared that Egypt holds Israel fully responsible for all the dangerous consequences of its
terrorist actions in Jerusalem and the West Bank.
He added that the Israeli expansionist policy, which
runs counter to the declared objectives of the international community to establish a just and lasting peace
in the Middle East, will jeopardize the chances of
peace and could lead us back to the volatile and
precarious situation which existed in the area. He
stated that the only viable solution to the existing
dangerous situation that threatens the very opportunities for peace in the area is for the Security Council to adopt a resolution that calls for the exercise by
the Palestinian people of its right to self-determination
in accordance with the principles of the United Nations
and its relevant resolutions, and to take all necessary
measures to ensure that Israel shall desist forthwith
from its present irrational policy that contravenes the
world quest for peace. The Foreign Minister stressed
the unanimous position taken by the General Assembly
in regard to the applicability
of the fourth Geneva
Convention2 to the occupied Arab territories. Israel,
he stated, “has a continuing
legal obligation
to
preserve the condition in these territories intact, until
they are restored fully to their legitimate owners”.

104. The responsibility that the Council bears in this
dangerous situation is indeed very grave. In view of the
prevailing situation, the world can ill afford inaction by
the Council. We cannot stand idle in the face of Israeli
terrorist action against the inhabitant-s of the occupied
Arab territories. They are, indeed, not alone on the
battlefield: Egypt, its people and Government,
stand
whole-heartedly
with them. Every action aimed at
the forces of tyranny and repression is a victory for
freedom everywhere.
The meeting

rose at 1.35 p.m.

Notes
’ New York, David McKay Company, Inc., 1%7.
z United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75,p. 287.

i2

*’

:.
i

.,

.,:,

,”

..
.

_‘_.’

.

.
.I,

United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS UNIES

Les publications dcs Nations Unies sent en vente dans IS tibrairks et lcs agences d@sitair~ du
monde entier. Idfotmezvous aup& de votre librahzouadressez-vou
il : Nations U&s. Section
de.svezttes.New York ou Get&e.
KAIE

IIOJIYIEITb

N3.4AHHII

OPI’AHU3AI@iEf

OE%E~BHEHHMX

HAU&iElr

HJAaRHR
OpraRHJaqHH
OCheAUHeHHblX
HauHR y1oxtxio I(YUIHTL B KHHXCKblX
uara3max u arewrcmax
no Bcex pattoaax unpa. Iiaaoxme cnpamm 06 u3namifr~
B
Earner.9 xxmcRor4 Mamzm*e *mf mium~e no anpecy : Opranmamiff Oh.e&tmeetlbrx
HaqnR, Cexqsifi no npoxme A3AamR. Hbso-RopK
unti 3SCeneKa.

COMO CONSEGUIR PURLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS

Las publicacioncs de hs Naciones Unidas &n-en wnta en Iiimias y casas distribuidotas en
todas partes de1mtmdo. ConsuIte a su librcro o dirfjase a: Nadoncs Unidas, Secci6rt de Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

._

Litho in United Nations, New York

00300

83-6080%4iqust

19844,500

.
