A /77/PV.87

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-seventh session

87th plenary meeting

Friday, 30 June 2023, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kőrösi  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Hungary)

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Reports of the Fifth Committee
The President: The General Assembly will now
consider the reports of the Fifth Committee on agenda
items 135, 151 to 153, 155, 156, 159, 160, 162, 163 (a)
and (b), 164, 165, 167 and 136. The Committee has also
submitted a report on sub-item (a) of agenda item 118.
Before proceeding further, I would like to emphasize
to delegates that as the Committee concluded its work
today, its reports are available in English only. It is my
understanding that they will be issued in all official
languages as soon as possible. I thank everyone for
their understanding.
The positions of delegations regarding the
recommendations of the Committee have been made
clear in the Committee and are reflected in the relevant
official records. If there is no proposal under rule 66 of
the rules of procedure, I shall therefore take it that the
General Assembly decides not to discuss the reports of
the Committee that are before the Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The President: Statements will therefore be
limited to explanations of vote or position. I would like
to remind members that in accordance with General
Assembly decision 34/401, a delegation should as far as
possible explain its vote or position only once, that is,
either in the Committee or in plenary meeting, unless
that delegation’s vote in plenary meeting is different
from its vote in the Committee, and that explanations

of vote or position are limited to 10 minutes and should
be made by delegations from their seats. When there are
multiple proposals under an agenda item, statements in
explanation of vote before the voting on any or all of
them should be made in one intervention, followed by
action on all of them, one by one. Therefore, there will
be an opportunity for statements in explanation of vote
after the voting on any or all of them in one intervention.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the
Committee, I would like to advise representatives that
we will proceed to take decisions in the same manner
as was done in the Committee, unless the Secretariat is
notified otherwise in advance. That means that when
recorded votes are taken, we will do the same as was
done in the Committee. I should also hope that we will
proceed to adopt without a vote those recommendations
that were adopted without a vote in the Committee.
The results of the voting will be uploaded to the
e-deleGATE portal, under “Plenary announcements”. I
would also like to remind Members that any corrections
to the voting intentions of delegations after the voting
has concluded should be submitted directly to the
Secretariat at the end of the meeting and uploaded to the
e-deleGATE portal. In that regard, I count on everyone’s
cooperation in refraining from any interruptions to
our proceedings.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-19017 (E)

*2319017*

A/77/PV.87

Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The President: I now invite the attention of the
General Assembly to the report of the Fifth Committee
submitted under sub-item (a) of agenda item 118, entitled
“Appointment of members of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions” (A/77/567/
Add.1).
Members will recall that the General Assembly
concluded its consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda
item 118 at its 34th plenary meeting, on 15 November
2022. In order for the Assembly to consider the report
of the Committee, it will be necessary to reopen
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 118.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to reopen consideration of sub-item (a) of
agenda item 118?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 118 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(a) Appointment of members of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/77/567/Add.1)
The President: The General Assembly will now
consider the report of the Committee on sub-item (a)
of agenda item 118, entitled “Appointment of members
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions”.
In its report, the Committee recommends that the
General Assembly appoint Minhong Yi of the Republic
of Korea as a member of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions for a term
of office beginning on 31 July 2023 and ending on
31 December 2025.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to appoint Minhong Yi as a member of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
for a term of office beginning on 31 July 2023?
It was so decided (decision 77/408 B).
2/29

30/06/2023

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (a) of agenda item 118?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 135
Financial reports and audited financial statements,
and reports of the Board of Auditors
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/77/658/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Committee in
paragraph 6 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution
entitled “Financial reports and audited financial
statements, and reports of the Board of Auditors”.
The Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted
(resolution 77/253 B).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 135.
Agenda item 151
Administrative and budgetary aspects of the
financing of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/77/924)
The President: The Assembly has before it four
draft resolutions recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 15 of its report. We will now take a
decision on draft resolutions I through IV, one by one.
The Assembly will first take a decision on draft
resolution I, entitled “Triennial review of the rates and
standards for reimbursement to Member States for
contingent-owned equipment”, the text of which, for the
time being, is contained in document A/C.5/77/L.40.
The Committee adopted the draft resolution without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do likewise?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 77/303).
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution II, entitled “Support account
23-19017

30/06/2023

A/77/PV.87

for peacekeeping operations”, the text of which, for the
time being, is contained in document A/C.5/77/L.42.
The Committee adopted the draft resolution without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 77/304).
The President: We will now turn to draft resolution
III, entitled “Financing of the United Nations Logistics
Base at Brindisi, Italy”, the text of which, for the time
being, is contained in document A/C.5/77/L.43. The
Committee adopted the draft resolution without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution III was adopted
(resolution 77/305).

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/77/930)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Committee in paragraph
6 of its report. The text of the draft resolution, for the
time being, is contained in document A/C.5/77/L.52.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?

The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 153.
Agenda item 155
Financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping
Force in Cyprus
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/77/925)

Draft resolution IV was adopted
(resolution 77/306).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 151.
Agenda item 152
Financing of the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/77/890/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Committee in paragraph
8 of its report. The text of the draft resolution, for the
time being, is contained in document A/C.5/77/L.45,
as orally amended in the Committee. The Assembly
will now take a decision on the draft resolution. The
Committee adopted the draft resolution without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
was

Financing of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic

The draft resolution was adopted
(resolution 77/307).

The President: Next, we turn to draft resolution
IV, entitled “Financing of the Regional Service Centre
in Entebbe, Uganda”, the text of which, for the time
being, is contained in document A/C.5/77/L.44. The
Committee adopted the draft resolution without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?

The draft resolution
(resolution 77/290 B).

Agenda item 153 (continued)

adopted

The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 152.

The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Committee in paragraph
6 of its report. The text of the draft resolution, for the
time being, is contained in document A/C.5/77/L.46.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted
(resolution 77/308).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 155.
Agenda item 156
Financing of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/77/926)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Committee in paragraph
8 of its report. The text of the draft resolution, for the
time being, is contained in document A/C.5/77/L.47,

23-190173/29

A/77/PV.87

as orally amended in the Committee. The Assembly
will now take a decision on the draft resolution. The
Committee adopted the draft resolution without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted
(resolution 77/309).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 156.
Agenda item 159
Financing of the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/77/923)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Committee in paragraph
13 of its report. The text of the draft resolution, for the
time being, is contained in document A/C.5/77/L.39.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Committee adopted it without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?

30/06/2023

Agenda item 162
Financing of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/77/931)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Committee in
paragraph 6 of its report, the text of which, for the time
being, is contained in document A/C.5/77/L.53.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted
(resolution 77/312).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 162.
Agenda item 163 (continued)
Financing of the United Nations peacekeeping
forces in the Middle East

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
77/310).

(a) United Nations Disengagement Observer Force

The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 159.

The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Committee in
paragraph 6 of its report, the text of which, for the time
being, is contained in document A/C.5/77/L.54.

Agenda item 160
Financing of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/77/927)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Committee in
paragraph 6 of its report, the text of which, for the time
being, is contained in document A/C.5/77/L.48.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted
(resolution 77/311).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 160.
4/29

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/77/891/Add.1)

We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution, entitled “Financing of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force”. The Committee
adopted the draft resolution without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted
(resolution 77/291 B).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda
item 163.
(b) United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/77/932)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Committee in
paragraph 13 of its report, the text of which, for the
time being, is contained in document A/C.5/77/L.38,
23-19017

30/06/2023

as orally amended and technically updated in the
Committee. Furthermore, the Secretariat has informed
me that as a result of the technical update of paragraph
16, that paragraph would read as follows:
“Decides to appropriate to the special account
for the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
the amount of 585,940,100 dollars for the period
from 1 July 2023 to 30 June 2024, inclusive of
537,367,000 dollars for the maintenance of the
Force, 41,460,000 dollars for the support account
for peacekeeping operations and 7,113,100 dollars
for the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi,
Italy”.
The related blanks of paragraphs 17, 18, 19 and 20
would be populated accordingly.
I now give the floor to the representative of Israel.
Ms. Furman (Israel): Israel has maintained and
continues to maintain excellent relations with all
peacekeeping forces in our region, including the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, and we continually
demonstrate our unequivocal support for United
Nations peacekeeping operations as a whole.
The fourth preambular paragraph and paragraphs
4, 5 and 14 introduced in document A/C.5/77/L.38
are nothing more than an attempt to insert a political
agenda into an otherwise non-political discussion
of a United Nations peacekeeping mission’s budget.
Therefore, my delegation requests the deletion of the
fourth preambular paragraph and paragraphs 4, 5 and
14 from the draft resolution. We urge Member States to
join Israel in supporting those deletions.
In case a recorded vote is requested on our request
for deletion, I call on all Member States to vote in
favour of the deletion of those paragraphs.
The President: The representative of Israel has
proposed an oral amendment to the draft resolution.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution,
entitled “Financing of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon”.
In accordance with rule 90 of the rules of procedure,
the Assembly will first take a decision on the oral
amendment proposed by the representative of Israel. A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

A/77/PV.87

In favour:
Canada, Israel, United States of America
Against:
Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bhutan, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Cambodia, Chile, China, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Gambia, Guyana, Honduras, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Kenya,
Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Myanmar, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Pakistan, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Singapore, South Africa, South
Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Türkiye, Uganda, United
Arab Emirates, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Congo, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Hungary, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Malta,
Monaco,
Netherlands
(Kingdom of the), New Zealand, North Macedonia,
Norway, Panama, Poland, Portugal, Republic
of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San
Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay
The oral amendment to draft resolution
A/C.5/77/L.38 was rejected by 67 votes to 3, with
49 abstentions.
The President: Since the oral amendment proposed
by the representative of Israel was not adopted, we
shall proceed to take a decision on the draft resolution
recommended in the report of the Committee entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

23-190175/29

A/77/PV.87

In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Belgium, Bhutan, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy,
Japan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Morocco, Myanmar, Nepal, Netherlands
(Kingdom of the), New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Pakistan,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, South
Sudan, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and
Tobago, Türkiye, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Canada, Israel, United States of America
Abstaining:
Congo
The draft resolution was adopted by 120 votes to 3,
with 1 abstention (resolution 77/313).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Tunisia informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda
item 163.
6/29

30/06/2023

Agenda item 164 (continued)
Financing of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/77/892/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Committee in
its report. The text of the draft resolution, for the time
being, is contained in document A/C.5/77/L.49, as
orally amended in the Committee.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted
(resolution 77/292 B).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 164.
Agenda item 165
Financing of the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/77/928)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Committee in its report.
The text of the draft resolution, for the time being, is
contained in document A/C.5/77/L.50.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Committee adopted the draft resolution without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted
(resolution 77/314).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 165.
Agenda item 167
Financing of the activities arising from
Security Council resolution 1863 (2009)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/77/929)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Committee in
its report. The text of the draft resolution, for the time
23-19017

30/06/2023

being, is contained in document A/C.5/77/L.51, as
orally amended in the Committee.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Committee adopted the draft resolution without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted
(resolution 77/315).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 167.
Agenda item 136 (continued)
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/77/673/Add.2)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
decision recommended by the Committee in its report.
The text of the draft decision, for the time being, is
contained in document A/C.5/77/L.55.
We will now take action on the draft decision
entitled “Questions deferred for future consideration”.
The Committee adopted the draft decision without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do likewise?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 77/548 C).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 136.
The General Assembly has thus concluded its
consideration of all the reports of the Committee
before it.
Agenda item 27 (continued):
Report of the Security Council
The President: The General Assembly will resume
its consideration of agenda item 27 entitled “Report of
the Security Council”, to hear the remaining speakers
in the debate.
Mr. Hadjichrysanthou (Cyprus): I would start
by thanking the President of the Security Council
for the month of June, Ambassador Nusseibeih for
her presentation of the annual report of the Security
Council for 2022 (A/77/2) (see A/77/PV.86).

A/77/PV.87

I would like to reiterate the importance of this
report to my delegation, as it is one of the few tools that
we have at our disposal that reflects the fact that the
Council exercises its functions on behalf of the United
Nations membership as a whole. For this reason, the
report of the Security Council should adopt a more
cooperative approach based on transparency and
complementarity with respect to the General Assembly
in order to achieve the overarching goals of the United
Nations. We are cognizant of the amount of time and
labour that goes into preparing this report, constraining
its issuance at an early date.
Mr. Maniratanga (Burundi), Vice-President, took
the Chair.
While the overview of the Council’s work
provided by the report is useful, we believe that the
membership would benefit from a more substantive and
analytical report.
In that regard, we reiterate our conviction that the
report should include first, a substantive depiction of
where the consideration of each agenda item stands;
secondly, an analysis of the state of each conflict
dealt with by the Council, including the impact that
the Council action has had on the conflict; thirdly,
an assessment concerning implementation of Council
decisions and compliance of relevant actors with them;
fourthly, an assessment of the Council’s performance in
fulfilling core aspects of its mandate, such as upholding
the prohibition of the use of force; and fifthly, a forwardlooking evaluation as to how the Council will ensure
the peaceful settlement of each dispute before it.
Moreover, we believe that the report could provide
first, strategic insights concerning overall conflict
trends and patterns, including in relation to root causes
and possible ways of making the approach of the
Council more comprehensive; secondly, solutions to
typical consequences of conflict, such as displacement
of populations, including of a protracted nature, and
consequent violations of rights and demographic
engineering in conflict-affected areas; and thirdly, a
special chapter on peace and justice, aiming at clarity
regarding the levels of impunity for atrocity crimes in
armed conflict, including sexual violence and strategies
to eliminate it.
My delegation welcomes the two resolutions
adopted by the Council in this reporting cycle on
Cyprus, including resolution 2674 (2023), which renews
the mandate of the United Nations Force in Cyprus, in

23-190177/29

A/77/PV.87

accordance with Security Council resolution 186 (1964).
The Cyprus question is one of the oldest conflicts on the
Organization’s agenda. It remains unsolved because of
the blatant disregard for the numerous relevant Council
resolutions and decisions, without consequence. It is
therefore imperative that the Security Council show
leadership, both by enforcing its own resolutions and
by holding those in breach accountable. Allowing the
effects of the unlawful use of force against Cyprus
to solidify not only encourages the creation of more
faits accompli on the ground, but also challenges the
credibility of the Council.
Lastly, I must underline that the Council needs to
improve the way it relates to Member States directly
concerned or affected by the items on its agenda,
as well as Member States hosting United Nations
peacekeeping operations.
Mr. Alajmi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to express my thanks and
appreciation for holding this meeting on the report
submitted by the Security Council to the General
Assembly (A/77/2), which addressed a number of items
and topics inscribed on the Council’s agenda during
the period under consideration. Those include political,
security, economic, humanitarian and environmental
issues, both as emergency and chronic. We find that the
content has mostly focused on the narrative nature of
the proceedings of the meetings and lacks the analysis
and details necessary to reflect the points of view
and aspirations of the States Members of the United
Nations regarding the full implementation of United
Nations resolutions.
The existence and persistence of certain issues
on the Security Council’s agenda for long periods of
time, in some cases more than 75 years, such as the
just Palestinian question, should prompt us to seriously
consider the causes for the successive failures in
supporting the right of the free Palestinian people to
achieve their legitimate demands to end the colonial
occupation and establish their independent State, with
Jerusalem as its capital, in accordance with the various
resolutions and outcomes of the various entities of the
United Nations, particularly the Security Council,
which is entrusted by the Charter of the United Nations
with the responsibility of maintaining international
peace and security.
The clear obstacles limiting the ability of the
Council to live up to its main responsibilities in the light
8/29

30/06/2023

of the growing threats and non-traditional challenges
the world is facing drive us to support the efforts of
many Member States to improve the working methods
of the Security Council, as well as to increase the
momentum of intergovernmental negotiations aimed at
reforming that important United Nations organ.
The State of Kuwait has joined and supported
a number of innovative initiatives in the context
of those reform efforts, such as the signing of the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group’s
code of conduct, in which Council members pledge
not to object to draft resolutions involving crimes
against humanity, genocide and war crimes. We also
acceded to the French-Mexican initiative that calls
for voluntary abstention from using the veto power
in crimes against humanity. In addition, the State of
Kuwait, alongside countries of the so-called core group
led by Liechtenstein, proposed a draft resolution to the
General Assembly on the veto initiative. It was adopted
by consensus as resolution 76/262. It stipulates the
convening of a debate of the General Assembly within
10 working days when a veto is used in the Security
Council. We believe that this historic resolution
will enhance the role of the General Assembly while
enabling its work and promoting transparency and
accountability in the relationship between the General
Assembly and the Security Council.
In the context of the intergovernmental negotiations
to reform the Security Council, we noted positive
developments during this session reflecting the desire
of many Member States to support this important
process by adopting a new dimension, represented
in conciliatory procedures, through the creation of
a website that displays all the documents submitted
during the session, as well as the webcast and live
stream of the governmental negotiations so as to enable
a closer follow-up by all Member States and others who
are interested in this vital process.
Through the experience gained by the State of
Kuwait and its non-permanent membership in the
Security Council for the period 2018-2019, we believe
that a tangible and effective change in the Council’s
working methods can be achieved only through the
cooperation and genuine desire of all its members. We
therefore hope to see greater flexibility and innovation
in order to ensure greater effectiveness, efficiency and
transparency of the Council. During our term on the
Council, we cooperated with the other members for the
publication of document S/2019/997, relating to the time
23-19017

30/06/2023

A/77/PV.87

frames for the preparation of the annual report of the
Security Council submitted to the General Assembly,
in order to ensure its discussion.
In conclusion, we reiterate the State of Kuwait’s
support for a more transparent, competent and
accountable Security Council, including in the context
of the work of the Security Council Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions, as well as the intergovernmental reform
process. We affirm our readiness to support those efforts
in any way possible in order to fulfil the aspirations
for the full implementation of the resolutions of the
Security Council, in its capacity as the organ charged
with maintaining international peace and security.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, my delegation thanks Her
Excellency Ambassador Lana Nusseibeh, Permanent
Representative of the United Arab Emirates, for
her presentation of the annual report of the Security
Council for 2022 (A/77/2).
The annual reports of the Security Council
constitute an important tool to reflect the transparency
of the Council’s work. They also provide an opportunity
for Member States to assess the work undertaken by the
Council on their behalf.
The majority of Member States have called for an
improvement in the content of the Security Council’s
reports to the General Assembly, notably the need to
include in them information and details of the Council’s
work and to not include descriptive narratives so that
an objective and comprehensive assessment of the
Council’s activities pursuant to the Charter of the
United Nations can be carried out.
My delegation
following remarks.

would

like

to

reiterate

the

First, there is a need to put an end to the provisional
rules of procedure and to definitively adopt rules of
procedure. It is necessary to respect the Council’s
working methods and to ensure that they are not
used in a selective or biased manner according to the
whims of certain Member States or their own interests,
which hinders the Council’s ability to shoulder its
responsibilities with efficiency and effectiveness
and negatively affects its capabilities to resolve
various conflicts.
Second, the Security Council must work with
resolve to fulfil its mandate for the maintenance of

international peace and security with regard to highly
important existential issues such as the Palestinian
question and the ongoing occupation by Israel of Arab
territories, including the Syrian Golan and southern
Lebanon. Israel continues its aggression against those
territories and the sovereignty of their peoples living
under the yoke of the Israeli occupation owing to the
impunity afforded to it by one permanent member of
the Security Council and its veto with regard to Israel.
Third, my delegation reiterates the importance of
Security Council reform which must ensure equitable
geographical representation and appropriate and fair
representation on the Council of developing States,
including Arab States, so that their voices can be heard
and they can exercise their sovereign and equal rights,
as other States do, without exceptions or discrimination.
Fourth, it is incumbent on all members of the Security
Council, especially when a State holds the presidency
of the Council, to professionally communicate with
non-permanent members when the Council considers
issues related to them. Council members must engage
in constructive dialogue with the States concerned
and take into account their concerns in the process of
drafting resolutions and issuing statements and not
isolate or exclude them.
Fifth, my delegation supports the idea of
reconsidering the penholder system and related
measures that could improve the effectiveness of the
Council’s work and ensure equal opportunities for
and active participation by all Council members in its
work. It would also prevent that noble task from being
misused by some Council members and from targeting
countries and violating their sovereignty. We also
believe that penholders must be neutral and objective
and must participate in consultations and constructive
dialogue with the countries whose matters are under
consideration by the Security Council. Penholders
should also reflect those countries’ concerns, especially
when the Council drafts documents on matters related
to those countries.
Sixth, the time and resources of the Security
Council must be used in an efficient manner. The
convening of repeated meetings on the situation in a
certain country within short period of time should be
avoided unless there is a dire need for that. It seems that
certain States are using those meetings as a platform to
bring pressure to bear on the country concerned and to
cause it harm.

23-190179/29

A/77/PV.87

Seventh, the Security Council must limit its
imposition of sanctions on countries and must be aware
of their humanitarian consequences and not view them
as an end in themselves, especially when it has been
proven that those most harmed by the sanctions are the
populations of those countries. Their populations suffer
because they are deprived of their right to life, food,
medical care, development and other human rights.
My eighth and final point is that a framework should
be established for the participation of representatives
of civil society and non-governmental organizations
in open meetings of the Security Council. That should
be done in accordance with clear criteria based on the
added value their participation brings to the Council’s
work through the provision of their expertise and
experiences. Those meetings should not be a platform
for harming or attacking a Member State or for
promoting a biased viewpoint or touting a falsified and
non-objective picture of the matter at hand.
Mr. Mythen (Ireland): Ireland aligns itself with
the statement delivered on behalf of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency Group. We welcome
the holding of this debate and thank the United Arab
Emirates, as President of the Security Council, for
presenting the Council’s annual report (A/77/2) to
the Assembly.
The presentation of this report today is about more
than ticking off a reporting obligation under the Charter
of the United Nations. It is a necessary opportunity for
Member States to assess the work that the Security
Council undertakes on their behalf. It is an essential
element in the relationship that must exist between the
two principal organs of the United Nations dealing with
peace and security.
The importance of that relationship was
demonstrated clearly last year when the Council failed
to act in the face of Russia’s illegal full-scale invasion
of Ukraine and when it referred a situation to the
General Assembly for the first time in 40 years. The
Assembly stepped up where the Council failed to uphold
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
to condemn the aggression and to support a return to
the path of diplomacy. Yet, it is a damning indictment
of the current state of the Council than the General
Assembly had to step in. The world urgently needs a
Security Council that is fit for purpose, a Council that
is more representative, transparent, effective, inclusive
and accountable to the wider membership. The longer
10/29

30/06/2023

reform is postponed, the more we risk undermining the
legitimacy of the Council and the United Nations as
a whole.
The report before us today makes a valuable
contribution to the transparency and accountability of
the Security Council, but there is room for improvement.
We believe the report lacks the kind of self-critical
analysis that would provide a basis for improving
how the Council operates. The first step, it is often
said, is to admit that one has a problem. We believe
the introductory narrative section should be expanded,
and should aim to assess the Council’s effectiveness in
carrying out its tasks, both in terms of how it functions
and more importantly how it addresses — or fails to
address — its core task of maintaining international
peace and security. We recognize that the requirement
for consensus among Council members may make
a frank assessment more difficult, but innovation is
possible. For example, the views of departing members
could be specifically cited without a need for unanimity
on their contributions.
Ireland also emphasizes the importance of
strengthening the Council’s engagement with regional
organizations, civil society and non-Council members.
Incorporating diverse perspectives and expertise can
only enrich the Council’s deliberations and enhance its
capacity to address complex challenges. We strongly
encourage the Council to invite those with human
rights and protection mandates, such as the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, to brief it on a more
regular basis.
While there are serious divisions in the Council,
progress can nevertheless be made on even the most
difficult issues. Progress can occur. We commend
the adoption of resolution 2664 (2022), for example,
co-penned by Ireland and the United States to provide
a cross-cutting humanitarian carveout for all sanctions
regimes. It shows that progress can be made and that
the Council can make important, impactful decisions in
even the most difficult of circumstances.
Mr. Tun (Myanmar): Let me begin by thanking
the President of the General Assembly for convening
today’s debate and the United Arab Emirates, as
President of the Security Council, for presenting the
Council’s annual report (A/77/2).
Today’s debate on the annual report provides a great
opportunity for the Council itself as well as for the whole
United Nations membership. It affords all Member
23-19017

30/06/2023

States a chance to assess the work of the Council and its
effectiveness, as well as its dysfunction, in responding
to existing and emerging threats to international peace
and security and making progress on the transparency
of its working methods. The members of the Security
Council, especially the permanent members, with their
special responsibility, should take this opportunity
to listen to the voices, suggestions and in some cases
the frustration of the United Nations membership
regarding the Council’s action or inaction. All the
States Members of the United Nations, by signing the
Charter of the United Nations, confer on the Security
Council the primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security. They therefore
expect the Council to be a reflection of collective
responsibility, since, by the terms of the Charter, and
specifically its Article 24, the Security Council acts
on their behalf. I therefore want to stress the letter and
the spirit of the Charter, which begins with “We the
peoples of the United Nations”.
The Security Council is not expected to dictate how
to resolve every domestic political or social dispute in
every Member States. However, in some situations with
regional and international ramifications, the Council’s
unwillingness or inability to act has had profound
consequences for the lives of millions of people. My
country, Myanmar, is a fine example of such situations.
Since the illegal military coup d’état in February 2021,
the Security Council has issued seven press statements
and one presidential statement (S/PRST/2021/5). In
December 2022, the Security Council took a historically
significant step by adopting its first-ever resolution,
resolution 2669 (2022), on Myanmar. However, if we
reflect objectively on the Security Council’s response
so far to the deteriorating situation there, it has been
discouraging to the people of Myanmar, who continue
to be relentlessly and violently assaulted by the
military junta.
Since the early days of the attempted illegal coup,
the Security Council has repeatedly called for the
immediate release of all who have been arbitrarily
detained, including President Win Myint and State
Counsellor Daw Aung San Suu Kyi. Yet they remain
hostages of the junta following sham trials. The Council
strongly condemned the junta’s violence against
peaceful protesters and called for restraint. Almost
every statement made by the Council over the past two
and half years was followed by more brutal violence on
the part of the military junta. In resolution 2669 (2022),

A/77/PV.87

the Council demanded an immediate end to all forms
of violence and called for the swift implementation
of the five-point consensus of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), among other
things. While we welcome and appreciate its statements
and resolution, we have seen that as far as the military
junta is concerned, each and every call of the Security
Council has fallen on deaf ears. The junta is waging
war on its own people. There has been no progress on
the implementation of the five-point consensus.
We need only consider the reality on the ground
to understand the worsening situation. As of today, the
junta has brutally killed more than 3,700 people. The
indiscriminate aerial and heavy-weapon attacks on the
civilian population and wholesale burning of residential
towns and villages continue and have displaced
more than 1.5 million people. Targeted killings of
civilians continue unabated with total impunity. One
of the worst massacres was the heinous targeted aerial
attack on a civilian gathering in Pazigyi village on
11 April this year, which killed nearly 200 civilians,
including children as young as a six-month-old baby.
The brutal attacks are not isolated incidents. These are
targeted attacks on the civilian population. They are
so widespread and systematic that the United Nations
Independent Investigative Mechanism for Myanmar
concluded that they could amount to crimes against
humanity and war crimes.
From all of those, one thing has become very clear.
We need decisive action from the Security Council to
save the lives of the people of Myanmar. Statements
and condemnation are evidently insufficient. We value
the important principle of close cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations.
Accordingly, we recognize the role of ASEAN and
support its Special Envoy in trying to find a solution
to the crisis in Myanmar. However, ASEAN alone is
not enough. All the ongoing efforts, including those of
ASEAN, need to be backed by the Security Council, with
enforceable actions with a particular focus on ending
the ongoing violence against the people. While we do
not expect a simple solution from the Security Council
for our devastating situation, it is not unreasonable for
the people of Myanmar to expect it to do something
to protect their lives. An argument that we frequently
hear is that we should not make the situation worse.
We could not agree more. Responding with the aim of
stopping atrocities against civilians and war crimes in
Myanmar will not make the situation worse. Holding

23-1901711/29

A/77/PV.87

30/06/2023

the perpetrators of international crimes accountable
will not make it worse. Ending military impunity will
not make it worse. In fact, doing so will go a long way
to creating an environment that is conducive to an
eventual resolution of the situation that accords with
our people’s aspirations.

understand the Security Council’s actions, debates and
resolutions. But we need more discussions and open
debates in order to hear the views and suggestions of the
United Nations membership. We need more meaningful
and concrete involvement of the membership in the
process of decision-making.

I therefore want to take this opportunity to appeal
once again to the Security Council to pay serious
attention to the expectations and aspirations of the
people of Myanmar and follow up by taking action to
enforce the implementation of resolution 2669 (2022),
in order to save the lives of the people of Myanmar.

While the Security Council’s comprehensive report
enhances the Council’s accountability, there is still
much to be done to ensure that Member States’ inputs
are duly considered and taken on board. Since Security
Council resolutions are binding on all Member States,
they require compliance in support of the rule of law.
Respect for international law should be at the heart of
the Security Council’s agenda and working methods. I
would like to take this opportunity to make a comment
on the veto initiative. We appreciate that the General
Assembly has become a forum for airing Member
States’ sentiments and perspectives. However, we
should be able to find ways to ensure that this exercise
is not just a talking shop but an avenue to achieving
concrete outcomes and actions.

Mr. Peñaranda (Philippines): The Philippines
thanks the Security Council for the submission of its
annual report (A/77/2) to the General Assembly. We
also join others in thanking the United Arab Emirates
for introducing the report, Brazil for preparing it and
the Swiss presidency of the Council for finalizing it.
Under Article 24, paragraph 3, of the Charter of
the United Nations, the Security Council must submit
an annual report to the General Assembly for its
consideration, with the submission of the annual report
being the only clear obligation that the Council has to
the Assembly under the Charter. With regard to the
relationship between the Council and the Assembly, the
Philippines has always supported their respective roles
on international peace and security, and we reaffirm
the role and authority of the General Assembly,
including on questions relating to international peace
and security, in accordance with Articles 10 to 14 and
35 of the Charter. The Philippines also agrees with
the view that the General Assembly and the Security
Council are complementary organs. They may have
different mandates, but they share the same goal, which
is the maintenance of international peace and security
and global order.
Today’s plenary meeting of the Assembly to consider
the report of the Security Council is an opportunity
to strengthen the relationship between the two bodies
in working and delivering as one for the common
good. More importantly, by providing its report to
the Assembly, the Council has in fact recognized its
obligation to account to the Assembly on how it is
fulfilling its mandate. Through the annual report, we
recognize the Security Council’s openness in sharing
its activities, initiatives and decisions with the General
Assembly. That effort to ensure transparency enables
Member States and the international community to
12/29

The report also provides Member States with vital
information on the prevailing international security
landscape, peacekeeping operations, disarmament
efforts and regional conflicts. It will be an invaluable
reference in the formulation of appropriate policies
and strategies to address global security concerns
effectively. For instance, the Council adopted two
major resolutions last year — resolutions 2642 (2022),
which renewed the authorization for cross-border
humanitarian assistance for Syria for six months, and
2699 (2022), the first-ever on Myanmar, in which the
Council expressed its support for concrete measures
and ending the violence — that are highlighted in
the report and that provide invaluable insights on
responding to ongoing conflicts, emerging threats and
global security challenges in our region and beyond.
We recognize that the Security Council’s report serves
as a platform for dialogue. Its presentation enables
Member States to raise questions, seek clarifications
and propose solutions concerning international peace
and security matters.
Finally, we should continue to identify ways to
further enhance the role, authority, effectiveness and
efficiency of the General Assembly so that it can
partner with the Security Council for the effective
implementation of resolutions and initiatives and
fulfil the United Nations commitment to maintaining
international peace, security and stability. The
23-19017

30/06/2023

Philippines also reiterates its support for the ongoing
efforts through intergovernmental negotiations to
reform the Security Council to make it more inclusive,
representative and accountable and better able to
reflect the geopolitical realities and aspirations of the
international community.
Mr. Rojas (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Peru
appreciates the opportunity to participate in this
important debate on the report of the Security Council
for 2022 (A/77/2).
In that regard, my delegation aligns itself with
the statement made by the representative of Portugal
on behalf of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency (ACT) group (see A/77/PV.86), and
I would like to add the following remarks in my
national capacity.
The report is one of the tools with which we can
assess the strengths and weaknesses of the current
structure and mechanisms of the Security Council’s
work, especially with regard to preventing conflicts
and disputes and ensuring its role in the maintenance
of international peace and security, the peaceful
settlement of disputes and the principle of collective
security. We therefore do not view this agenda item
as a compartmentalized issue, or the presentation of
the report as a mere bureaucratic formality. Rather we
see it as intertwined with other important processes,
such as the intergovernmental negotiations on Security
Council reform, which we discussed yesterday (see
A/77/PV.85).
We appreciate the fact that the report addresses
emerging and very important issues such as the links
between conflict and food insecurity and technology
and security, as well as information on the establishment
of a sanctions regime for Haiti, which is particularly
important for us, as it is a country in our region. We also
appreciate the inclusion of statistics in the introduction
of the report, including, for example, the increase in
the number of unscheduled meetings held at the request
of Council members, which reflects the dynamics of
the Council during 2022. As a country committed
to gender equality, we also commend the inclusion
of disaggregated data on women’s participation. It is
encouraging to see progress reflected in the fact that in
2022 46 per cent of Council briefings were delivered by
women, compared with 44 per cent in 2021 and 34 per
cent in 2020.

A/77/PV.87

We should also underscore that the word “veto”
is used in the report’s introduction for the first time,
and information is provided on the number of meetings
at which the right of the veto was exercised, which is
significant, given that its inappropriate use has often
prevented the Council from taking action even when
it is urgently needed. In future we would like to see a
chapter on the veto included, providing details of the
cases in which it was used and specific statistics, which
would enable a better understanding of the obstacles
that arise in decision-making and would be a first
step in the efforts to overcome divisions and promote
cooperation in the Council.
Peru reaffirms its firm commitment to
multilateralism and the Charter in overcoming global
challenges. We will continue to work both through the
ACT group and with other Member States to strengthen
the role of the Security Council and ensure that it
fulfils its mandate to maintain international peace
and security.
Mr. Ghorbanpour Najafabadi (Islamic Republic
of Iran): The Islamic Republic of Iran notes the report
of the Security Council (A/77/2) and acknowledges
the potential that regular annual submissions of
those reports have for enhancing transparency and
accountability within the Council. The practice can
serve as a valuable way to keep the General Assembly
informed about the decisions and measures that the
Council undertakes to uphold international peace and
security. We thank Brazil for its timely preparation
of the introduction to the report and appreciate its
presentation to the Assembly by the United Arab
Emirates’ presidency of the Council.
However, while the report provides valuable
factual information regarding the Council’s activities,
it falls short where substantive and analytical insights
regarding overarching trends in international peace
and security are concerned. It therefore cannot enable
the General Assembly to make a comprehensive and
meaningful assessment of the Council’s performance
and evaluate the state of international peace and
security. We strongly uphold the principle that the
Council has a profound responsibility to the Member
States on whose behalf it acts, and it must therefore be
held accountable to them. The decisions made by its
members should be guided by the collective interests
of the entire United Nations membership. Safeguarding
the Council’s credibility requires firmly rejecting any
attempts to manipulate it as a way to pursue national

23-1901713/29

A/77/PV.87

political interests and agendas. It is absolutely vital to
that credibility that the Council reject efforts to turn it
into a tool for pursuing such interests and agendas, an
approach that regrettably has continued to be applied in
many cases.
The Assembly needs to be able to assess the
Council’s performance, as well as the state of
international peace and security, including in cases
in which the Council has failed to act substantively
and comprehensively. In that regard, I would like to
highlight the most enduring problem in the Middle East,
on which the Council has continued to be utterly silent.
Israel has maintained its oppressive and expansionist
policies, including its unlawful criminal practices in
the region, particularly in the occupied Palestinian
territory. Its actions have resulted in the deaths of
innocent Palestinians, including women and children,
the requisitioning of Palestinian properties, the seizure
and demolition of homes and people’s forcible eviction
from them. Furthermore, Israel continues to occupy
the Syrian Golan and repeatedly violates Syria’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity, particularly by
targeting civilians and civilian objects. The Council
has made no concrete reaction to any of those atrocities
against the Palestinian people and other nations in the
region. Indeed, Israel commits such atrocities in full
view of the international community, knowing well that
it will face no consequences. As is reflected in chapter
12 of part V of the report, my delegation has continued
to highlight Israel’s threat to peace and security in
the region.
In addition, Israel’s dangerous policies on the use
of weapons of mass destruction and their capabilities,
as well as its direct involvement in terrorist acts,
remain a matter of grave concern for countries in
the Middle East. Israel has refused to adhere to any
weapons of mass destruction, disarmament or armscontrol regimes, despite the repeated international
calls for it to join the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons, accept the International Atomic
Energy Agency Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement
and submit its nuclear programmes for inspection by
the Agency. It has also declined to take part in two
initiatives to establish a zone free of weapons of mass
destruction in the Middle East.
We are deeply concerned about the Council’s
inability to adequately address those significant
concerns, primarily owing to the consistent support
that one of its permanent members provides to Israel.
14/29

30/06/2023

It is disheartening that the support has hindered the
Council’s ability to take necessary action. In the light of
the situation, we call urgently on the United Nations as
a whole to take immediate and decisive action to put an
end to Israel’s continued impunity. It is imperative that
concrete measures be taken to ensure accountability
and justice for the violations being committed.
The holders of the permanent seats on the Council
bear a special responsibility to uphold the Council’s
credibility, comply with the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and ensure the
implementation of the Council’s resolutions. However,
it is a matter of deep concern that the United States
continues to openly violate resolution 2231 (2015).
Its unlawful unilateral withdrawal from the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) in 2018 and
subsequent imposition of unilateral sanctions on
the Islamic Republic of Iran are clear violations of
resolution 2231 (2015). Despite the numerous calls
of the international community, the United States
continues to ignore its commitments and has even
rejected previous agreements in the discussions on a
possible return to the JSCPOA’s full implementation,
citing reasons far beyond the scope of resolution 2231
(2015). It is also worth noting that for the first time in
the Council’s history, the United States, a permanent
member, openly invited all Member States to either
disobey the resolution or face punishment. If that
alarming trend goes unchecked, it will severely damage
the credibility of both the Council and the Organization
as a whole, eroding the rule of law and leading to
international disorder. It will be crucial to address and
rectify those actions in order to preserve the integrity
and effectiveness of the Council and uphold the
principles of international law.
In conclusion, my delegation emphasizes how
important it is that the Council refrain from deliberating
on issues that do not pose a threat to international
peace and security or pertain to the internal affairs
of sovereign States. It will be critical to uphold full
compliance with the Charter to prevent the Council
from excessively and hastily resorting to its Chapter
VII functions. We have observed instances in which
sanctions were imposed in situations where no action
was warranted, which underscores the need for careful
consideration and measured responses. By continuing
to adhere to those principles, the Council can ensure
that its actions are proportionate to and consistent with
its mandate to preserve global peace and security.
23-19017

30/06/2023

Mr. Eustathiou de los Santos (Uruguay) (spoke in
Spanish): We welcomed the finalization in May of the
annual report of the Security Council (A/77/2) under the
Swiss presidency (see S/PV.9330), and we acknowledge
Brazil’s hard work in preparing the introduction to the
document. We also express our sincere appreciation to
the United Arab Emirates for presenting the report to
the General Assembly.
Uruguay believes that it will be crucial for us to
focus all our efforts on ensuring that the next Council
report for the coming year is completed earlier,
specifically in January 2024, in order to enable us
in turn to discuss the topic in the Assembly sooner,
thereby encouraging a timely and effective dialogue on
issues of vital importance to international peace and
security. We are pleased to acknowledge the report’s
inclusion of relevant references to trends and dynamics,
especially those that reflect an improvement in women’s
participation in peace and security processes. That is a
significant step towards building a more inclusive and
definitely more equitable society.
We also appreciate the opportunity that open
debates afford countries that are not Security Council
members, and we hope to see debates held on new items
on the international security agenda. Similarly, we
underscore the references in the report to substantive
issues such as the establishment of a sanctions regime
for Haiti and the links between security and food
security. Such aspects are crucial to addressing the
complex challenges we face in the area of international
security. The grave situation in Haiti, where all the
scourges common to modern-day conflicts can sadly
be observed, is alarming. We urge the international
community to continue working to find solutions to
alleviate the plight of the civilian population and lay the
foundations for the re-establishment of the rule of law.
We welcome the mentions of the special reports
issued pursuant to General Assembly resolution
76/262, and we encourage the Security Council to
consider including a list of them, making it possible to
better understand the issues addressed. It is relevant to
acknowledge the annual report’s first-ever reference
to a veto, and it is also necessary to underscore other
aspects of the relationship between the Council and the
Assembly, such as the selection process for the SecretaryGeneral, the election of judges to the International
Court of Justice and matters relating to peacekeeping
and peacebuilding, which are key to ensuring a solid
and effective global governance system.

A/77/PV.87

In that context, we want to take this opportunity
to assess the Council’s achievements and challenges
in 2022. We should study its achievements to date and
consider what lies ahead in our collective quest for
peace and stability. The Council has a duty to promote
international peace and the resolution of conflicts, an
area where it is falling short, with the primary obstacles
being rigidity and a lack of flexibility and dialogue,
resulting in inaction and a failure to take the concrete
measures that can make lasting peace possible and pave
the way for settling conflicts. Let us take advantage
of our debates to address the underlying causes of
conflicts and promote effective advocacy on the part
of the Council in its role as a guarantor of international
peace and security. Such situations as those in Haiti,
Ukraine, Myanmar and the Sudan are of great interest to
the international community and require our undivided
attention and concerted effort.
In conclusion, today’s debate offers an invaluable
opportunity to strengthen cooperation and constructive
dialogue among all Member States. In that regard, we
call on all Council members to work to produce a report
that is analytical as well as descriptive.
Uruguay also aligns itself with the statement
delivered by Portugal on behalf of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group. Let us work
together to confront challenges.
The Acting President (spoke in French): We have
heard the last speaker in the debate on this item. May
I take it that the General Assembly takes note of the
report of the Security Council contained in document
A/77/2?
It was so decided.
The Acting President (spoke in French): The
exercise of the right of reply has been requested. I would
like to remind members that statements in the exercise
of the right of reply are limited to 10 minutes for the
first intervention and five minutes for the second, and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Ravindran (India): I would like to take the
floor to exercise my delegation’s right to reply to
remarks by the representative of Pakistan today (see
A/77/PV.86) that impinge on India’s domestic affairs
and on our sovereignty and territorial integrity.
India just completed a two-year term on the Security
Council for 2021 and 2022, in which we fulfilled our
responsibility in the maintenance of international

23-1901715/29

A/77/PV.87

peace and security, raised our voice against common
threats to humankind such as terrorism and in fact
spoke for the wider global South. As for Pakistan, the
only achievements it has to show for itself are its stellar
record as the world’s biggest exporter of terrorism and
its bigoted policies that constitutionally and legally
relegate its own citizens to second class. Even today we
heard a spirited defence of terrorism from Pakistan’s
representative, which is not surprising for a country
that has harboured and continues to harbour some of
the world’s most wanted terrorists. That being the case,
I will not dignify Pakistan’s venomous comments about
India by responding to them, since those who are soaked
in bigotry will find it hard to understand the functioning
of a pluralistic society. Such remarks deserve only our
collective contempt and perhaps our sympathy for a
mindset that utters falsehoods repeatedly.
As for the remarks on the Indian Union territory of
Jammu and Kashmir, it is well known that Jammu and
Kashmir and Ladakh in their entirety are inalienable
territories of India, and that includes the territory of
Jammu and Kashmir that is currently under illegal
occupation by Pakistan. Even if the representative of
Pakistan takes the floor again, I do not want to engage
with him further on the matter, and would rather like
to once again suggest that he review what has just been
said and perhaps reflect on it.
Mr. Chaudhary (Pakistan): I feel compelled
to take the floor to respond to the remarks by the
representative of India against my country. India
continues to perpetuate a factually incorrect position
year after year. It is completely false and wrong to say
that by making any comment on Jammu and Kashmir
a country is impinging on India’s territorial integrity
and sovereignty. Jammu and Kashmir is internationally
recognized as a disputed territory and not an integral
or inalienable part of India, and repeating a wrong
position will not make it acceptable at any point in this
forum. In his statement this morning (see A/77/PV.86),
the Permanent Representative of Pakistan drew the
attention of the membership to the fact that there are
Security Council resolutions on Jammu and Kashmir that
have been awaiting implementation for more than seven
decades now. The resolutions recognize the right of the
people of Jammu and Kashmir to self-determination, a
right clearly provided for in the Charter of the United
Nations. It is vital to ensure that the Security Council
takes cognizance of India’s intransigence and makes a
concerted effort to implement its resolutions on Jammu
16/29

30/06/2023

and Kashmir. It has a legal responsibility to do that. It
was merely that fact that the representative of Pakistan
highlighted and underlined this morning. My delegation
would also like to draw the attention of the Assembly to
Article 25 of the Charter, which states that
“[t]he Members of the United Nations agree to
accept and carry out the decisions of the Security
Council in accordance with the present Charter.”
By claiming Jammu and Kashmir as a territory that is
an internal matter for India, the Indian representative
has yet again challenged the legitimacy of the Security
Council resolutions that unequivocally declare Jammu
and Kashmir a disputed territory whose final status
is to be determined through a plebiscite under United
Nations auspices. India’s comments, which strike at
the core of the Council’s authority, are an affront to
the United Nations, the efficacy of multilateralism, the
Charter and the principles of the multilateral work that
we do in our Organization.
Let me share with members the situation that has
prompted my delegation to bring the issue of Jammu and
Kashmir to the attention of the international community.
India has imprisoned the entire Kashmiri
leadership. It has illegally detained thousands of
Kashmiri youth, women and children. It has summarily
executed young boys, violently put down protests and
burned down entire neighbourhoods and villages.
Indian-occupied Jammu and Kashmir is the most
militarized zone in the world, where close to 900,000
security forces personnel have been deployed by India
to curb the Kashmiris’ legitimate struggle. I want to
point out to all our colleagues that those Indian crimes
are not something merely suggested by Pakistan. They
have been well documented by the United Nations. The
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
has issued two reports citing massive human rights
violations and has proposed the establishment of a
commission of inquiry to investigate them, asking for
access to occupied Jammu and Kashmir. More than a
dozen special procedures of the Human Rights Council
have expressed similar concerns about the human
rights violations in occupied Jammu and Kashmir and
have sought access to investigate them. However, India
continues to hinder access for such visits. It completely
denies all access to the occupied territory.
As for the allegations about terrorism, that is an
old Indian tactic to divert attention from its wellestablished crimes in the occupied territory. My
23-19017

30/06/2023

delegation rejects those outrageous comments outright.
Despite such provocations, I will not comment on the
fascist anti-Muslim policies of the Indian Government
and more than a dozen other human rights violations in
various parts of India. I will also refrain from dwelling
on the issue of the Hindu vigilante groups that violently
target minorities, including for eating beef.
The Acting President (spoke in French):
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 27.
Agenda item 132 (continued)
The responsibility to protect and the prevention of
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity
Report of the Secretary-General (A/77/910)
Ms. Vittay (Hungary): Hungary aligns itself with
the statement delivered earlier in the week on behalf of
the European Union (see A/77/PV.83) and would like to
add a few remarks in its national capacity.
We thank the Secretary-General for his report on
development and the responsibility to protect (R2P)
(A/77/910). We highlight the fact that the report builds
on the notion that mass atrocities are the result of a
confluence of structural factors, political dynamics,
triggers of violence and patterns of targeting during
violence. In that sentence, the word “structural” is
key. The report emphasizes that poverty, long-standing
institutionalized discrimination, poor education,
economic and gender inequalities and social exclusion,
as well as corruption and a lack of good governance, are
all important risk factors for atrocity crimes. The report
also sets up a correlation between underdevelopment
and conflict.
Looking at the way forward, we would like to
highlight a few institutional aspects, as well as some
substantive observations. Concerning the institutional
framework, Hungary commends the invaluable work
of the Special Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide
and on the Responsibility to Protect. We also thank
the Secretary-General for issuing his thematic reports.
However, we also echo the need for more concrete
guidance from the reports. Concrete and practical
recommendations and best practices significantly
assist Member States in their prevention efforts and
help them to assess whether such recommendations
have been implemented as appropriate. In addition, an

A/77/PV.87

analysis of trends regarding risks could also facilitate
the prevention efforts of Member States.
Our second point regarding the institutional
framework is that other United Nations entities
may also contribute to the eventual success of the
responsibility-to-protect agenda. The Peacebuilding
Commission, in particular, can play an important role
in supporting States in the transition from conflict
and atrocity crimes to sustainable peace by addressing
underlying development indicators. Member States
should explore the possibilities for greater engagement
with the Peacebuilding Commission, which can help
States and advise the Security Council with regard to
meeting their obligations related to R2P.
Thirdly, we encourage all Member States to appoint
a national R2P focal point and join the Global Network
of R2P Focal Points. Sixty-one Member States and two
regional organizations have so far appointed R2P focal
points and are building their national and collective
capacities for preventing mass atrocity crimes. We can
maximize the network effect only if we have as many
participants as possible.
Turning to the substantive remarks, we note that
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
Our Common Agenda (A/75/982) provide a framework
for global cooperation in achieving a better and more
sustainable future. Furthermore, as articulated in Our
Common Agenda, the New Agenda for Peace should be
focused on strengthening prevention, understanding
key risk factors and addressing all forms of violence, as
well as the implementation of Sustainable Development
Goal 16 on peace, justice and strong institutions. We
underline that in order to have an effective prevention
system, we must agree on the early warning signs and
clarify the early action to be taken in response to such
alarms. In that regard, effective early warning should be
rooted in accurately identifying all the factors that pose
risks of violence, including the risk factors associated
with atrocity crimes, rather than focusing solely on the
risk of conflict.
Finally, Hungary would like to emphasize that
the protection of cultural heritage is a crucial and
indispensable instrument for peace and reconciliation
as well as inclusive and sustainable development. The
destruction of tangible and intangible cultural heritage
can severely affect and endanger social cohesion and
the peaceful coexistence of peoples and lead to an
escalation of conflicts. That strong correlation has

23-1901717/29

A/77/PV.87

already been recognized. The time is therefore ripe
for paying greater attention to the area. We encourage
States to criminalize offences against cultural
heritage in their domestic legal systems and hold
individuals accountable for crimes against or affecting
cultural heritage.
Mr. Tun (Myanmar): This debate is a great
opportunity for all Member States to reflect on the
concept of the responsibility to protect (R2P). I
appreciate the Secretary-General’s examination of the
relationship between R2P and sustainable development
in this year’s report (A/77/910).
I would also like to thank the Special Adviser of
the Secretary-General, Mr. George Okoth-Obbo, for
introducing the report (A/77/910) (see A/77/PV.83).
We affirm that States have the primary responsibility
to protect their populations from genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity.
Nonetheless, the international community has a
responsibility to help States fulfil this obligation
and take collective action in a timely and decisive
manner, especially when an authority-in-power itself is
perpetrating those crimes against its own people. The
consequences of failing to respond decisively to atrocity
crimes are severe, not only for the immediate victims
but also for the very foundations of international law.
Protection is not just about responding to imminent
risks of such serious crimes. Addressing the structural
risks for mass atrocities is also a key tenet of the
protection responsibility of States. To that end, we have
a global road map in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. Unfortunately, we note with alarm that
we are now off track in attaining most of the targets set
forth in the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). In
many situations, including my own country, Myanmar,
hard-won gains in the implementation of the SDGS,
including poverty reduction, are in regression.
As the General Assembly is aware, the people
of Myanmar have been subject to repeated atrocious
crimes committed by the illegal military junta.
Accordingly, I wish to highlight governance-related
drivers of atrocities in the context of what is happening
in my country. Sustainable Development Goal 16 is
a key foundation for preventing the structural risks
that could lead to atrocities. This Goal encompasses
promoting peaceful and inclusive societies, providing
access to justice for everyone, strengthening the rule of
law and building effective and accountable institutions
18/29

30/06/2023

at all levels. However, in Myanmar, this foundational
goal has been totally demolished since the illegal coup
by the military junta.
The elected civilian Government’s efforts to
build effective, transparent, accountable and inclusive
institutions have been eliminated by a junta that has
not been held to account. In fact, the junta has created
and maintained a culture of impunity within the rank
and file that encourages the inhumane use of violence
against anyone it deems to be sympathetic to growing
anti-coup resistance forces. Under that perceived sense
of impunity, the military has been relentlessly waging
a campaign of terror against the people of Myanmar in
order to exert control over the population. Since it is
unable to contain the nationwide resistance, the illegal
junta has been turning to targeted killings of civilians
as their military tactic. The junta forces have brutally
killed almost 3,700 people.
The United Nations has extensively documented
the junta’s brutal conduct, including arbitrary arrests,
torture of detainees, wholesale burning of residential
homes, indiscriminate area attacks and bombings,
and — in several massacres — targeted killings
of civilians. The military’s brutal attacks against
civilians are not isolated incidents. These attacks are so
widespread, systematic and coordinated that the United
Nations Independent Investigative Mechanism for
Myanmar concluded that they amount to crimes against
humanity and war crimes, which are among the four
atrocity crimes for which the responsibility to protect
was intended to be invoked.
The people of Myanmar are determined to bring
about the end of the inhumane junta and rebuild their
country by re-establishing the rule of law, democracy
and respect for human rights under the federal
governance system that guarantees self-determination
for the ethnic peoples of the country. Implementation
of the Sustainable Development Goals in Myanmar
largely depends on the ability of the people of Myanmar
to establish these crucial foundations. To do that, we
need support and help from the States Members of the
United Nations.
Myanmar is in a situation where its military
institutions have been attacking people who refuse
to submit to their illegal and illegitimate rule. In the
face of the relentless assaults by the brutal military
machine, the people of Myanmar have long been asking
the international community, particularly the Security
23-19017

30/06/2023

Council, to take decisive action against the junta’s
ongoing violence. Unfortunately, with no adequate
action from the international community, the military
junta has been emboldened to continue further serious
international crimes with total impunity. Over the
past six months, the military has escalated its brutal
attacks meant to instil terror and intimidation. We
have all been witnessing the military’s escalating
brutality and attacks following the adoption of Security
Council resolution 2669 (2022). Clearly, the Security
Council needs to adopt effective follow-up measures to
that resolution.
I therefore wish to appeal to the Security Council,
individual Member States and our neighbouring
countries to protect the civilians in Myanmar by
utilizing the available tools suggested by the SecretaryGeneral in his annuals reports on the responsibility
to protect.
While the international community is not providing
protection to the people of Myanmar who are under
relentless violent assaults from the illegitimate junta,
the very least that Member States can do is to refuse
to enable the Myanmar military to commit further
atrocity crimes against the people of my country. On
behalf of the people of Myanmar, I urge all Member
States not to equip the inhumane military with the
weapons and technologies it can use to commit further
war crimes and crimes against humanity against the
people of Myanmar, which also is in line with the
Assembly’s call in resolution 75/287; that they not help
fund the military’s brutal campaign of terror against its
own people; that they not encourage the military junta
by legitimizing its illegal attempted coup; and that,
finally, and most importantly, that they help us end
military impunity in Myanmar by holding perpetrators
of serious international crimes accountable.

A/77/PV.87

Today’s debate once again demonstrates the positive
impact that the institutionalization of the principle of
the responsibility to protect within the United Nations
has had in the course of its development. The 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, along with the
international human rights instruments, represents
a blueprint for action for a peaceful and prosperous
world. Given the inextricable link between peace
and development, we firmly believe that the effective
realization of the 2030 Agenda can significantly
mitigate the risk of atrocities.
Nowadays, our world has to confront unprecedented
levels of violence, conflict and displacement. We
are witnessing a variety of circumstances in which
populations are victims or at risk of being subject to
atrocity crimes. We fully concur with the SecretaryGeneral that poverty, long-standing institutionalized
discrimination, poor education, economic and gender
inequality, social isolation, and a lack of effective
governance are all significant risk factors for atrocity
crimes. Indeed, sustainable development plays a critical
role in building the social resilience of populations.
Unfortunately, despite the unanimous agreement of
international community in 2005 on the responsibility
to protect populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity (resolution 70/1),
today we are witnessing increased levels of violence,
atrocities and record-high displacement. Among these,
we have unfortunately witnessed war crimes committed
by Russia in my own country, Georgia, and continue to
witness ever-increasing violations of human rights in
the Russia’s illegally occupied Abkhazia and Tskhinvali
regions of Georgia.

Mr. Abesadze (Georgia): Georgia aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the representative
of the European Union in its capacity as observer
(see A/77/ PV.83). Allow me to deliver the following
statement in my national capacity.

Georgia remains deeply alarmed by the enormous
human suffering in Ukraine caused by Russia’s
premeditated, unjustified and unprovoked full-scale
aggression. According to numerous reports and
international mechanisms, a wide range of war crimes
committed by Russia in Ukraine is documented. Those
blatant violations of international humanitarian law
and international human rights law create acute risks to
peace, security and development and demand that the
international community take a resolute stance.

At the outset, I would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his comprehensive report (A/77/910), which
analyses the nexus between the challenges to sustainable
development and the causes of atrocity crimes.

Ahead of the Sustainable Development Goal (SDG)
Summit, we voice our steadfast support to the joint
actions aimed to achieve a more sustainable future
for all.

The situation in Myanmar is a stark reminder of
the challenges we face in ensuring accountability and
justice in the world. It is a call to action for all of us.

23-1901719/29

A/77/PV.87

At the national level, Georgia has continued its efforts
to advance the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. The Government of Georgia
has offered high-level political support to incorporating
Sustainable Development Goals into national priorities
since the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and has continued its efforts to advance
the Agenda throughout these years. In September
2022, the Government of Georgia adopted the Vision
2030 development strategy for Georgia, a nationwide
policy document. It covers the key priorities of our
nationwide development by 2030 and is fully aligned
with all 17 SDGs. To mainstream the SDGs in the local
Government, a localization plan was developed for
their implementation at the local level. The goal is to
localize the SDGs in all municipalities by 2025, which
should contribute to achieving the set targets for 2030.
Georgia is equally committed to further strengthening
its national human rights machinery and attaches
great importance to cooperating with existing human
rights mechanisms.
Before concluding, I would like to reaffirm
Georgia’s commitment to advancing the goals and
objectives of R2P and to express support to the
Secretary-General’s proposed New Agenda for Peace,
which we view as a much-needed opportunity to
promote peace, prevent conflicts and strengthen the
framework for a peaceful world.
Mr. Geisler (Germany): Germany aligns itself with
the statements delivered on behalf of the European
Union and on behalf of the Group of Friends of the
Responsibility to Protect. We thank the SecretaryGeneral for this year’s report (A/77/910) and its
recommendations, and we thank Special Adviser
Okoth-Obbo for his presentation of the report.
The responsibility to protect (R2P), as reflected
in the 2005 World Summit outcome document, serves
as a cornerstone of our individual and collective
commitment to prevent and respond to the most heinous
international crimes. It demands that we, as members
of the international community, recognize our duty to
safeguard populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity. Upholding
that responsibility requires efforts encompassing
political, humanitarian and socioeconomic dimensions.
Germany reaffirms its unwavering commitment to R2P
as a holistic concept, resting on its three pillars.
20/29

30/06/2023

We commend the focus of this year’s report on
development, as the power of economic development
in fostering stability, resilience and social cohesion
must not be underestimated. To effectively integrate
economic development within our efforts to prevent
atrocities, we must pursue comprehensive strategies
that address the interconnected drivers of violence.
That entails promoting good governance, strengthening
the rule of law, accountability, protecting human rights
and combating corruption. By establishing conducive
environments for economic growth and promoting
social inclusion, we can empower individuals and
communities to actively participate in the development
process, fostering a sense of ownership and shared
responsibility for peace and stability.
Germany is a leading donor in the field of
development cooperation. We are determined to do
our part on the path towards achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) set out in the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development. As co-facilitator of the
Summit of the Future, we are firmly committed to
help bring along the transformative changes we need
to address the challenges of the future. In particular,
the New Agenda for Peace offers the potential of
strengthening prevention, understanding key risk
factors and implementing SDG 16, on peace, justice
and strong institutions.
Germany firmly believes that investing in
preventive measures, early-warning systems and robust
institutions is not only morally imperative, but also costeffective in the long run. By strategically allocating
resources to conflict prevention and sustainable
development, we can mitigate the human and economic
costs associated with responding to crises. We must,
therefore, encourage greater international cooperation,
knowledge-sharing and capacity-building in order to
enhance our collective ability to prevent, detect and
respond to the signs of impending atrocities.
Germany supports the work of the Special Advisers
on the Prevention of Genocide and the Responsibility
to Protect. As early warnings are key to prevention,
we strongly encourage the United Nations Office on
Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect
to issue statements on specific-country situations
and to provide thematic briefings and country
analyses at appropriate meetings. We believe that the
systematic sharing of information and analysis with
the Security Council, the General Assembly and the
23-19017

30/06/2023

Human Rights Council can contribute significantly to
meaningful prevention.
Germany is deeply concerned about grave situations
unfolding in several countries, with particular attention
to Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine and the
situation in the Sudan. We call on the international
community to intensify efforts to protect the populations
from atrocities and to work towards sustainable
solutions that ensure accountability.
Women and girls, in all their diversity, are
disproportionately affected by mass atrocities, facing
specific forms of violence, such as sexual and genderbased violence, forced displacement and systematic
discrimination. It is imperative that our response to
atrocities is centred on the needs, rights and agency
of victims and survivors, particularly women and
girls, ensuring their protection, empowerment and
meaningful participation.
Germany stresses the importance of the women
and peace and security agenda in addressing the
gendered dimensions of conflicts and atrocity crimes.
By integrating the women and peace and security
principles into our policies and programmes, Germany
aims to ensure that the rights, needs and perspectives
of women and girls are effectively addressed and their
voices are heard and respected. We also need to be
mindful to include young people, as reflected in youth
and peace and security agenda.
In conclusion, let us recommit to the three
pillars — the responsibility to protect, genocide
and atrocity prevention and sustainable economic
development. By integrating those interconnected
strands, we can foster a world where every individual
can live in peace, dignity and prosperity. Germany
stands ready to collaborate with all Member States, the
United Nations and relevant stakeholders to translate
those aspirations into concrete actions.
Mr. Moussa (Djibouti): At the outset, Djibouti is
pleased to welcome today’s meeting. This is the sixth
occasion in which the General Assembly has formally
considered the responsibility to protect (R2P). It is
also the second meeting since the General Assembly
adopted resolution 75/277 on 18 May 2021, in which
it decided to include R2P on its annual agenda and
formally requested that the Secretary-General report
annually on the topic.

A/77/PV.87

The fifteenth report of the Secretary-General on the
R2P (A/77/910) examines the interrelationship between
sustainable development and the R2P. It recognizes that
development can build the conditions for sustainable
peace, equitable growth and accountable governance
and constitutes one of the building blocks for realizing
the fundamental purposes and objectives of R2P — the
prevention of genocide, war crimes, crimes against
humanity and ethnic cleansing. It is axiomatic that
development deficits or exclusion from associated
rights can potentially trigger and/or escalate the risks of
atrocity crimes, especially when combined with other
critical factors.
The report recognizes the intersection between
development and R2P and urges States to leverage
development programming across the spectrum of
atrocity risk assessment, early warning, preparedness
and response to avoid, reduce or mitigate those
risks and occurrences. The report is timely and
demonstrates the contribution that R2P can make to the
development framework.
In the context of today’s debate, we would like to
underscore the following four points.
First, 18 years after the adoption of the 2005 World
Summit Outcome reflecting R2P, the imperative for
concrete action to protect populations from genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity remains more urgent than ever.
Secondly, R2P is the raison d’être of the State.
One of the most fundamental objectives of the State,
as a sovereign entity, is the protection of its population.
Sovereignty equals responsibility.
Thirdly, the implementation of R2P requires a
wide-ranging partnership among States, on the one
hand, and bilateral, regional and multilateral actors, on
the other hand.
Fourthly and last but not least, the development-R2P
nexus as proposed and described in the current report
links the first and second pillars of R2P and provides a
framework for consensus-building and the convergence
of perspectives on that important principle.
In the light of the foregoing, let us recommit
ourselves to the full realization of the solemn declaration
made by world leaders in the 2005 World Summit
Outcome to expedite actions in consensus-building on
consolidating the implementation of R2P, consistent
with established principles of international law, ahead

23-1901721/29

A/77/PV.87

of the twentieth anniversary of its proclamation in
2025. Let us take the upcoming twentieth anniversary
as a clarion call to action to perfect R2P.
In conclusion, we thank the Special Adviser on
the Responsibility to Protect for the leadership he
has provided in developing the principle and building
consensus around it. We urge support to the two Special
Advisers and the Office of the Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide and
encourage Member States to explore options to enhance
and strengthen the role of the Special Adviser on the
Responsibility to Protect in providing United Nations
early warning assessments and recommendations on
how to prevent atrocities, including to the Security
Council, the General Assembly and the Human
Rights Council.
Ms. Hayovyshyn (Ukraine): Ukraine aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the European Union
(see A/77/PV.83) and would like to make a few remarks
in its national capacity.
We reaffirm the Ukrainian Government’s
commitment to the 2005 World Summit Outcome
document. We have committed to protecting all
populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity.
Ukraine is a party to the core instruments of
international law relating to the prevention of atrocity
crimes, the protection of populations, the upholding
of human rights and the elimination of all forms of
discrimination. And Ukraine is now at the forefront of
protecting its own people on the ground.
The principles of the responsibility to protect (R2P)
reject the use of military force by one State against
another under the pretence of protecting a population
from alleged threats, especially when the actual goal
is to occupy another State’s territory. Military force
should not be employed to alter borders or occupy
territories. However, Russia has launched a full-scale
invasion of Ukraine, using the false pretext of protecting
its population from genocide. Since 24 February 2022,
United Nations official information indicates that the
number of civilian casualties in Ukraine has reached
almost 25,000, although the actual number of victims is
likely much higher.
Despite those losses, Ukraine is actively resisting
the aggressor. In response to its military failures on the
battlefield, Russia is resorting to terrorizing civilians
22/29

30/06/2023

in Ukraine by targeting critical infrastructure and
residential areas with missiles, multiple-launch rocket
systems, guided aerial bombs and Iranian-made attack
drones. Those attacks have resulted in significant
casualties and widespread destruction.
The scorched-Earth tactic employed by Russia
is emblematic of its dictatorial nature. Throughout
history, it has repeatedly used that tactic and continues
to do so today, resembling a medieval monster.
The atrocities committed by the Russian army in
towns and villages across Ukraine are reminiscent
of the Ukrainian genocide known as the Holodomor,
which was carried out by Russia’s predecessor from
1932 to 1933.
In an effort to prevent counteroffensive actions by
Ukraine across the Dnipro River, the Russian occupiers
deliberately destroyed the dam at the Nova Kakhovka
hydroelectric power plant on 6 June. That act resulted
in the largest ecological and humanitarian disaster in
Europe in decades. Despite the United Nations request
for access to the residents of the flooded settlements
on the left bank of the Dnipro River under Russia’s
temporary military control, the Kremlin declined to
grant permission.
According to Ukrainian intelligence, Russia has
made preparations to destroy Zaporizhzhya nuclear
power plant. The potential consequences of such a
disaster are highly unpredictable.
The actions of the Russian forces in Ukraine clearly
demonstrate that their objective in invading Ukraine
is the annihilation of Ukraine as a nation. While we
speak, Russia is actively pursuing the genocide of the
Ukrainian people.
We have consistently emphasized the United
Nations crucial role in the prevention of atrocity crimes,
particularly regarding the second and third pillars of
R2P. The Security Council holds a special responsibility
in that regard. However, the use of veto power or even
the threat of its use impedes the Council’s ability to
respond promptly in situations requiring urgent action
to protect civilians.
At the onset of the invasion, Russia misused its
veto power to obstruct the Council from fulfilling
its primary responsibility. As a result, the General
Assembly took on the responsibility and fulfilled its
role by adopting six resolutions during the eleventh
emergency special session.
23-19017

30/06/2023

A/77/PV.87

To effectively curb the aggression, it is imperative
to pursue demilitarization and hold the Russian military
and political leaders accountable for their crimes.
Again, the General Assembly must assume that role
by establishing a special tribunal to hold accountable
those responsible for the crime of aggression against
Ukraine. This is not only about saving Ukrainian lives.
It is also about averting potential global catastrophes
and preventing further genocide, war crimes and crimes
against humanity everywhere the Russian army has
been abusing R2P principles — in Ukraine, Georgia
and elsewhere in the world.

should be aimed at supporting the countries concerned
in implementing their development strategies and
should focus on their needs rather than attaching
preconditions to assistance based on self-established
assessment criteria, let alone by making decisions
for them. Development is foundational to peace and
security. China would like to work with the international
community to support developing countries in
responding to security challenges, maintaining
common security and enhancing their capacity to
protect cvivilians with additional resources and means
by realizing sustainable development.

Ms. Jiang Hua (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China aligns itself with the statement made by the
representative of Venezuela on behalf of the Group
of Friends in Defence of the Charter of the United
Nations (see A/77/PV.83) and takes note of the report of
the Secretary-General on the responsibility to protect
(A/77/910). I would like to share three points.

Mr. Pieris (Sri Lanka): We thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report (A/77/910) on the responsibility
to protect (R2P) and its application in the context
of sustainable development, which I thought was
commendable. However, in an ideal world, all States
would undoubtedly take responsibility to protect their
populations. It is a sine qua non, perhaps. But in reality,
projecting that responsibility at an international scale
remains problematic, in my view, for there will always
be the issue of who should act, when and how. In my
view, adopting specific threshold and precautionary
principles would be a crucial step in making it harder
for States to make false humanitarian claims. It is
argued that they would strengthen strong arguments
and weaken weak ones, which matters for Governments
that fail to persuade other States, the media and global
public opinion and risk condemnation and sanctions in
consequence of that principle.

First, preventing and addressing the root causes
of conflict is key to implementing the principle of the
responsibility to protect. The Secretary-General’s report
stresses that development deficits can exacerbate social
unrest and lead to risks of conflict, even triggering
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity. China believes that promoting the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and advancing development for peace
is an important way to eliminate the root causes of
conflict. The international community should work in
every part of the world to eliminate poverty, address
development imbalances, build inclusive societies,
help developing countries enhance their capacity for
autonomous development and lay a foundation for
preventing conflict and protecting civilians.
Secondly, States have the primary responsibility
to protect civilians. The international community
can provide assistance, but it is ultimately the States
concerned that have to fulfil their responsibilities.
The international community should adhere to the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, fully respect the sovereignty of the countries
concerned, prevent the escalation of tensions through
good offices and negotiations and create favourable
conditions for national Governments to fulfil their
responsibility to protect.
Thirdly, the development assistance provided by
the international community to developing countries

Without the adoption of such principles and without
considerable reform of the Security Council, which
remains highly unlikely, the realpolitik of our global
order will continue to undermine the R2P concept.
It is therefore currently still far from being able to
effectively make our world a more secure place. In our
international order, States have a duty to individuals
and communities. They are endowed with inalienable
rights and have an obligation to secure those rights now
and over time. That means that it is the duty of States
to prevent serious violations — of economic, social,
cultural and environmental rights as well as civil and
political ones — that fuel cases of international crimes.
And the original definition of sustainable development
as expressed at the World Commission on Environment
and Development clearly encompasses that human
rights angle, especially with respect to the lives of
future generations.

23-1901723/29

A/77/PV.87

Sustainable development is development that
meets the needs of the present without compromising
the ability of future generations to meet their own
needs. If States fail to meet the universal agreed goal
of sustainable development, future generations are
liable to be the victims of living conditions that are
below the agreed human rights standards. I say that
because in the traditional sense, the concept of the
responsibility to protect has challenged the natural
order of the international system by providing a
different understanding of State sovereignty, including
State accountability.
It is therefore clear that although there is tension
between State sovereignty, sustainable development
and the defence of human rights, it is possible to
overcome that clash by looking at sovereignty as the
State’s responsibility for the protection of its own
citizens, rather than merely as a mechanism available
for unbridled power. It must therefore be appreciated
that the doctrine of the responsibility to protect specifies
that the primary responsibility to protect lies with the
State itself and not with the international community.
The general idea is that sovereignty and military
intervention should be seen as counterbalancing
factors, where military intervention is used only as a
last resort. Resolution 60/161 on R2P, adopted by the
General Assembly in 2005, tried to overcome many
prevailing tensions, but it still recognized the ultimate
authority of the Security Council. According to the
resolution, each State had a responsibility to protect
its population, but collective action was to be taken
through the Security Council, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations, including Chapter VII,
on a case-by-case basis.
Why is that relevant? I say it is relevant because it
points to a fact that we must appreciate, which is that as
one academic puts it, R2P is a mere aspiration — and a
rather weak one at that — as opposed to a real principle
of international norms or even international law.
R2P sometimes not only runs against the practices
of practical politics, where national sovereignty still
reigns supreme, but more important, it is at odds
with a fundamental principle of the United Nations
itself — the ultimate legal deference to national
sovereignty, as decided by the members of the Security
Council. The Council might approve of the concept
with respect to one particular case but might not do so
in the case of another because certain members of the
permanent five are at cross-purposes. Its protagonists
24/29

30/06/2023

often say that intervening in the face of mass murder
is an option that cannot be relinquished. Undoubtedly
that cannot be more true, but we do not need R2P to
exercise that option. Whether the Security Council
authorizes such an intervention will always be one of
practical judgment.
No one is prepared to defend the claim that
States can do what they want with their people and
then hide behind the principle of sovereignty. There
is no justification for the core crimes of genocide,
ethnic cleansing and so on. In 2001 the International
Commission on Intervention and State Sovereignty
called on the international community, its members
and nations and non-governmental organizations, to
embrace the idea of the responsibility to protect as
a basic element in the code of global citizenship and
its vital necessity. But it is critical to consider these
issues concerning the concept of the responsibility to
protect, because they emphasize that the history of the
doctrine of the responsibility to protect sounds almost
like a fairy tale, and one of the most striking aspects
is the gap between the promise and the reality. While
State representatives and international organizations
have continued to endorse the concept as a permanent
principle, individual States and groups of States alike
continue to emphasize the primacy of State sovereignty
where domestic affairs are concerned in order to point
out the Security Council’s limited competencies and to
emphasize that the responsibility to protect has not yet
gained legal force.
It must be appreciated that the R2P doctrine is
riddled with too many contradictions and practical
problems to make it seriously implementable. However,
we should not forget that the responsibility to protect is
an ambitious project that represents a vital opportunity
for the world community to transform its understanding
of humanitarian intervention rather than see it as a new
licence to intervene militarily. R2P challenges and
obliges nations to affirm and realize socioeconomic
rights in the developing world. Countries coming out
of prolonged armed conflict are vitally dependent
on socioeconomic development to help them avoid
relapsing into violence and brutality. The Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) provide a framework
for defining and prioritizing the most essential
development needs, as well as a blueprint for investing
in and focusing development assistance in individual
countries. Implementing a social-welfare version
of R2P through the SDGs will require innovative
23-19017

30/06/2023

A/77/PV.87

fundraising strategies, including the transformation
and channelling of private credit in the public interest
and a robust global financial architecture.

make in this Hall are meaningless if they are not backed
by decisive action, timely interventions and robust
accountability mechanisms.

Improving women’s access to food, employment,
education and reproductive and other health services
is at the heart of the Sustainable Development Goals.
Such efforts are also crucial to fighting poverty,
protecting children, lessening economic inequality
and preventing social instability and armed conflict
at the global level, and should therefore be central
aspects of the responsibility to protect. The Sustainable
Development Goals are essential benchmarks for
countries at risk of war and repression, as well as
those struggling to emerge from armed conflict and
humanitarian emergencies. When States embrace R2P
through the SDGs, they commit to a human security
partnership with countries in socioeconomic distress
in pursuit of long-term conflict resolution. For human
rights activists, that human-welfare-centred vision of
the responsibility to protect is an essential reminder
that social justice and civil liberties are equal pillars
of and partners in the global human rights movement.

With the Sustainable Development Goals Summit
fast approaching, the report of the Secretary-General
is a welcome and timely reminder that sustainable
development is critical to our prevention efforts.
Poverty, inequality and weak institutions can create
environments conducive to conflict and violence.
It is our responsibility as Member States to tackle
those challenges head-on and to prioritize the wellbeing and protection of vulnerable populations. The
role of women is also key to prevention. We know
from our own experience of conflict on the island of
Ireland that women have a transformative role to play
in the prevention of violence and in mediation and
peacebuilding. We must ensure that the women and
peace and security agenda is implemented so that we
can achieve women’s full participation and leadership
in the prevention and resolution of conflict. We must
also pursue accountability for conflict-related sexual
violence, to which women and girls are especially
vulnerable, and which can constitute war crimes,
crimes against humanity or constitutive acts with
respect to genocide.

Mr. Gómez (Ireland): Ireland aligns itself with
the statements made on behalf of the European Union
and by the representative of Croatia on behalf of the
Group of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect
(see A/77/PV.83).
Let me begin by thanking the Secretary-General
for his report (A/77/910). I also want to take this
opportunity to thank Special Adviser Okoth-Obbo for
his insightful remarks (see A/77/PV.83) and to reaffirm
Ireland’s support for the Office on Genocide Prevention
and the Responsibility to Protect.
In what feels like an increasingly fragile, violent
and fractured world, there are some who would have
us believe that the responsibility to protect (R2P) is no
longer relevant, or that it is an outdated and unworkable
idea. We firmly reject that assertion. From the Sudan and
Afghanistan to Myanmar and the occupied Palestinian
territory, the need to protect populations at risk of
mass atrocity crimes is as important now as it has ever
been. The fact that we remain far from the objective
envisaged in 2005 is not a failure of R2P. It is a failure
of political will and of our collective determination to
prioritize the safeguarding of human lives over narrow
interests and geopolitical considerations. The truth is
that the responsibility to protect is only as effective
as our commitment to its principles. The promises we

Much like our commitment to the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, our commitment to R2P is
far off track, but we can still change course. Within
the context of Our Common Agenda (A/75/982) and
the New Agenda for Peace, there is an opportunity to
reassess and recalibrate our approach to the prevention
of atrocities. Likewise, the twentieth anniversary of
the 2005 World Summit, two years from now, should
serve as a catalyst for renewed commitment and
action towards our shared vision of a future where the
responsibility to protect is not just a lofty ideal but a
tangible reality. Ireland recognizes the importance of
regional and international partnerships, including with
civil society, in fulfilling our responsibility to protect.
We support the vital role of the United Nations and call
for the continued strengthening of its early-warning and
prevention mechanisms. Where prevention fails, the
Security Council has the responsibility to take collective
action to prevent and halt atrocity crimes. Ireland urges
all Member States to join the code of conduct of the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group
and the French-Mexican initiative on the use of the veto
in the Security Council in cases of mass atrocities.

23-1901725/29

A/77/PV.87

Mr. Faati (Gambia): At the 2005 World Summit,
Member States agreed unanimously on the international
community’s responsibility to protect populations,
regardless of their race or creed, from genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity.
While that obligation is a primary responsibility of
individual Member States, at the same time it is one
that is shared by all of us. We must acknowledge that
progress has been made since then. However, much
remains to be done, and in the current global context,
some of that progress risks being reversed. We thank
the Secretary-General for this year’s report (A/77/910)
entitled “Development and the responsibility to protect:
recognizing and addressing embedded risks and drivers
of atrocity crimes”.
In Africa today, there is undisputed recognition
of the strong interlinkages between peace and
development, with studies confirming that armed
conflicts and atrocity crimes remain a major obstacle to
development. Apart from the heavy human and material
costs, conflicts and atrocities impede development,
damage infrastructure, prevent the reliable delivery
of social services and disrupt the growth of societies.
Conflicts on the continent have perpetuated poverty,
which at the same time has had a negative impact on
our progress towards our collective goal of achieving
sustainable peace and security.
The challenge of addressing the root causes
of conflicts and insecurity requires greater global
solidarity and leadership on the part of the United
Nations. The international community should intensify
its collective efforts to accelerate progress towards
achieving the Sustainable Development Goals and the
goals and targets of the African Union’s Agenda 2063,
including those of the Silencing the Guns in Africa
initiative. We must also strengthen the partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union in
formulating joint responses to existing and emerging
threats to peace, security and development in Africa.
As we are addressing development challenges,
the United Nations agencies and other development
partners need funding flexibility and predictability to
deliver programmes that support building prosperous
and structurally transformed economies that leave
no one behind, especially in the least developed
and middle-income countries. We are aware of the
geopolitical competition for influence by regional and
global Powers, but as small States Members of the
United Nations, we are more interested in seeing greater
26/29

30/06/2023

cooperation in addressing the risk of atrocity crimes
and in fighting poverty, climate change, conflicts and
global insecurity.
The Government of the Gambia champions the
promotion and protection of human rights as one of
the central pillars of its domestic and foreign policies
related to the well-being of its own people and peoples
elsewhere in the world. Our policies and approach
continue to be guided by our awareness of the difficult
history that we travelled as a country in our journey
to democracy. The Gambia continues to seek national
reconciliation, entrench its democracy and consolidate
the rule of law. It is in that context that the Gambia is
committed to accountability for atrocity crimes as we
continue to seek justice for the Rohingya minority of
Myanmar. As a global community with a conscience,
we cannot continue to ignore the plight of victims
of atrocity crimes and must uphold our collective
responsibility to protect and our obligations under the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide.
The Gambia will continue to contribute to the
global pursuit for peace and security and the protection
and promotion of human rights through the progressive
development of international law, with a view to
remedying the lack of a dedicated convention on
preventing and punishing crimes against humanity. The
international community must not relent in its quest for
accountability for atrocity crimes. We look forward to
hearing from Member States during today’s debate on
best practices for ending the current climate of impunity
and inaction regarding the risk of atrocity crimes across
the globe. Our debate should be a reminder of the
importance of continuing this exchange of information
and the need to strengthen our individual and collective
prevention efforts.
Ms.
Arumpac-Marte
(Philippines):
The
Philippines has consistently supported the agenda
item on the responsibility to protect (R2P) because we
believe in the need for the General Assembly’s formal
and continuing consideration of the evolving concept
of R2P. In that regard, we note with appreciation the
Secretary-General’s report (A/77/910), which provides
an examination of the relationship between sustainable
development and the responsibility to protect and the
ways in which development can be leveraged to realize
the aims of R2P.
23-19017

30/06/2023

We would like to take this opportunity to share the
AmBisyon Natin 2040 of the Philippines, our strategic
vision that has guided the Philippines’ development
plans. Its vision is clear. No Filipino should be poor or
hungry, Filipino families should live together and have
a work-life balance, and all should feel secure over
their entire lifetimes. The plan lays out a foundation
for inclusive growth, a high-trust and resilient society
and a globally competitive knowledge economy. In the
realization that the world we want, as elaborated in the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development through the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), aligns with
the life that we want, the Philippines has mainstreamed
the SDGs in its development plans through its strategic
vision. We have made inroads on the means of
implementation and are enhancing those institutional
mechanisms with a view to recovering quickly and
accelerating progress in the wake of the impact of the
coronavirus disease pandemic.
We note that the report encourages States to
recognize the intersection between development and the
responsibility to protect and to leverage development
programming across the spectrum of atrocity risk
assessment, early warning and preparedness and
response in order to prevent, reduce and mitigate the
risks and occurrences of such atrocities. In relation to
the recommendations in the report, we want to take this
opportunity to share developments from our end and to
reiterate our understanding of R2P.
The first duty of States is to protect their populations
from actual harm and threats to their safety and
welfare. That is ultimately the basis of State legitimacy.
As a constitutional democracy that values the dignity
of every person and protects the most vulnerable, the
Philippines understands sovereignty as responsibility.
As early as 2009, we enacted into law the Philippine
Act on Crimes against International Humanitarian
Law, Genocide and Other Crimes Against Humanity. It
proceeds from the principle that the most serious crimes
of concern to the international community must not go
unpunished and that their effective prosecution must be
ensured by taking measures at the national level.
In terms of strategies aimed at poverty alleviation
and economic equality, the Philippines remains steadfast
in its commitment to achieving the world we want and
to the vision of AmBisyon Natin 2040 as part of that
responsibility. Building on our previous initiatives on
stakeholder engagement, resource mobilization and
monitoring, our strategies have expanded to include

A/77/PV.87

financial inclusion, savings mobilization, insurance
coverage and effective social protection for the most
vulnerable and most at risk.
On strengthening the human rights protection
system, while reaffirming the importance of human
rights and international humanitarian law, we would
like to highlight the United Nations Joint Programme on
Human Rights in the Philippines, launched in 2021, as a
tool for fostering systematic and coherent engagement
among United Nations entities, Member States,
international partners and civil society. With regard to
addressing conflict and advancing peacebuilding, the
Government’s rehabilitation programme in Marawi is
being fast-tracked, including to compensate the victims
of violence and terrorism.
Trust and respect for sovereignty are essential if we
are to advance the operationalization of the prevention
mandates of the relevant United Nations entities. R2P
will be best implemented by strengthening national
institutions for good governance. However, it should
not be misused for political purposes or as a means
to justify foreign intervention. The assessment of
the possible causes of failure in the responsibility to
protect should be impartial and evidence-based, free
from double standards and hidden agendas. The R2P
principle should be applied strictly according to the
parameters of the 2005 World Summit Outcome and
the Charter of the United Nations. Our experience with
R2P serves to remind us that it is imperative to respect
the principle of sovereignty. We can work with it, but
never against it.
Ms. Andrić (Croatia): Croatia aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the representative of the
European Union, in its capacity as observer, and that
delivered by my own delegation on behalf of the Group
of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect (see A/77/
PV.83), and I would like to add some remarks in my
national capacity.
We would like to thank Mr. George Okoth-Obbo,
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the
Responsibility to Protect, for his statement and his work
in promoting the responsibility to protect (R2P). His
position is one with many challenges and limitations,
and rightly, as the principle of the responsibility
to protect remains a cornerstone around which the
international community can unite when vulnerable
populations face the threat of genocide, war crimes,
ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity. We

23-1901727/29

A/77/PV.87

are deeply concerned about the continued prevalence
around the world of the occurrence of atrocity crimes
and risks of their occurrence, and we therefore believe
that we need to step up our consideration of ways to
enhance the effectiveness of measures to prevent or
mitigate them.
It would be easy to paint R2P as a divisive topic,
just as it would be easy to do for almost any topic
we discuss in this Hall. In today’s world there is an
alarming disregard for the fundamental tenets of
international law, including international humanitarian
and human rights law. But it is not our job to run away
from difficult topics and questions or to abandon any
topic that cannot achieve full consensus. Voting in the
General Assembly and the Human Rights Council has
consistently shown support for R2P, and this year’s
annual debate featured voices in favour of the concept
from all regional groups. We all agreed on that in 2005.
We did not shy away from finding a solution after we
saw the signs of impending bloodshed and watched
it happen.
The discussion surrounding the responsibility to
protect in the United Nations can often be fraught with
assumptions, fears and questions about what Member
States really want. As we approach the end of this
debate, it should be clear what Member States want.
We therefore join the calls of many speakers before
us encouraging the Special Advisers to the SecretaryGeneral on the Prevention of Genocide and on the
Responsibility to Protect to use their leadership roles
to advance R2P and the prevention of atrocities and to
highlight the potential risks in ongoing and emergent
crises. Like many before us, we also urge the Special
Advisers to strengthen those efforts, share their
analyses with the wider United Nations membership
and regularly provide the necessary early-warning
assessments and recommendations on how to prevent
atrocities, including to the Security Council, the General
Assembly and the Human Rights Council. Additionally,
as others have in this debate, we would like to once
more encourage the Secretary-General to include in
his future reports assessments of the implementation
of recommendations from previous reports and an
analysis of trends regarding the risks of genocide, war
crimes, crimes against humanity and ethnic cleansing,
as well as their prevention.
As we approach the twentieth anniversary of the
World Summit, it will be prudent to take stock and look
forward with a view to understanding how to improve
28/29

30/06/2023

the implementation of R2P and remove obstacles to it.
The anniversary is a perfect time to review what has
been achieved and what lies ahead. Let us use the time
between now and 2025 to gather best practices, identify
challenges and strengthen our strategies. Finally, in this
Hall, it is our words that are our tools, but we want our
every word to have an effect on the situation on the
ground. As the Special Adviser on R2P said recently to
the Group of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect,
we have to dispel the notion that the responsibility to
protect is about beautiful concepts and principles, as
opposed to what it is really about, which is how to keep
people safe.
The Acting President (spoke in French): I now
give the floor to the observer of the Sovereign Order
of Malta.
Mr. Beresford-Hill (Sovereign Order of Malta):
The Permanent Mission of the Sovereign Order of Malta
joins our distinguished colleagues in addressing a matter
of profound global significance — the responsibility
for preventing genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity. Our shared history bears
witness to the unimaginable atrocities that have scarred
our world and sadly continue to do so. It is in the face of
those appalling realities that the global community has
rallied together, recognizing again the pressing need to
prevent and protect against such abominations.
In 2005, the General Assembly adopted a historic
resolution (resolution 60/1) outlining the responsibility
to protect (R2P), symbolizing a collective commitment
to safeguarding the rights and security of individuals.
R2P is built on three pillars that continue to guide all
of us — the pursuit of peace, justice and the prevention
of mass atrocities. The first pillar highlights the
responsibility of sovereign States to protect their own
populations from genocide and other crimes. The second
underscores the responsibility of the international
community to assist States in fulfilling their protective
obligations, and when a State is unwilling or unable
to protect its people, the global community must step
forward with timely and decisive responses to prevent
or halt mass atrocities and provide aid to those who
need it. The third pillar recognizes the necessity of
collective action in promoting preventive measures, in
accordance with international law and the Charter of
the United Nations.
As we gather here today, we feel compelled to reflect
on R2P’s profound significance and implications for
23-19017

30/06/2023

A/77/PV.87

our shared future. Our discourse should revolve around
bolstering our preventive strategies, strengthening
our early-warning mechanisms and fostering a culture
of accountability. Together, as we engage in this
discourse, let us bear in mind the countless lives lost,
the resilience of survivors and the enduring hope that
lies in our collective pursuit of a more just and peaceful
world. Through respectful dialogue and an exchange
of diverse perspectives, we can pave the way for an
enlightened future, one where the responsibility to
protect is upheld and the spectre of mass atrocities
remains forever banished.

has been involved in nearly every armed conflict
around the globe — I want to say that my delegation
categorically rejects those baseless and unsubstantiated
allegations. They are based on fabricated assumptions
and are nothing more than a propaganda tactic that
various States use to further their political agendas. In
that regard, the Government of the Islamic Republic
of Iran, in good faith and based on its constructive
approach to the Ukraine conflict, stands ready to
engage constructively in joint technical and expert
cooperation with Ukraine to clarify the unfounded
accusations made against Iran.

The Sovereign Order of Malta is committed to the
promotion of the health and dignity of people in need, and
we ask the Assembly, and each State and organization
represented in it, to reaffirm its commitment to
attaining the common good of all societies and to look
past our own privatized, individualistic and inwardly
nationalistic priorities. After all, the goodness of a
thing can truly be good only when it is common to
all. As Pope Francis has said, “Either we are brothers
and sisters or we will destroy each other.” And as he
remarked in a statement read to the Security Council
recently, “We are suffering from a famine of fraternity”
(see S/PV.9346). Surely here, in this bastion of hope,
the fraternity that binds so many of us together can
and should transcend these walls and should echo in
the corridors and halls of power and in the hearts and
minds of those who sent us here.

The Islamic Republic of Iran reiterates its
commitment to its obligations under international
humanitarian law and emphasizes that all of its
arms exports are conducted in full compliance with
international law, international humanitarian law
and the applicable rules and regulations governing
international trade and conventional weapons. My
Government continues to call for a comprehensive,
peaceful and sustained resolution to the current conflict,
including an immediate ceasefire, a resumption of
dialogue and the provision of humanitarian assistance
to people in need.

The Acting President (spoke in French): We have
heard the last speaker for this item.
The exercise of the right of reply has been requested.
I would like to remind members that statements in the
right of reply are limited to 10 minutes for the first
intervention and five minutes for the second, and should
be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Ghorbanpour Najafabadi (Islamic Republic
of Iran): As there were some references and accusations
concerning the involvement of Iranian-made weapon
systems in the Ukraine conflict, made by various
countries, including the United States — which has
had by far the world’s largest military budget and
expenditure for decades, and since its establishment

Mr. Skachkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We noted that a number of States used the
high rostrum of this forum to artificially link the issue
of the responsibility to protect to what is happening
in Ukraine, making accusations in that regard
against Russia.
The basis for the conduct of our special military
operation is Russia’s exercise of its inalienable right to
self-defence as enshrined in Article 51 of the Charter of
the United Nations. We notified the Security Council
to that effect in due course via a letter issued on
24 February 2022 (S/2022/154, annex). Anyone who
wishes to may acquaint themselves with the letter.
The Acting President (spoke in French): May I
take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to
conclude its consideration of agenda item 132?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 6 p.m.

23-1901729/29
