Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee
ANNEX TO THE PROTOCOL AMENDING THE SLAVERY
CONVENTION SIGNED AT GENEVA ON 25 SEPTEMBER

1926
In article 7 "the Secretary-General of the United Nations"
shall be substituted for "the Secretary-General of the League
of Nations".
In article 8 "the International Court of Justice" shall be substituted for "the Permanent Court of International Justice",
and "the Statute of the International Court of Justice" shall
be substituted for "the Protocol of December 16th, 1920, relating
to the Permanent Court of International Justice".
In the first and second paragraphs of article 10 "the United
Nations" shall be substituted for "the League of Nations".
The last three paragraphs of article 11 shall be deleted and
the following substituted:
"The present Convention shall be open to accession by all
States, including States which are not Members of the United
Nations, to which the Secretary-General of the United Nations shall have communicated a certified copy of the Convention.
"Accession shall be effected by the deposit of a formal instrument with the Secretary-General of the United Nations,
who shall give notice thereof to all States Parties to the Convention and to all other States contemplated in the present
article, informing them of the date on which each such instrument of accession was received in deposit."
In article 12 "the United Nations" shall be substituted for
"the League of Nations".

795 (VIII). Appeal to States to accelerate their
ratifications of, or accessions to, the Conven•
tion on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide, and measures designed to
ensure the widest possible diffusion of the
nature, contents and purposes of the Con•
vention

The General Assembly,
Considering its resolution 260 A (III) of 9 December 1948, by which it approved the Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide,
and believing that the Convention represents a valuable
contribution to the development of international law,
1. Reiterates its appeal to States to accelerate their
ratifications of, or accessions to, the Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
take all necessary measures designed to ensure the
widest possible diffusion of the nature, contents and
purposes of the Convention.
455th plenary meeting,
3 November 1953.
796 (VIII). Publication of documents concern•
ing the drafting and application of the Charter: Preparatory work with regard to the
possible holding of a General Con£erence of
the Members of the United Nations in ac•
cordance with Article 109 of the Charter

The General Assembly,
Having regard to the provisions of Article 109 of
the Charter under which a proposal to hold a General
Conference of the Members of the United Nations for
the purpose of reviewing the Charter is to be placed
on the agenda of the tenth annual session of the General Assembly if such a conference has not been held
before that session,

51

Considering that the examination of such a proposal
will require cortsiderable preparation on the part of both
the Secretary-General and Member States,
Considering that study of the legislative history of
the Charter and of the practice followed by the various
organs of the United Nations is one of the best methods
of acquiring knowledge of the Charter and will greatly
facilitate the General Assembly's consideration, at its
tenth annual session, of the question of calling a General Conference,
Having regard to the memorandum by the Secretary-General, 4
Requests the Secretary-General to prepare, publish
and circulate among the Member States during 1954,
or shortly thereafter:
(a) A systematic compilation of the documents of
the United Nations Conference on International Organization not yet published;
( b) A complete index of the documents of that Conference on the lines envisaged in part II and part III
C of the memorandum by the Secretary-General;
( c) A repertory of the practice of United Nations
organs appropriately indexed.
458th plenary meeting,
27 November 1953.
797 (VIII). Arbitral procedure
The General Assembly,
Noting the draft 5 on arbitral procedure prepared by
the International Law Commission at its fifth session,
Considering that the said draft includes certain important elements with respect to the progressive development of international law on arbitral procedure,
Considering that, having regard to the importance
of the topic, the governments of Member States should
have an opportunity of making known their views on
the draft on arbitral procedure in the light of the discussion which has taken place at the current session
of the General Assembly,
1. Decides to transmit to Member States the draft
on arbitral procedure prepared by the International Law
Commission together with the observations made
thereon in the Sixth Committee at the current session of the General Assembly, with a view to the submission by governments of whatever comments they
may deem appropriate, if possible, before 1 January
1955;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to circulate to
Member States any comments he may receive, and to
include the question in the provisional agenda of the
tenth session of the General Assembly.
468th plenary meeting,
7 Detember 1953.
798 (VIII).

Regime of the high seas

The General Assembly,
Considering that at its fourth session the General
Assembly recommended 6 that the International Law
Commission study simultaneously the regime of the high
seas and the regime of territorial waters,
See document A/C.6/343.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Eighth Session, Supplement No. 9, page 9.
6 See resolution 374(IV).
4

5

52

General Assembly-Eighth Session

Having regard to the fact that the problems relating
to the high seas, territorial waters, contiguous zones,
the continental shelf and the superjacent waters are
closely linked together juridically as well as physically,
Decides not to deal with any aspect of the regime
of the high seas or of the regime of territorial waters
until all the problems involved have been studied by
the International Law Commission and reported upon
by it to the General Assembly.
468th plenary meeting,
7 December 1953.

799 (VIII). Request for the codification of the
principles of international law governing
State responsibility
The General Assembly,
Considering that it is desirable for the maintenance
and development of peaceful relations between States

that the principles of international law governing State
responsibility be codified,
Noting that the International Law Commission at
its first session included 7 the topic "State responsibility" in its provisional list of topics of international
law selected for codification,
Requests the International Law Commission, as soon
as it considers it advisable, to undertake the codification of the principles of international law governing
State responsibility.
468th plenary meeting,
7 December 1953.

7 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fourth
Session, Supplement No. 10, para. 16.
