S/2017/746

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 August 2017
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2363
(2017), by which the Council extended the mandate of the African Union -United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) until 30 June 2018 and requested
me to report, every 60 days, on its implementation. The report provides an update
and analysis of the conflict, as well as an overview of the political situation and the
operational environment in Darfur, the main challenges to the effective
implementation of the mandate, including violations of the status -of-forces
agreement, from 6 June to 15 August 2017. It also presents the steps taken by
UNAMID towards achieving its benchmarks and provides an update on progress in
the implementation of the recommendations of the strategic review, including the
financing strategy for the transfer of tasks to the United Nations country team.

II. Conflict analysis
2.
Residual clashes between the Government of the Sudan and the Darfur rebe l
movements that had launched incursions late in May occurred in North Darfur,
while the fragmentation of the armed oppositions continued, their breakaway
factions forming alliances with or against the Government. Intercommunal fighting
also persisted across Darfur, with a slight increase in the number of fatalities
compared to the corresponding period of 2016, mainly over land and livestock
disputes. Violence against civilians, perpetrated primarily by armed militia, also
manifested resource dimensions, the majority of cases occurring in farmland, or as
part of the efforts to deter internally displaced persons from returning to their home
villages. Civilians were also caught in confrontations between armed militias and
government security personnel, including attacks against the police and the Rapid
Support Forces. The humanitarian situation was exacerbated by flooding and the
outbreak of acute watery diarrhoea in some parts of Darfur. Meanwhile, political
reshuffles following the formation of the Government of National Accord were
extended to the local level, but the ruling party maintained overall control of the
existing structures. Progress pertaining to the Darfur peace process and the
implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur remained modes t, a

17-14610 (E)

050917

*1714610*

S/2017/746

situation compounded by the refusal of the non-signatory movements of the Doha
Document to commit themselves to the resumption of talks. 1
Fighting between the Government of the Sudan and armed groups and its
impact on security
3.
Following the clashes between the Government and the Sudan Liberation
Army/Minni Minawi (SLA/MM) and the Sudan Liberation Army/Transitional
Council, a splinter faction of the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid (SLA/AW),
in North and East Darfur, from 20 to 29 May, UNAMID received security clearance
to access the Ayn Sero area, 30 km north-west of Kutum in North Darfur, on 8 June.
The patrol received reports of civilian casualties and looting in the area. The
Government forces and SLA/MM clashed on 9 June in Uru, 39 km north-west of
Umm Barru in North Darfur. Eleven SLA/MM members were reportedly killed,
while three Sudanese security personnel sustained minor injuries. On 17 June, 13
SLA/MM members surrendered to the Sudanese Armed Forces in Ayn Sero.
4.
In Central Darfur, on 10 June, there was a confrontation between the Sudanese
Armed Forces and SLA/AW elements in Thur village, 15 km south of Nertiti,
triggered by an alleged theft by the latter of livestock belonging to the Nawaibah
clan of the Northern Rizeigat. On 14 June, a group of armed Nawaibah attacked
internally displaced persons, killing two of them, in Wisa village near the Thur East
camp for internally displaced persons. On 18 June, Nawaibah militia clashed with a
group of SLA/AW elements in the vicinity of the Thur East camp, which led to the
injury of one Nawaibah, followed by the intervention of the Sudanese Armed Forces
and police personnel.
5.
In Sortony, North Darfur, the situation involving former SLA/AW elements,
now called the SLA/Popular Defence (SLA/PD) following their defection to the
Government in January 2017, and frictions with the internally displaced populations
and Arab nomads in the area, remained precarious. On 17 June, a group of Sudanese
Armed Forces soldiers and the Northern Rizeigat from Kube water point, 5 km
north-west of Sortony, arrived at the gathering site for internally displaced persons,
reportedly to seek missing livestock. Tensions increased as a group of SLA/PD also
arrived at the scene in armed vehicles. Although the Sudanese soldiers and Rizeigat
personnel returned to Kube after UNAMID troops prevented their entry into the
gathering site, the Arab nomads threatened on 18 June to break off any dialogue
with the internally displaced persons and resort to violence if the livestock issue
was not resolved. On 20 June, UNAMID prevented another attempt by Sudanese
Armed Forces and Arab nomads to enter the gathering site in Sortony in search of
the SLA/PD leader. On 6 July, Arab militiamen ambushed a group of SLA/PD in
Dible village, 10 km west of Sortony, killing four and wounding three others.
UNAMID patrols to Kube water point on 17 and 18 July observed that the local
residents, predominantly Arabs, had deserted the area, possibly in fear of reprisals.
Intercommunal conflicts
6.
Intercommunal violence persisted in Darfur over land and livestock disputes:
10 cases resulted in 74 fatalities, in comparison to 11 clashes resulting in 96
fatalities during the previous period. At the heart of these conflicts are unresolved
issues on the use of land for farming or the grazing and migration of livestock.
Reconciliation efforts by local governments remained temporary measures, as
evident from the frequent breaches of the peace agreements between the
__________________
1

2/17

For an assessment of the implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, see
S/2017/747.
17-14610

S/2017/746

communities. The Government also launched disarmament campaigns to contain
violence, but underlying causes of land ownership and access remained unaddressed.
7.
In South Darfur, notwithstanding the agreement signed in August 2016 among
the leaders of seven major tribes in Shattaya, 94 km north-west of Kass, the
Misseriya attacked Fur returnees in the area on 26 June, burning down their
properties so that they would leave for a nearby camp for internally displaced
persons. The Government deployed security forces and arrested two perpetrator s.
On 8 June, fighting broke out between the Rizeigat and the Gimir in Sesaban
village, 50 km south-east of Katilla, and one Gimir and two Rizeigat were killed. In
retaliation, on 9 June, Rizeigat attacked a mosque in Sesaban, during which two
Rizeigat, one Gimir and one Fallata were killed. Local authorities deployed forces,
and on 15 June, the Rizeigat and the Gimir signed an agreement on cessation of
hostilities. On 20 July, armed Fallata in military attire attacked 20 Salamat and
killed 5 of them, in Hashabah valley, 16 km south-west of Graida, as the latter were
moving with their livestock towards Nyala. In the Dawis area, 14 km north -east of
Kass, armed Huttiya Arabs clashed with Tunjur over farmland ownership on 30 July,
and five Tunjur were reportedly killed.
8.
In Central Darfur, despite the peace agreement signed between the Salamat
and the Misseriya on 29 May, the Salamat attacked the Misseriya in the Sure area,
40 km north-east of Um Dukhun, on 12 June, causing the death of one Misseriya.
9.
In East Darfur, on 26 June, the conflict between the Ma‘aliya and Hamar
reignited, despite a reconciliation agreement signed in 2014, when the Ma ‘aliya
clashed with the El Gekhisat clan of the Hamar in Karkadeh village, 18 km west of
Sharif, over livestock theft. Six Hamar and three Ma‘aliya were killed, and
UNAMID accompanied local authorities to visit the area. However, on 28 June,
another confrontation occurred at Um Totahana village, 65 km north -east of Adilla,
in which one Misseriya inhabitant of the area was killed. On 21 July, a series of
clashes occurred between the Ma‘aliya and the Rizeigat in Esharaya, 7 km north of
Kelikili, and El Mujelid, 60 km north of Ed Daein, which resulted in the death of 14
Rizeigat. Fighting continued on 23 and 24 July in Al Sahab village, 37 km northwest of Abu Karinka, and in Hasab Ala, 17 km north -east of Ed Daein, and resulted
in the deaths of two Ma‘aliya and 25 Rizeigat. The state government deployed
security forces on 24 and 28 July, Sudanese Armed Forces arrived in Ed Daein to
disarm and confiscate weapons from the Rizeigat and the Ma ‘aliya, and arrested
traditional leaders and civilians from both communities on 29 July. On 1 August,
Rapid Support Forces also started to disarm civilians in Abu Karinka and Adilla,
and arrested Ma‘aliya leaders and some civilians on 4 August. These measures have
generated resentment among the two communities.
Violence against civilians and human rights violations
10. Despite the reduction in the number of armed clashes, the securit y and human
rights situation in Darfur remained volatile. UNAMID documented 94 cases of
human rights violations and abuses involving 204 victims, including 22 children,
compared to 82 cases involving 124 victims during the previous reporting period.
Violations of the right to life accounted for 17 cases involving 81 victims, and
violations of the right to physical integrity acco unted for 37 cases involving 82
victims. There were 27 cases of sexual and gender-based violence, including
conflict-related sexual violence, involving 37 victims, including 9 children, and 3
cases of arbitrary arrest and illegal detention involving 6 victims. There were seven
abduction cases involving 27 victims. In total, UNAMID confirmed 63 cases of
human rights violations and abuses involving 128 victims, while the remaining 31
cases, with 76 victims, could not be verified owing to various factors, including
access restrictions. Of the 94 reported cases, 10 cases involving 22 victims were
17-14610

3/17

S/2017/746

reportedly perpetrated by government security forces and auxiliary groups. The
remaining 84 cases, with 182 victims, were allegedly perpetrated by unidentified
armed men, some described by the victims as Arabs.
11. While the Government has taken steps to strengthen judicial institutions and to
combat impunity through the deployment of judges, prosecutors and police
personnel in Darfur, victims of human rights violations and abuses continue to
report their limited access to justice. The number of investigations of human rights
violations remains low, as are success rates by the police in apprehending
perpetrators. Investigations were initiated in only 14 of the 94 documented cases,
resulting in nine arrests.
12. UNAMID continued to observe abductions and attacks of farmers by armed
individuals, often described as Arabs. On 1 July, a farmer was killed in the outskirts
of Tawilah, North Darfur, by two armed men described as Arabs. On 9 June, an
internally displaced person was shot dead at his farm by members of a militia group
outside Mershing, South Darfur. On 18 June, 16 civilians were abducted in Dubu-alOmda in eastern Jebel Marra in South Darfur, and they have not been released. In
another incident on 20 June, armed individuals shot and seriously injured a civilian
in Beida, West Darfur. On 18 June a police officer shot and injured a civilian in
Habila, West Darfur.
13. UNAMID also recorded 38 incidents of access denial to farms and arbitrary
land occupation, in the majority of which nomadic herders claimed ownership of
properties on the grounds of prolonged absence by the internally displaced persons.
Tensions between farmers and nomadic herders are likely to increase with the onset
of the farming season.
14. The plight of internally displaced persons, particularly women and children,
remained critical because of insecurity. Internally displaced persons were victims of
101 crimes, which led to 13 fatalities. Other civilians were affected by 217 crimes
resulting in 48 fatalities, including cases of murder (37), armed robbery (29),
attempted robbery (6), assault/harassment (70), burglary/break-in (5), looting (2),
abduction (14), arson (2), shooting (33), attack/ambush (6), threat of violence (4),
livestock theft (8) and other crimes (1). The level of criminality and the number of
criminality-related deaths remained almost unchanged, compared to the previous
60-day period, when 97 crimes against internally displaced persons resulted in 19
fatalities and 205 crimes with 44 fatalities affected other civilians. Random night
shooting in and around camps for internally displaced persons remained a major
concern. For example, on 26 June, armed Rapid Support Forces personnel entered
the Ardamata camp for internally displaced persons in El Geneina, West Darfur, and
fired indiscriminately when residents asked them to leave. They arrested four of the
internally displaced persons, who were released later at the intervention of local
authorities. Similar shooting incidents were reported in the Krinding and Dorti
camps in West Darfur and the Khamsa Dagayeg and Hasahisa camps in Central
Darfur.
15. In Central Darfur, on 28 June, two suspected Sudanese Armed Forces soldiers
shot and wounded a Fur internally displaced person inside the North camp, 5 km
north-east of Nertiti. On the same day, a robbery attempt of a Fu r by armed militia
in Kaira, 38 km north-east of Nertiti, escalated into a clash that resulted in the death
of five militia members and three locals. Fearing retaliation, the locality
commissioner instructed the inhabitants to evacuate from the area to Gol o, while
facilitating reconciliation between the two parties.
16. In South Darfur, on 22 July, Arab nomads attacked a group of Fur internally
displaced persons from the Kalma camp who were farming in Hajar Tono, 68 km
south-east of Nyala, killing six of them. The incident prompted an unverified
4/17

17-14610

S/2017/746

number of internally displaced persons to leave the area and return to the Kalma
camp. The Sudanese police deployed reinforcements to the area and arrested two
suspects, but on 26 and 27 July armed Arabs shot and wo unded a girl and raped two
women, respectively, all of whom were returning from Hajar Tono village to the
Kalma camp owing to the deterioration in the security situation in the return area.
Crime and banditry
17. Confrontations between armed militia and government security personnel also
led to civilian casualties. In West Darfur, on 29 July, a group of Arab herders
attacked a police station in Terbiba village, 20 km south-west of Masteri, killing two
and injuring three others, including a civilian, in retaliation for the Sudanese police
having chased livestock away from a farming area in Terbiba. The Government
security forces were deployed to the area to contain the situation.
18. The Government intensified its disarmament campaign. On 6 August, the
national high committee for the collection of weapons and non-registered vehicles
issued a statement, directing those in possession of weapons, ammunition,
explosives or unregistered vehicles to hand them over to the government security
institutions, with immediate effect. The following day, the Second Vice-President,
Hassabo Mohamed Abdel Rahman, initiated a tour of Darfur to promote the
disarmament campaign. On 13 August, the media reported that Musa Hilal and other
commanders of the Border Guards Force rejected the government disarmament plan
categorically. They also denounced the arrest of Rizeigat and Ma ‘aliya tribal leaders
by the Rapid Support Forces following their clashes in East Darfur, and refused any
merger with those forces.

III. Political situation
Darfur peace process
19. While SLA/MM clashed with the Government once during the reporting
period, in June, and SLA/AW remained unengaged in the peace process, their
breakaway groups and other factions entered piecemeal negotiations with the
Government. On 22 June, the Government reported that a faction of SLA/AW led by
General Haroon Kilmang Koi had joined the peace process, facilitated by the
Governor of Central Darfur. On 2 July, a faction of the Justice and Equality
Movement (JEM/Sudan) under Abubakar Hamid Noor and Souleyman Jamous
announced that the group had presented a list of 15 demands to the Government on
which they would engage in talks. On 24 July, a group composed of combatants
claiming to be members of JEM, SLA/MM and SLA/AW, led by Adam Ali Ahmed,
signed a peace agreement with West Darfur State. Reportedly, the group assembled
in Ed Daein, East Darfur, and travelled to West Darfur in seven vehicles and with an
unspecified number of weapons.
20. On 16 July, the president of the Sudan Liberation Army/General Command
(SLA/GC), Abu Jamal, who had signed a peace agreement with the Government in
Koron, Central Darfur, in November 2016, was dismissed by other leaders of the
group; the implications of this remain unclear for the faction and its representation
in the state-level government. On 6 July, the Sudan Liberation Movement for
Justice, the Sudan Liberation Movement-Unity, and a JEM faction led by Abdallah
Bishr Gali, all of which are relatively unknown and have a limited presence in
Darfur, issued a statement announcing the formation of an alliance called the Sudan
Liberation Force Alliance, with Al-Tahir Abu Bakr Hajar as its chairman. The
coalition called on other armed groups, including SL A/MM, SLA/AW and JEM, to
join the alliance.
17-14610

5/17

S/2017/746

Implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur
21. There was limited progress with respect to the work of the remaining
commissions and fund established under the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur,
namely the Darfur Land Commission, the Voluntary Return and Resettlement
Commission, the Truth, Justice and Reconciliation Commission, the Security
Arrangements Implementation Commission and the Darfur Reconstruction and
Development Fund. The presence and capacity of these institutions in Darfur
continued to be challenged by the lack of political support, funding and personnel.
Funding constraints have also undermined the Darfur Internal Dialogue and
Consultation, with an estimated $1.4 million outstanding to complete the process .
National dialogue
22. In accordance with the national dialogue process and its outcome, on 2 July,
the President, Omar Hassan al-Bashir, issued a decree extending the unilateral
ceasefire by the Government until 2 October 2017. On 3 July, the Prime Minister
and First Vice-President, Bakri Hassan Saleh, elevated the Ministers of Investment
(from the National Umma Party), Information (from the Democratic Unionist
Party), and Higher Education and Scientific Research (from the National Congress
Party (NCP)) to the status of Deputy Prime Minister.
23. In Darfur, new cabinets were announced by State Governors between 9 June
and 16 July. While nearly half of them were members of the National Congress
Party (four out of eight ministers in East, West and North Darfur and 4 out of 10 in
South Darfur), other political parties received ministerial posts as follows: four for
the National Liberation and Justice Party, three for the Liberation and Justice Party,
two for the JEM/Dabajo, and one each for the United U mma Party, the Federal
Umma Party, and two parties considered close affiliates of NCP, namely the
Democratic Unionist Party and the National Democratic Unionist Party. In addition,
SLA/AW breakaway factions (SLA/General Command and SLA/Historical
Leadership), JEM breakaway factions (JEM Sudan and JEM Jebel Moon), the
Popular Movement for Democratic Rights and the Movement of Popular Force for
Rights and Democracy received one ministerial post each, and three other new
ministers whose political affiliations are unclear were appointed. Only two women
were among the new appointees. New locality commissioners have also been
appointed in East, West and South Darfur, where all nine, two of them women, are
from NCP. In Central Darfur, seven out of nine were selected from NCP, while the
political affiliation of the remaining two is not known.
24. On 11 July, the United States of America postponed its decision with respect to
the removal of sanctions against the Sudan for an additional three months, but
maintained its prohibition on interaction with individuals associated with the
conflict in Darfur. The Government of the Sudan announced a suspension of the
negotiations thereafter.

IV. Humanitarian situation
25. There were reports of civilian displacement in the Ayn Sero area, Kutum
locality, North Darfur, following the clashes between Government forces and
SLA/MM elements in May. These reports remained unverified, as the Government
maintained that the situation in the area was stable and there was no need for
assistance. In Um Dukhun, Central Darfur, an estimated 4,000 people are reported
to have been newly displaced, owing to intercommunal fighting in May, and the
humanitarian response is in progress.

6/17

17-14610

S/2017/746

26. Flash floods and the outbreak of diseases compounded the humanitarian
situation in Darfur. In June, flash floods affected 7,000 people in the Kalma camp
for internally displaced persons in South Darfur. Hundreds of shelters were
damaged or destroyed, although no injuries or deaths were reported. In July,
flooding reportedly affected about 900 households in the Hamidiya and Hasahisa
camps for internally displaced persons in Central Darfur, as well as 281 households
in Shangil Tobaya in North Darfur. Humanitarian assistance is under way for these
areas.
27. The reporting period also witnessed a rapid spread of acute watery diarrhoea
in North, East and South Darfur. According to the Government, 424 cases resulting
in 19 deaths were reported in North Darfur from 14 June to 21 July, 504 cases
resulting in 28 deaths in East Darfur between 20 June and 21 July, and 475 cases
resulting in 6 deaths in South Darfur between 28 June and 21 July, the majority of
them in the Kalma camp for internally displaced persons.

V. Operating environment
28. The overall environment in which UNAMID and humanitarian personnel
operate continued to improve, with fewer criminal incidents and movement
restrictions. Nevertheless, delays in the issuance of visas, particularly for human
rights personnel, continued to hamper the work of UNAMID, and the backlog of
containers at the ports of entry has also not been resolved.
Attacks and threats of attacks on UNAMID and humanitarian actors
29. A total of 40 criminal incidents affected UNAMID personnel during the
reporting period compared to 14 in the previous one, and 34 during the same time in
2016. On 20 June, a national staff member was robbed at the UNAMID office in the
Hamidiya camp for internally displaced persons in Zalingei, Central Darfur. On
21 June, a group of unidentified men attempted to rob three UNAMID national staff
members near the UNAMID compound in El Fasher, North Darfur. Later the same
day, three unidentified armed men stopped a local vehicle with three national staff
members on board, near the UNAMID compound in El Fasher, robbing them of
their personal belongings and carjacking their vehicle. On 22 June, unidentified
armed perpetrators carjacked a vehicle belonging to a UNAMID -contracted
company, Gulf Catering Company, in El Fasher, and robbed the driver. On 5 July, in
two separate incidents, two UNAMID police officers were robbed of their
belongings by unidentified armed perpetrators in El Fasher. On 6 August, two armed
men carjacked a private vehicle from a national staff member and robbed her of
valuables near El Fasher Super Camp. All of these incidents were reported to the
Sudanese authorities, but none of the perpetrators has been apprehended.
30. Humanitarian partners encountered several criminal incidents. On 12 June,
unidentified perpetrators carjacked a vehicle belonging to an international
non-governmental organization in Nyala, South Darfur, and on 1 July unidentified
perpetrators broke into a guesthouse occupied by one national staff member of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in Ed Daein, East
Darfur, and took his personal belongings.
Detention of staff
31. The national staff member who was arrested by the National Intelligence and
Security Services in Nyala on 23 November 2016 for alleged espionage has
remained in government custody in Khartoum without trial. Another national staff
member who was arrested by the Security Services in Ed Daein, East Darfur, on
17-14610

7/17

S/2017/746

28 May 2017, for allegedly bribing local government officials and committing other
crimes against the State, remains under arrest. The Government has yet to provide
any evidence in either case.
Access restrictions
32. There were only two incidents of access denial during the reporting period. On
27 June, a UNAMID patrol was denied access to the Nigea camp for internally
displaced persons in Shearia, East Darfur, by National Intelligence and Security
Services personnel, who claimed that training for internally displaced persons was
being conducted without informing the Government and threatened to attack
UNAMID patrols in the area. On 28 June, a UNAMID patrol was denied access by
the Security Services to Khazanjadeed, north-east of Shearia, because of an alleged
breakout of acute watery diarrhoea. On 19 July, Sudanese Armed Forces personnel
at a checkpoint near Kidingeer village in South Darfur fired at a UNAMID patrol.
No injuries were reported, and the Government claimed that the patrol was mistaken
for an armed group.
33. UNAMID did not experience any air movement restrictions during the
reporting period. However, there were occasional bureaucratic impediments to air
mobility, including delays in the approval of flight schedules, prohibition of flights
between team sites in different sectors, and limits on air operation hours.
34. The humanitarian operating environment continued to improve, compared to
the previous year, and partners reported faster approval for movements within
Darfur and fewer denials of access. Agreement was also reached between the
Humanitarian Aid Commission and international non-governmental organizations
regarding the process for the recruitment of national staff, but implementation has
yet to be monitored. The overall compliance with the revised humanitarian
directives issued in December 2016, however, remained inconsistent across Darfur
States, an example of which included access constraints concerning Ayn Sero in
North Darfur. The inter-agency mission to Deribat, South Darfur, has been
postponed because of insecurity, and a humanitarian mission to Rockero, Central
Darfur, was postponed several times, until it was finally carried out from 5 to 9 July.
On 10 August, two unknown armed men carjacked a vehicle belonging to the United
Nations Population Fund near its office in Nyala.
Visas and customs clearance
35. The Government granted 742 visas for UNAMID, including 445 for military
and police personnel, 123 for official visitors, 130 for contractors and 44 for
international staff and dependents. A total of 139 visa requests have been pending
beyond the normal period of 15 days, some of them since January 2016. These
include 8 cases for police, 27 cases for contractors, 32 cases for official visitors, 22
cases for military personnel, 40 cases for civilian staff, and 10 cases for United
Nations Volunteers. Only 1 visa was approved for the human rights section of
UNAMID, and 21 additional visas remain pending. The current vacancy rate for the
human rights section remains at 46 per cent, while the overall vacancy rate for
international civilian staff is 16 per cent, 5.4 per cent of that attributable to pending
visas.
36. The Sudanese authorities have released food ration containers progressively,
as they arrive at Port Sudan. However, customs clearances for 114 shipments of
contingent-owned and United Nations-owned equipment remained pending, some
since April 2015. These shipments include 1 armoured personnel carrier, 10
vehicles, communications and information technology equipment, generators,
submersible pumps and spare parts for vehicles. The delays have resulted in
8/17

17-14610

S/2017/746

demurrage charges and other costs incurred by troop- and police-contributing
countries associated with the inspection and repair of equipment. In addition, the
Government has not granted the certificate of taxation exemption for goods
imported by sea in 2016 and 2017. The Government has since informed UNAMID
that the certificate of taxation exemption has been replaced by a new system.

VI. Progress towards the achievement of the strategic objectives
of UNAMID
Protection of civilians
37. UNAMID completed the roll-out of its refined strategy for the protection of
civilians across the mission area, while its integrated field protection teams
conducted 37 missions in West Darfur, 21 in North Darfur and 3 in Central Darfur.
In addition, the teams addressed immediate threats to women identified by the
women protection networks, supported by UNAMID, by accelerating weekly patrols
by UNAMID police and military during grass and firewood collection.
38. In West Darfur, internally displaced persons and farmer s raised concerns about
harassment, intimidation and denial of access to farms; women reported cases of
harassment by herders during firewood collection. In response, UNAMID consulted
with the women’s groups from all camps for internally displaced persons in
El Geneina, collected specific details regarding incident-prone locations, timings
and days, and adjusted military and police patrol plans to ensure increased visibility.
In Central Darfur, the integrated field protection teams conducted a verification
patrol to Thur to investigate allegations of the attack against internally displaced
persons in the Wisa area on 10 June. The teams engaged with the local security
committee which then held a series of meetings with the Arab communities, as well
as internally displaced persons, to normalize the situation. UNAMID has since
carried out follow-up visits to the area at least twice a week. In North Darfur, the
teams visited the Korma camp for internally displaced persons and surrounding
villages, where concerns were raised regarding harassment and intimidation during
farming activities. In response, UNAMID developed a plan to intensify the
protection of farming areas during the harvesting season, from June to October. The
plan included increased joint advocacy and engagement with herders, farmers and
internally displaced persons on farm protection issues, the conduct of regular
security meetings with local authorities and crop protection committees to enhance
the sensitization of local communities, and an intensification of the number and
duration of farming patrols in consultation with internally displaced farmers. In
South Darfur, internally displaced persons and other stakeholders in the
Menawashei and Khor Abeche areas also expressed similar security concerns a s the
farming season started. UNAMID collaborated with humanitarian agencies in
the revitalization and rehabilitation of basic social services in Shattaya locality to
support 256 returnee households. At the request of UNAMID, the Sudanese security
forces deployed to the area, and brokered mediation to defuse tension.
39. In total, UNAMID military conducted 17,190 patrols, including 8,889 patrols
aimed at protecting civilians. These consisted of 6,291 short-range patrols, 391
long-range patrols and 2,207 evening patrols. In total, UNAMID conducted 4,162
visits to villages and 2,113 visits to camps for internally displaced persons.
Separately, UNAMID police conducted 5,005 patrols in support of physical
protection of civilians, including 2,367 confidence -building patrols to camps for the
displaced and 2,638 patrols to respond to the security needs of the internally
displaced, particularly women and children engaged in livelihood activities outside
their camps. In addition, UNAMID police undertook 537 joint pa trols with
17-14610

9/17

S/2017/746

community policing volunteers. The patrols helped to monitor security and provide
a safe and protective environment in camps for the displaced.
40. In coordination with humanitarian agencies, UNAMID provided 365 round trip escorts for United Nations agencies, funds and programmes, civil society and
humanitarian partners in support of the delivery and monitoring of humanitarian
assistance, humanitarian assessment and verification missions, and the stockpiling
of humanitarian items at its team sites in advance of the rainy season. The escorts
included a humanitarian inter-agency assessment mission, as well as a registration
mission by the International Organization for Migration to Rockero and Golo in
Jebel Marra and 11 logistics convoys of the World Food Programme (WFP)
consisting of 87 trucks carrying 1,947 tons of food and 46 tons of non -food items,
mainly in North Darfur. UNAMID also continued to provide security for WFP
warehouses in various locations, including El Fasher and Sortony in North Da rfur.
Moreover, UNAMID continued to provide daily escort to humanitarian water,
hygiene and sanitation partners transporting water from Kube to the Sortony
gathering site. Similarly, UNAMID provided armed escorts twice a week for
humanitarian supplies between Sortony and Kabkabiyah in North Darfur, where the
road remains blocked for commercial trucks since May 2016.
41. UNAMID continued to engage the authorities on their obligations to respect
and protect the rights of civilians and to combat impunity. In partnership with the
Government, from 20 to 22 June, 30 prison managers, including 2 female officers,
were trained in human rights and the professional aspects of prison management. In
addition, on 29 and 30 June, 20 prosecutors and police investigators in Zalingei,
Central Darfur, were trained in international fair trial standards and investigations.
42. UNAMID continued to advocate for the swift deployment of mobile
prosecutors to underserviced areas, which has been delayed because of financial
constraints. UNAMID also stressed the need to strengthen the office of the Special
Prosecutor for the crimes committed in Darfur, which, according to the ministerial
directive of July 2016, was tasked to investigate and prosecute all rape cases in
Darfur. These cases continue to be tried in ordinary courts, however, as exemplified
by the trial of an adult male, accused of raping a 2-year-old girl, in the Juvenile
Court in West Darfur on 3 and 10 July.
43. With respect to gender, UNAMID visited the camps for internally displaced
persons in Hamidiya, Central Darfur, and Kass, Erly and Alfaneeya, South Darfur,
on 5 and 6 July, respectively, to monitor issues relating to the protection of women.
On 14 June, in Zalingei, UNAMID concluded a three-day workshop on sexual and
gender-based violence prevention and response for 18 Sudanese women police
officers. At a meeting with the Special Prosecutor for crimes committed in Darfur,
in Nyala, South Darfur, on 19 June, the Prosecutor acknowledged challenges
relating to the non-reporting of cases concerning female victims, for fear of
stigmatization and reprisals, and underscored the need for collaboration in
addressing them.
44. In an effort to promote local awareness and ownership on child protection
issues, UNAMID conducted six training and sensitization events, which benefited
155 community members (61 men and 94 women). Following advocacy by
UNAMID, on 9 July, the Sudanese Armed Forces disclosed information about the
investigation into the alleged recruitment of a 14 -year old boy by the Rapid Support
Forces in Jourouf village, South Darfur, confirming that the name of the child could
not be found among recent recruits.
45. UNAMID, in collaboration with the United Nations Development Programme
and the Sudan Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Commission,
supported the launch of the second phase of the reintegration process for 1,400 of
10/17

17-14610

S/2017/746

3,000 ex-combatants who had been demobilized since 2014 and whose cases we re
still pending. From 12 to 15 June, 42 demobilized ex-combatants participated in the
reintegration programme in Zalingei, Central Darfur, while on 14 June the
reintegration exercise was launched for 300 demobilized ex -combatants in Nyala,
South Darfur. From 25 to 27 July, a similar exercise was launched in El Fasher, also
targeting 300 ex-combatants. The reintegration package included small business
start-up kits, agricultural implements as well as the provision of livestock and
training in animal husbandry. In addition, UNAMID continued the implementation
of 26 community stabilization projects in 12 localities across Darfur, benefiting
2,255 young people (1,142 male and 1,113 female). The projects included livelihood
development, vocational skills training, infrastructure development and support of
rule of law institutions, with a view to preventing the recruitment of civilians into
armed or criminal groups. Several quick-impact projects were completed during the
reporting period, including a handover of equipment on 21 June to the outreach and
training centre at El Geneina Radio station, and a women’s dormitory and kitchen at
Ardamata prison on 6 July in West Darfur.
46. UNAMID continued to address the threats posed by explosive remnants of war
by deploying response teams throughout Darfur, with particular focus on areas
adjacent to Jebel Marra. The teams conducted assessments and disposal operations
in 61 hazard areas, where 1,840 items of unexploded ordnance were destroyed.
These operations enabled safe access for UNAMID patrols and delivery of
humanitarian aid in areas otherwise inaccessible, and improved security for the
affected local communities.
Support for an inclusive peace process
47. Throughout the reporting period, the African Union-United Nations Joint
Special Representative for Darfur, Jeremiah Kingsley Mamabolo, continued to
support the peace process for Darfur. On 9 June, the Joint Special Representative
met with Minni Minawi and Gibril Ibrahim, the leaders of SLA/MM and JEM, in
Paris, following their clashes with the Government in North and East Darfur in May
and June. Both claimed that their groups did not violate the unilateral ceasefire, that
the clashes were initiated by the Government forces, and that only a mutually
agreed ceasefire could guarantee a lasting cessation of hostilities. The two, however,
agreed to issue a statement reiterating their commitment to finding a negotiated
settlement to the conflict.
48. In another engagement in Paris, on 10 June, Abdul Wahid stated that he would
fulfil his commitment made to the Joint Special Representative in May by making a
public announcement to clarify his movement’s position on a peaceful resolution to
the conflict. The announcement has yet to be made.
49. On 2 July, on the sidelines of the African Union Summit in Addis Ababa, the
Joint Special Representative briefed the Chairperson of the African Union High level Implementation Panel, President Thabo Mbeki, on the position of the
Government and the movements regarding the resumption o f talks. They discussed
the prospect for convening, at the request of SLA/MM and JEM/Gibril, another
round of talks on the cessation of hostilities with the Government, contingent upon
their genuine commitment to the suspension of fighting.
50. In support of the Darfur Internal Dialogue and Consultation, UNAMID
facilitated a total of three consultations at the locality level, in the southern part of
Nyala, South Darfur, on 25 and 26 July, and in the northern part of Nyala and in
Kornoi, North Darfur, on 1 and 2 August. Approximately 150 participants at each
session, representing civil society, internally displaced persons, native
administrations, religious leaders, nomads, farmers, women, youth and academia
17-14610

11/17

S/2017/746

discussed a range of issues, including governance, security, development, justice,
reconciliation, and land-related concerns. As of August, 67 of 68 locality-level
consultations have been conducted.
Mitigation of intercommunal violence
51. UNAMID, in collaboration with the Sudanese authorities, the U nited Nations
country team and other stakeholders, continued to support the mediation of
communal conflicts across Darfur. Six meetings were held to encourage peaceful
coexistence and support the implementation of peace agreements signed between
various groups, including those between the Salamat and the Misseriya in Central
Darfur (on 6, 12 and 28 June), the Ma‘aliya and the Southern Rizeigat in East
Darfur (on 26 June), and the Gimir and Rizeigat (on 18 June) and the Fallata and the
Masalit (on 19 June) in South Darfur.
52. Following the breach of the reconciliation agreement between the Salamat and
the Misseriya on 12 June in Central Darfur, UNAMID engaged Salamat leaders to
work with local authorities for the enhancement of the rule of law and prevention of
further violations. On 26 June, UNAMID participated in a meeting in Abu Karinka
between the Ma‘aliya native administration and a Rizeigat delegation from
Ed Daein, East Darfur, aimed at strengthening relations between the two groups. In
West Darfur, on 19 June and 8 July, UNAMID and the native administration leaders
in Masteri and Umsebeka disseminated the outcome documents of the peaceful
coexistence conference, held in El Geneina, on 15 May.
53. To prevent seasonal farming-related communal conflicts, UNAMID held two
meetings in North Darfur (on 14 and 29 June), three in West Darfur (on 5 and
20 June and 6 July), two in Central Darfur (on 5 and 21 June) and two in East
Darfur (on 4 and 8 July), bringing together native administrations, peaceful
coexistence and agricultural protection committees, farmers, nomadic herders, local
authorities and community leaders, as well as the United Nations country team.
UNAMID also conducted five peaceful coexistence forums for farmers and herders
in Tawilah and Korma in North Darfur (9 and 11 July), Umsebeka in West Darfur
(12 July), Ed Daein in East Darfur (12 July) and the Bulbul Tembisco administrative
unit in South Darfur (19 July). The participants in the forums discussed a range of
mitigating measures, such as dialogue forums, social peace awareness campaigns,
demarcation of livestock migration routes, and community projects aimed at
improving access to water.

VII. Progress in the implementation of the recommendations of
the strategic review
54. The mission advanced with the implementation of the reconfiguration of
UNAMID in accordance with resolution 2363 (2017). In collaboration with the
Secretariat, it devised a new mission concept and a reconfiguration plan to meet the
deadlines of the first phase of its reconfiguration. The Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations visited the Sudan from 19 to 23 July and engaged with
Government officials, UNAMID personnel, and other partners to take forward t he
implementation of the recommendations of the strategic review. UNAMID also
engaged the Government at the state level to discuss its new configuration and
focus, including a meeting with four of the five Governors on 6 August.

12/17

17-14610

S/2017/746

Military and police drawdown and the impact of reconfiguration on protection
needs and human rights
55. UNAMID has commenced the first phase of its reconfiguration involving the
closure of 11 team sites and the reduction of military personnel strength fr om
15,845 to 11,395 and police personnel strength from 3,403 to 2,888. Six team sites
are expected to be closed by the end of August. Troops have withdrawn from Foro
Burunga and Habila in West Darfur, except for rear parties in the process of clearing
their contingent-owned equipment. The departure of a battalion from El Geneina
was completed on 22 July, to be followed by the repatriation of its contingent owned equipment. A relocation order has been issued for troops in Muhajiriyah and
Shearia in East Darfur, and Mellit, Al-Malihah, Tine and Um Kaddadah in North
Darfur.
56. Individual police officers have been redeployed from 10 out of 11 closing team
sites, including Foro Burunga and Habila in West Darfur, Muhajiriyah in East
Darfur, Tine, El Fasher-2 (Abou Shouk), Al-Malihah, Mellit and Um Kaddadah in
North Darfur, and Tulus and Edd al-Fursan in South Darfur. The process of closing
the one remaining team site, Zamzam in El Fasher in North Darfur, will commence
by September. One formed police unit was redeployed from Ed Daein to Shearia on
14 August to take over camp security from departing troops.
Jebel Marra Task Force
57. Following the adoption of resolution 2363 (2017), UNAMID submitted a
formal request to the Government on 2 July seeking its cooperation with the
reconfiguration of UNAMID, including the establishment of a new team site in
Golo, Central Darfur. Concurrently, UNAMID developed plans to deploy the Jebel
Marra Task Force, including its headquarters arrangements, once the land for the
team site is granted. The protection strategy for the Jebel Marra region is also being
formulated, with a view to ensuring coordination with humanitarian partners and
tailoring military and police activities in response to the specific needs of the area.
As at 15 August, the Government has not yet provided a response. The Secretariat,
working with the African Union, will continue to engage the authorities and to
impress upon them the need for them to urgently facilitate the establishment of the
team site in Golo. The Security Council will be regularly updated on developments
concerning the matter.
Civilian staffing review
58. On the basis of a self-assessment exercise by UNAMID to identify its staffing
needs and proposals, and further to consultations and reviews at the Headquarters
level, a team from the Departments of Peacekeeping Operations and Field Support
travelled to UNAMID from 31 July to 6 August to finalize the conclusions of the
civilian staffing review and its recommendations. A reduction of civilian personnel
commensurate with the new troop ceiling and configuration of UNAMID will be
reflected in the submission of the revised UNAMID budget for 2017/18 by
8 September.
Joint UNAMID-United Nations country team financing strategy for sustaining
peace in Darfur
59. Drawing on the strategic review of UNAMID, as well as the United Nations
Development Assistance Framework for 2018-2021 completed on 25 April 2017,
and the multi-year humanitarian strategy for 2017-2019 and the humanitarian
response plan for 2017 finalized in May 2017, UNAMID and the United Nations
country team are in the process of developing a new integrated strategic framework
17-14610

13/17

S/2017/746

for the period 2017-2019 to articulate common priorities and complementary efforts
for peace consolidation in Darfur in the context of the drawdown of UNAMID.
Informed by the field-level consultations, the new framework will serve as the
United Nations strategy for sustaining peace in Darfur, with a p articular focus on
the rule of law and human rights, durable solutions for displacement, and
peacebuilding for community security.
60. The lack of resources available to the United Nations country team to support
peace consolidation in areas where it is relevant has posed a serious obstacle. A
number of tasks discontinued by UNAMID following its streamlining exercise in
2014 remain suspended, for example those related to gender and HIV/AIDS.
Following the completion of the integrated strategic framework, expected by the
end of August, UNAMID and the country team will develop a joint financing
strategy to mobilize resources for its implementation. The financing strategy will
elaborate, inter alia, the ways in which to promote national ownership of the
transition process and initiatives, geographic and time -bound prioritization and
sequencing of key tasks, strategic communication and outreach, as well as further
dialogue regarding the use of programmatic funding in peacekeeping budgets and
transfer of personnel, funds and other assets to the country team partners to ensure
that sufficient capacity is put in place to fill the gaps that are likely to emerge, once
the drawdown of UNAMID progresses.

VIII. Financial aspects
61. The General Assembly, by its resolution 71/310 of 30 June 2017, authorized
the Secretary-General to enter into commitments for the Operation in an amount not
exceeding $486.0 million for the period from 1 July to 31 December 2017.
62. As at 10 August 2017, unpaid assessed contributions to the Special Account
for UNAMID amounted to $461.4 million. Total outstanding assessed contributions
for all peacekeeping operations at that date amounted to $4,721.9 million.
63. Reimbursement of troop and formed police costs has been made for the period
up to 30 April 2017, while reimbursement of the costs of contingent -owned
equipment has been made for the period up to 31 March 2017, in accordance with
the quarterly payment schedule

IX. Observations
64. Ten years have passed since the United Nations, together with the African
Union, began planning for the deployment of a multidimensional peacekeeping
mission to Darfur. UNAMID was difficult to establish, given the terrain and local
conditions on the ground, while the political process to resolve the conflict through
inclusive dialogue lagged behind. Today, as UNAMID begins the first phase of its
drawdown, some of the same issues and conditions that caused the conflict and
rendered the mission’s operationalization difficult persist, while other aspects of
the conflict have evolved. The rebel groups have been weakened significantly for
the most part, although skirmishes resurfaced and continued in May and June. The
underlying drivers of the conflict, including violent competition over land, water and
other scarce resources, continue to threaten the lives of the people of Darfur, while
their consequences — most notably, large-scale and prolonged displacement —
further complicate local security and resource management. The mobilization and
arming of militias as part of the counter-insurgency strategy adopted by the
Government has exacerbated intercommunal tensions, to the point of undermining the
authority of local governments to establish and maintain law and order. Civilians,
14/17

17-14610

S/2017/746

including internally displaced persons, women and children, are particularly
vulnerable in this context, unable to earn a living or return home without fear of
intimidation, persecution, rape and other forms of violence, and loss of life,
particularly at the hands of the armed militias.
65. The issue of accountability as it relates to the armed militias, and wider
security sector reform, is a complex and yet crucial matter for the stabilization and
protection of civilians in Darfur. I encourage the Government to explore measures to
advance the disarmament of militias and security sector reform, in line with the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, as a matter of priority. It is equally important
that the remaining commissions and fund of the Doha Document articulate the next
steps, with sufficient resources and political support from the Government of
National Accord, to fulfil the remaining work, which is considerable.
66. The prospect of substantive negotiations between the Government and
movements that are not signatories to the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur
remains elusive. The Government maintains its position, which is to negotiate on
the basis of the Doha Document, but none of the non -signatory movements appears
committed to resuming talks in those terms. While preliminary consultations
continue outside the Sudan, their constituencies languish in the camps for internally
displaced persons. It is the responsibility of those leading the Government and the
non-signatory movements to resolve differences in their views on the provisions of
the Doha Document, as they remain relevant in addressing the grievances of the
people of Darfur. I urge the Government and the armed movements to honour their
unilateral declarations on the cessation of hostilities and move on to the next steps
in the peace process, facilitated by the African Union High -level Implementation
Panel, with the support of the United Nations Special Envoy for the Sudan and
South Sudan and the Joint Special Representative for Darfur and Head of UNAMID.
67. While the governance reform, in accordance with the outcome of the national
dialogue, continues, it is imperative that efforts continue to ensure that the process
is inclusive and transparent. It is also essential that the new state structures, at the
level of both the Government of National Accord and the Darfur States, support the
implementation of the remaining provisions of the Doha Document. UNAMID will
continue to engage Sudanese authorities in this regard. Similarly, further efforts
must be made to extend state authority across Darfur, especially in areas from which
UNAMID is withdrawing, in a manner that ensures the protection of civilians, the
safe and voluntary return of internally displaced persons, and inclusive and
sustainable peacebuilding by the Government.
68. In this connection, I call on the Government, donor countries, and other
partners to allocate sufficient resources for peacebuilding activities in Darfur. The
United Nations country team will lead efforts relating to women, girls and child
protection in the context of the rule of law, durable solutions and community
stabilization efforts outlined in the new integrated strategic framework. The
mobilization of resources for the country team to support these cross-cutting themes
will underpin the collective efforts of the United Nations in Darfur. All the same, it
is the obligation of the Sudanese authorities to provide basic services and promote
livelihood opportunities in Darfur from their national and local budgetary sources.
An eventual drawdown of UNAMID without adequate mechanisms to address these
fundamental requirements for sustainable peace means that the causes and
consequences of the conflict remain unaddressed, thereby posing the risk of a
recurrence of the conflict.
69. While we make every effort to proceed with the drawdown of UNAMID, the
cooperation of the Government of the Sudan is indispensable for its timely
implementation. This includes not only logistical and security assurances for the
17-14610

15/17

S/2017/746

closure of team sites and the repatriation and relocation of UNAMID personnel, but
also the establishment of a new team site in Golo to establish the Jebel Marra Task
Force, which is a critical component in the new strategy of UNAMID. I urge the
Government to approve the provision of land for a new temporary operating base in
Golo and grant clearances for the deployment of the Task Force expeditiously. I also
call on the Government to expedite the process of addressing outstanding
operational restrictions, including the issuing of pending visas, the release of
remaining containers by facilitating customs clearances, and the granting
to UNAMID of the certificate of tax exemption for goods imported by sea in
accordance with the status-of-forces agreement. This is all the more imperative as
the footprint of UNAMID will decrease significantly over the coming months. It is
my expectation that the Government will live up to all obligations in this respect,
sustaining the positive spirit that characterized the review process of UNAMID, and
meet all the pressing protection needs of the affected civilian population.
70. I would like to conclude by thanking the Joint Special Representative,
Jeremiah Kingsley Mamabolo, and all of the staff of UNAMID, the United Nations
country team and the humanitarian community, who continue their tireless efforts to
improve the lives of the people of Darfur. I also commend my Special Envoy for the
Sudan and South Sudan, Nicholas Haysom, and former Presidents Thabo Mbeki and
Abdulsalami Abubakar of the African Union High-level Implementation Panel for
their unceasing efforts to resolve the conflicts in the Sudan.

16/17

17-14610

S/2017/746

17-14610

17/17
