A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/51/46
9 January 1997

Fifty-first session
Agenda item 72
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the First Committee (A/51/566/Add.12)]
51/46.

Review and implementation of the
Concluding Document of the Twelfth Special
Session of the General Assembly
A

United Nations Disarmament Information Programme
The General Assembly,
Recalling its decision taken in 1982 at its twelfth special session, the
second special session devoted to disarmament, by which the World Disarmament
Campaign was launched,1
Bearing in mind its various resolutions on the subject, including
resolution 47/53 D of 9 December 1992, in which it decided, inter alia, that
the World Disarmament Campaign should be known thereafter as the "United
Nations Disarmament Information Programme" and the World Disarmament Campaign
Voluntary Trust Fund as the "Voluntary Trust Fund for the United Nations
Disarmament Information Programme",
Recalling its resolution 49/76 A of 15 December 1994,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General of 19 July 1996 on
the United Nations Disarmament Information Programme,2

1

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twelfth Special Session,
Plenary Meetings, 1st meeting, paras. 110 and 111.
2

A/51/219.

97-76057

/...

A/RES/51/46
Page 2

Deeply concerned by the continuing decrease in contributions to the
Programme, which has already affected a number of activities, beginning with
the suspension of publications such as the Disarmament Newsletter and Topical
Papers,
1.
Takes note with concern of the report of the Secretary-General of
19 July 1996 on the United Nations Disarmament Information Programme;2
2.
Commends the Secretary-General for his efforts to make effective
use of the limited resources available to him in disseminating as widely as
possible information on arms limitation and disarmament to Governments, the
media, non-governmental organizations, educational communities and research
institutes, and in carrying out a seminar and conference programme;
3.
Stresses the importance of the Programme, as a significant
instrument in enabling developing countries to participate fully in the
deliberations and negotiations on disarmament in the various United Nations
bodies;
4.
Notes with appreciation the contributions to the efforts of the
Programme by the United Nations information centres and the regional centres
for disarmament;
5.

Recommends that the Programme focus its efforts:

(a)
To inform, to educate and to generate public understanding of the
importance of multilateral action and support for it, including action by the
United Nations and the Conference on Disarmament, in the field of arms
limitation and disarmament, in a factual, balanced and objective manner, in
particular through the continuing publication in all official languages of The
United Nations Disarmament Yearbook and Disarmament: A Periodic Review by the
United Nations, and the updating of the Status of Multilateral Arms Regulation
and Disarmament Agreements;
(b)
To facilitate unimpeded access to and an exchange of information
on ideas between the public sector and public interest groups and
organizations, and to provide an independent source of balanced and factual
information that takes into account a range of views to help further an
informed debate on arms limitation, disarmament and security;
(c)
To organize meetings to facilitate exchanges of views and
information between governmental and non-governmental sectors and between
governmental and other experts in order to facilitate the search for common
ground;
6.
Invites all Member States to contribute to the Voluntary Trust
Fund for the United Nations Disarmament Information Programme;
7.
Commends the Secretary-General for supporting the efforts of
universities, other academic institutions and non-governmental organizations
active in the educational field in widening the worldwide availability of
disarmament education, and invites him to continue to support and cooperate
with educational institutions and non-governmental organizations engaged in
such efforts, without cost to the regular budget of the United Nations;

/...

A/RES/51/46
Page 3

8.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly
at its fifty-third session a report covering both the implementation of the
activities of the Programme by the United Nations system during the previous
two years and the activities of the Programme contemplated by the system for
the following two years;
9.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-third
session the item entitled "United Nations Disarmament Information Programme".
79th plenary meeting
10 December 1996
B
United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament
in Asia and the Pacific
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 42/39 D of 30 November 1987 and 44/117 F of 15
December 1989, by which it established the United Nations Regional Centre for
Peace and Disarmament in Asia and renamed it the United Nations Regional
Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Asia and the Pacific, with headquarters at
Kathmandu and with the mandate of providing, on request, substantive support
for the initiatives and other activities mutually agreed upon by the Member
States of the Asia-Pacific region for the implementation of measures for peace
and disarmament, through appropriate utilization of available resources,
Welcoming the report of the Secretary-General,3 in which he expresses
his belief that the mandate of the Regional Centre not only remains valid but
is even more relevant today in the changed international environment,
Commending the useful activities carried out by the Regional Centre in
encouraging regional and subregional dialogue for the enhancement of openness,
transparency and confidence-building, as well as the promotion of disarmament
and security through the organization of regional meetings, which has come to
be widely known within the Asia-Pacific region as the "Kathmandu process",
Noting that trends in the post-cold-war era have emphasized the function
of the Regional Centre in assisting Member States as they deal with new
security concerns and disarmament issues emerging in the region,
Recognizing the need for the Regional Centre to pursue effectively its
expanded function,
Expressing its appreciation to the Regional Centre for its organization
of substantive regional meetings at Kathmandu and at Hiroshima, Japan, in
1996,
Appreciating highly the important role Nepal has played as the host
nation of the headquarters of the Regional Centre,

3

A/51/445.
/...

A/RES/51/46
Page 4

1.
Reaffirms its resolution 50/71 D of 12 December 1995, in
particular its strong support for the continued operation and further
strengthening of the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament
in Asia and the Pacific as an essential promoter of the regional peace and
disarmament dialogue in the Asia-Pacific region known as the "Kathmandu
process";
2.
Expresses its appreciation for the political support and financial
contribution received by the Regional Centre;
3.
Appeals to Member States, in particular those within the AsiaPacific region, as well as to international governmental and non-governmental
organizations and foundations, to make voluntary contributions in order to
strengthen the programme of activities of the Regional Centre and its
implementation;
4.
Requests the Secretary-General to provide all necessary support,
within existing resources, to the Regional Centre in carrying out its
programme of activities;
5.
Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the General
Assembly at its fifty-second session on the implementation of the present
resolution;
6.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-second
session the item entitled "United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and
Disarmament in Asia and the Pacific".
79th plenary meeting
10 December 1996
C
Regional confidence-building measures
The General Assembly,
Recalling the purposes and principles of the United Nations and its
primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,
Bearing in mind the guidelines for general and complete disarmament
adopted at its tenth special session, the first special session devoted to
disarmament,
Recalling its resolutions 43/78 H and 43/85 of 7 December 1988, 44/21 of
15 November 1989, 45/58 M of 4 December 1990, 46/37 B of 6 December 1991,
47/53 F of 15 December 1992, 48/76 A of 16 December 1993, 49/76 C of 15
December 1994 and 50/71 B of 12 December 1995,
Considering the importance and effectiveness of confidence-building
measures taken at the initiative and with the participation of all States
concerned and taking into account the specific characteristics of each region,
in that they can contribute to regional disarmament and to international
security, in accordance with the principles of the Charter,
/...

A/RES/51/46
Page 5

Convinced that the resources released by disarmament, including regional
disarmament, can be devoted to economic and social development and to the
protection of the environment for the benefit of all peoples, in particular
those of the developing countries,
Convinced also that development can be achieved only in a climate of
peace, security and mutual confidence both within and among States,
Bearing in mind the establishment by the Secretary-General on 28 May
1992 of the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions
in Central Africa, the purpose of which is to encourage arms limitation,
disarmament, non-proliferation and development in the subregion,
Recalling the Brazzaville Declaration on Cooperation for Peace and
Security in Central Africa,4
1.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on regional
confidence-building measures,5 which deals with the activities of the United
Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa in
the period since the adoption by the General Assembly of resolution 50/71 B;
2.
Reaffirms its support for efforts aimed at promoting confidencebuilding measures at regional and subregional levels in order to ease tensions
and conflicts in the subregion and to further disarmament, non-proliferation
and the peaceful settlement of disputes in Central Africa;
3.
Also reaffirms its support for the programme of work of the
Standing Advisory Committee adopted at the organizational meeting of the
Committee held at Yaoundé in July 1992;
4.
Welcomes the fact that the Committee's programme of work has led
to specific actions and measures promoting confidence-building and security in
the Central African subregion;
5.
Notes the holding of the First Summit of Heads of State and
Government of Countries Members of the United Nations Standing Advisory
Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa, at Yaoundé on 8 July 1996;
6.
Welcomes with great satisfaction the signature at that Summit of
the Non-Aggression Pact between the States members of the United Nations
Standing Advisory Committee, and reaffirms its conviction that the Pact is
likely to contribute to the prevention of conflicts and further confidencebuilding in the Central African subregion;
7.
Invites the States members of the Standing Advisory Committee that
have not yet signed the Pact to do so, and encourages all member States to
expedite ratification so that it may enter into force as soon as possible;

4

A/50/474, annex I.

5

A/51/287.
/...

A/RES/51/46
Page 6

8.
Welcomes with satisfaction the Final Declaration of the First
Summit of the Standing Advisory Committee,6 which aims at the implementation
of the following measures:
(a)
The promotion of participatory systems of governance as a means of
preventing conflicts;
(b)
The organization, under United Nations auspices, of training
seminars for officers in the armed forces, republican guard, gendarmerie and
police forces of the Central African States, in order to promote a culture of
peace by explaining, once again, their role in a democratic context;
(c)
The development of a programme to combat illicit arms trafficking,
in order to remove this source of insecurity and a threat to the stability of
States in the subregion;
(d)
The setting-up, under United Nations auspices, of an early warning
system as the basic instrument for preventive diplomacy in Central Africa;
(e)
The strengthening of cooperation between States of the subregion
and bilateral and multilateral partners on the question of peace and security
in Central Africa;
9.
Expresses its conviction that the democratic process offers a
valuable means to build confidence, promote development and prevent conflicts,
and welcomes with satisfaction the decision taken by the States members of the
Standing Advisory Committee to hold a subregional conference at Brazzaville in
January 1997 on the topic "Democratic institutions and peace in Central
Africa";
10.
Welcomes the holding, under United Nations auspices, of the first
training seminar for instructors in peace operations, at Yaoundé from 9 to 17
September 1996, with a view to strengthening the capacity of the units
specializing in peace operations in the armed forces of the States members of
the Standing Advisory Committee;
11.
Expresses its gratitude to those Governments which responded
favourably to the request from the General Assembly and contributed towards
financing the aforementioned training seminar;
12.
Emphasizes once again the importance of continuing with this
training programme in order to strengthen the participation of States members
of the Standing Advisory Committee in future United Nations peace operations;
13.
Commends the Secretary-General for having established the Trust
Fund for the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions
in Central Africa;
14.
Appeals to Member States and governmental and non-governmental
organizations to make additional voluntary contributions to the Trust Fund for
the implementation of the programme of work of the Standing Advisory
Committee, in particular the measures and objectives referred to in paragraphs
8, 9 and 12 of the present resolution;

6

A/51/274-S/1996/631, annex.
/...

A/RES/51/46
Page 7

15.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide assistance
to the States members of the Standing Advisory Committee to ensure that they
are able to carry on with their efforts;
16.
Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General
Assembly at its fifty-second session a report on the implementation of the
present resolution;
17.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-second
session the item entitled "Regional confidence-building measures".
79th plenary meeting
10 December 1996
D
Convention on the Prohibition of the Use of Nuclear Weapons
The General Assembly,
Convinced that the use of nuclear weapons poses the most serious threat
to the survival of mankind,
Bearing in mind the advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice of 8 July 1996 on the Legality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear
Weapons,7
Convinced that a multilateral, universal and binding agreement
prohibiting the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons would contribute to
the elimination of the nuclear threat and to the climate for negotiations
leading to the ultimate elimination of nuclear weapons, thereby strengthening
international peace and security,
Conscious that some steps taken by the Russian Federation and the United
States of America towards a reduction of their nuclear weapons and the
improvement in the international climate can contribute towards the goal of
the complete elimination of nuclear weapons,
Recalling that, in paragraph 58 of the Final Document of the Tenth
Special Session of the General Assembly,8 it is stated that all States should
actively participate in efforts to bring about conditions in international
relations among States in which a code of peaceful conduct of nations in
international affairs could be agreed upon and that would preclude the use or
threat of use of nuclear weapons,
Reaffirming that any use of nuclear weapons would be a violation of the
Charter of the United Nations and a crime against humanity, as declared in its
resolutions 1653 (XVI) of 24 November 1961, 33/71 B of 14 December 1978, 34/83
G of 11 December 1979, 35/152 D of 12 December 1980 and 36/92 I of 9 December
1981,

7

A/51/218, annex.

8

Resolution S-10/2.
/...

A/RES/51/46
Page 8

Determined to achieve an international convention prohibiting the
development, production, stockpiling and use of nuclear weapons, leading to
their ultimate destruction,
Stressing that an international convention on the prohibition of the use
of nuclear weapons would be an important step in a phased programme towards
the complete elimination of nuclear weapons within a time-bound framework,
Noting with regret that the Conference on Disarmament, during its 1996
session, was unable to undertake negotiations on this subject as called for in
General Assembly resolution 50/71 E of 12 December 1995,
1.
Reiterates its request to the Conference on Disarmament to
commence negotiations, in order to reach agreement on an international
convention prohibiting the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons under any
circumstances, taking as a possible basis the draft Convention on the
Prohibition of the Use of Nuclear Weapons annexed to the present resolution;
2.
Requests the Conference on Disarmament to report to the General
Assembly on the results of those negotiations.
79th plenary meeting
10 December 1996

ANNEX
Draft Convention on the Prohibition of the Use of
Nuclear Weapons
The States Parties to the present Convention,
Alarmed by the threat to the very survival of mankind posed by the
existence of nuclear weapons,
Convinced that any use of nuclear weapons constitutes a violation of the
Charter of the United Nations and a crime against humanity,
Desiring to achieve a multilateral, universal and binding agreement
prohibiting the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons,
Bearing in mind the advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice that there exists an obligation of all States to pursue in good faith
and bring to a conclusion negotiations leading to nuclear disarmament in all
its aspects under strict and effective international control,
Determined, therefore, to achieve an international convention
prohibiting the development, production, stockpiling and use of nuclear
weapons, leading to their ultimate destruction,
Convinced that the present Convention would be an important step in a
phased programme towards the complete elimination of nuclear weapons within a
time-bound framework,
Determined to continue negotiations for the achievement of this goal,
/...

A/RES/51/46
Page 9

Have agreed as follows:
Article 1
The States Parties to the present Convention solemnly undertake not to
use or threaten to use nuclear weapons under any circumstances.
Article 2
This Convention shall be of unlimited duration.
Article 3
1.
The present Convention shall be open to all States for signature.
Any State that does not sign the Convention before its entry into force in
accordance with paragraph 3 of the present article may accede to it at any
time.
2.
The present Convention shall be subject to ratification by
signatory States. Instruments of ratification or accession shall be deposited
with the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
3.
The present Convention shall enter into force on the deposit of
instruments of ratification by twenty-five Governments, including the
Governments of the five nuclear-weapon States, in accordance with paragraph 2
of the present article.
4.
For States whose instruments of ratification or accession are
deposited after the entry into force of the Convention, it shall enter into
force on the date of the deposit of their instruments of ratification or
accession.
5.
The depositary shall promptly inform all signatory and acceding
States of the date of each signature, the date of deposit of each instrument
of ratification or accession and the date of entry into force of this
Convention, as well as of the receipt of other notices.
6.
The present Convention shall be registered by the depositary in
accordance with Article 102 of the Charter of the United Nations.
Article 4
The present Convention, of which the Arabic, Chinese, English, French,
Russian and Spanish texts are equally authentic, shall be deposited with the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, who shall send duly certified copies
thereof to the Governments of the signatory and acceding States.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned, being duly authorized thereto by
their respective Governments, have signed the present Convention, opened for
signature at
on the
day of
one
thousand nine hundred and
.

/...

A/RES/51/46
Page 10

E
United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament
in Africa
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 40/151 G of 16 December 1985, 41/60 D of 3
December 1986, 42/39 J of 30 November 1987 and 43/76 D of 7 December 1988 on
the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa, and
its resolution 46/36 F of 6 December 1991 and 47/52 G of 9 December 1992 on
regional disarmament, including confidence-building measures,
Reaffirming its resolutions 48/76 E of 16 December 1993, 49/76 D of 15
December 1994 and 50/71 C of 12 December 1995 on the United Nations Regional
Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa and the United Nations Regional
Centre for Peace, Disarmament and Development in Latin America and the
Caribbean,
Mindful of the provisions of Article 11, paragraph 1, of the Charter of
the United Nations stipulating that a function of the General Assembly is to
consider the general principles of cooperation in the maintenance of
international peace and security, including the principles governing
disarmament and arms limitation,
Taking into account the guidelines for international arms transfers
adopted by the Disarmament Commission at its 1996 substantive session,9
Welcoming the activities carried out by the United Nations Regional
Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa, which have contributed
substantially to understanding and cooperation among the African States and
have thereby strengthened its role in the areas of peace, disarmament,
security and development,
Bearing in mind the financial situation of the Regional Centre as
described by the Secretary-General in his report on the activities of the
Regional Centre,10
Underlining, therefore, the need to provide the Regional Centre with
financial stability so as to facilitate the effective planning and
implementation of its programmes of activities,
1.
Expresses its gratitude to the Member States, international
governmental and non-governmental organizations and foundations that have, so
far, contributed to the Trust Fund for the United Nations Regional Centre for
Peace and Disarmament in Africa;
2.
Commends the activities carried out by the Regional Centre in
identifying and broadening the understanding of pressing disarmament and
security issues in the African region;

9

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-first Session,
Supplement No. 42 (A/51/42), annex I.
10

See A/51/403.
/...

A/RES/51/46
Page 11

3.
Reaffirms its support for the further operation and strengthening
of the Regional Centre, and encourages it to continue to intensify its efforts
in promoting cooperation with subregional and regional organizations, as well
as among the African States, in order to facilitate the development of
effective measures of confidence-building, arms limitation and disarmament,
with a view to promoting peace and security;
4.
Appeals once again to Member States, mainly to African countries,
as well as to international governmental and non-governmental organizations
and foundations, to make regular and appropriate voluntary contributions in
order to revitalize the Regional Centre, strengthen its programmes of
activities and facilitate the effective implementation of such programmes;
5.
Requests the Secretary-General, in the light of the current
financial situation of the Regional Centre, to intensify his efforts in
exploring new ways and means of funding, and to continue to provide all
necessary support to the Regional Centre for better achievements and results;
6.
Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the Director of
the Regional Centre is, as far as possible and within existing resources,
locally based in order to revitalize the activities of the Regional Centre;
7.
Further requests the Secretary-General to report to the General
Assembly at its fifty-third session, under the item entitled "Review and
implementation of the Concluding Document of the Twelfth Special Session of
the General Assembly", on the activities of the United Nations Regional Centre
for Peace and Disarmament in Africa, and on the implementation of the present
resolution.
79th plenary meeting
10 December 1996
F
United Nations disarmament fellowship, training
and advisory services
The General Assembly,
Recalling its decision, contained in paragraph 108 of the Final Document
of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly,8 the first special
session devoted to disarmament, to establish a programme of fellowships on
disarmament, as well as its decisions contained in annex IV to the Concluding
Document of the Twelfth Special Session of the General Assembly,11 the second
special session devoted to disarmament, in which it decided, inter alia, to
continue the programme,
Noting with satisfaction that the programme has already trained an
appreciable number of public officials selected from geographical regions
represented in the United Nations system, most of whom are now in positions of

11
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twelfth Special Session,
Annexes, agenda items 9-13, document A/S-12/32.

/...

A/RES/51/46
Page 12

responsibility in the field of disarmament affairs in their respective
countries or Governments,
Recalling all the annual resolutions on the matter since the thirtyseventh session of the General Assembly, in 1982, including resolution 50/71 A
of 12 December 1995,
Noting with satisfaction that the programme, as designed, continues to
enable an increased number of public officials, in particular from the
developing countries, to acquire more expertise in the sphere of disarmament,
Believing that the forms of assistance available to Member States, in
particular to developing countries, under the programme will enhance the
capabilities of their officials to follow ongoing deliberations and
negotiations on disarmament, both bilateral and multilateral,
1.
Reaffirms its decisions contained in annex IV to the Concluding
Document of the Twelfth Special Session of the General Assembly11 and the
report of the Secretary-General12 approved by the Assembly in its resolution
33/71 E of 14 December 1978;
2.
Expresses its appreciation to the Governments of Germany and Japan
for inviting the 1996 fellows to study selected activities in the field of
disarmament, thereby contributing to the fulfilment of the overall objectives
of the programme;
3.
Commends the Secretary-General for the diligence with which the
programme has continued to be carried out;
4.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to implement annually
the Geneva-based programme within existing resources and to report thereon to
the General Assembly at its fifty-third session;
5.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-third
session the item entitled "United Nations disarmament fellowship, training and
advisory services".
79th plenary meeting
10 December 1996

12

A/33/305.
