16

General Aa1embl,.-Twent7-fifth See1ion

Noting with increasing concern that nuclear weaPon
tests in the atmosphere and underground are continuing,
Taking into account that several concrete suggestions have been set forth in the Conference of the
Committee on Disarmament as to possible provisions in
a treaty banning underground nuclear weapon tests,
1. Urges all States that have not yet done so to
adhere without further delay to the Treaty Banning
Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer
Space and under Water;
d
2. Calls upon all nuclear-weapon States to suspen
nuclear weapon tests in all environments;
3. Requests the Conference of the Committee on
Disarmament to continue, as a matter of urgency, its
deliberations on a treaty banning underground nuclear
weapon tests, taking into account the proposals already
made in the Conference as well as the views expressed
at the current session of the General Assembly, and to
submit to the Assembly at its twenty-sixth session a
special report on the results of its deliberations.
1919th plenary meeting,
7 December 1970.
2664 (XXV). Implementation of the results of
the Conferenc.e of Non-Nuclear-Weapon States

The General Assembly,
Having reviewed the report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of the results of the Conference
of Non-Nuclear-Weapon States, 111 prepared in pursuance of General Assembly resolution 2605 A
(XXIV) of 16 December 1969,
Having reviewed in particular the comprehensive
report, annexed thereto, regarding action taken by the
International Atomic Energy Aaency on the recommendations of the Conference ofNon-Nuclear-Weapon
States, 20
Recognizing the importance of increasing the number
of major nuclear proJects in the developing countries,
Noting with satisfaction that the International Atomic
Energy Agency is maintaining a fund of special fissionable materials and intends to continue its efforts to
ensure the supply to States members of the Agency,
when required, of such materials, including materials
for power reactors,
Appreciating the assistance given by the United
Nations Development Programme, through the International Atomic Energy Agency, to meet the growing
demand of developing countries in the field of the
peaceful uses of atomic energy,
Noting the launching in 1970 of the International
Nuclear Information Service to improve the identification and availabilit.Y of information relating to nuclear
science and its applications for peaceful purposes,
Noting the recent steps taken by the International
Atomic Energy Agency tc ,r et its increasing responsibilities,
1. Notes with satisfaction the report of the Secretary-General and the reports of the International Atomic
Energy Agency annexed thereto;21
2. Takes note of the increase in the target for voluntary contributions to the programme of technical assistance of the International Atomic Energy Agency and
19 A/8079.
20 A/8079, annex.
21 A/8079 and Add.1.

draws the attention of States members of the Agency
to the appeals made to increase the funds availa6le to
the Agency for multilateral assistance in the nuclear
field;
3. Recommends that the international sources of
finance should keep under review their policies regarding
the financing of meritorious nuclear projects, bearing
in mind not only the short-range but also the lon,range contribution such projects may make to economic
and technical development;
4. Invites the specialized agencies, the International
Atomic Energy Agency and other bodies to punue
as appropriate their action concerning the recommendations contained in the resolutions of the Conference of
Non-Nuclear-Weapon States;
5. Invites the Director-General of the International
Atomic Ener$Y Agency, in consultation with the specialized agencies and other bodies concerned, to submit,
in his annual report to the General Assembly, information on further developments concerning the question
of the implementation of the results of the Conference
of Non-Nuclear-Weapon States;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to include in the
provisional agenda of the twenty-sixth session of the
General Assembly the question of the implementation
of the results of the Conference of Non-Nuclear-Weapon States.
1919th plenary meeting,
7 December 1970.
2665 (XXV). E8tabll8hment, within the framework of the International Atomic Energy
Agency, of an international 1ervice for nu•
clear explosions for peaceful purpoaea under
appropriate international control

The General Assembly,
Having reviewed the report of the International
Atomic Energy Aaency 22 on the establishment, within
the framework of the International Atomic Energy
Agency, of an international service for nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes under appropriate international control,
Appreciating the work undertaken by the International Atomic Energy Agency in this respect,
Noting that the International Atomic Energy Agency
has convened a number of expert groups to advise
the Director-General of the Agency on the technical
aspects of this technology and on the character of the
international observation it might perform pursuant to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons,
1. Expresses its appreciation of the studies recently
performed on this subject;
2. Commends the International Atomic Energy
Agency for its efforts to compile and evaluate information on the present status of the technology and to
make it available on an international scale;
3. Requests the International Atomic Energy
Agency to continue and intensify its programme in
this field;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to include in
the provisional agenda of the twenty-sixth session of
the General Assembly an item entitled "Establishment,
within the framework of the International Atomic
Energy Agency, of an international service for nuclear
22 See

A '8080.
