S/PV.7502

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7502nd meeting

Thursday, 13 August 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Ogwu. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Nigeria)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Mangaral
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Lamek
Mrs. Kawar
Mr. Špokauskas
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Kononuchenko
Mr. Gasso Matoses
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Power
Ms. Chávez Colmenares

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa
The global response to the 2013 Ebola virus disease outbreak
Letter dated 5 August 2015 from the Permanent Representative of Nigeria to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2015/600)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-25379 (E)
*1525379*

S/PV.7502

Peace and security in Africa

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
The global response to the 2013 Ebola virus
disease outbreak
Letter dated 5 August 2015 from the Permanent
Representative of Nigeria to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/2015/600)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Sierra Leone to participate in this
meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Dr. David
Nabarro, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General on
Ebola; Dr. Margaret Chan, Director-General of the World
Health Organization; Mr. Téte António, Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations;
Mr. Per Thöresson, Deputy Permanent Representative
of Sweden on behalf of Mr. Olof Skoog, Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission; and Dr. Mosoka Fallah,
Director of the Community-Based Initiative.
On behalf of the Council, I want to welcome Dr.
Chan, Dr. Nabarro and Dr. Fallah, who are joining
today’s meeting via video teleconference from Hong
Kong, Geneva and Monrovia, respectively.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Dr. Chan.
Dr. Chan: Much has changed since I briefed the
Security Council on the Ebola outbreak in September
2014 (see S/PV.7268). The dire situation at that time
rallied an unprecedented response on the part of the
international community and individual Governments
that brought in military expertise, medical teams,
critical equipment and supplies, and considerable
financial resources.
That generous surge of support had an impact.
Surveillance and response capacities have vastly
improved. We have a very good picture of current chains

2/29

13/08/2015

of transmission and know how to break them. Smooth
genome sequencing of viruses can be done within 48
hours of case detection, giving clues for the detective
work of tracing the origins of each and every single
case. New cases in Liberia have again stopped. Guinea
and Sierra Leone have together reported only three
cases during each of the past two weeks, representing
the lowest numbers seen in well over a year. That is a
night-and-day difference from the situation less than a
year ago.
I can assure the Council that the progress is real,
and it has been hard earned. Most credit for this
progress goes to unwavering leadership at the highest
level of Government. At the same time, I must caution
against a false sense of security. All it takes is a single
undetected case in a health facility, one infected contact
fleeing the monitoring system, or one unsafe burial to
ignite a flare-up of cases. Further setbacks, such as
that experienced by Liberia at the end of June, can be
expected. We are grateful to Liberia for reporting that
event immediately and for mounting such an impressive
response.
International organizations continue to support
national efforts, with several thousand specialists
working alongside national staff in villages and towns,
as well as in the capital cities. If the current intensity
of case detection and contact tracing is sustained, the
virus can be soundly defeated by the end of this year.
That means going to zero and staying at zero. Fears
that the virus could become permanently established in
humans in that part of Africa have receded, and thatis
also very good news.
The outbreak — by far the largest, longest, and
most severe ever known — shocked the world and
challenged the international community, crying out
for the most powerful possible response. It called for
something we had never done before. What explains the
scale and duration of the outbreak? What allowed the
virus to rage out of control? What are the vulnerabilities
that might let similar or even worse events threaten
the world? What specific preparedness measures can
prevent their occurrence?
Most agree that the lack of public health capacities
and infrastructures created the greatest vulnerability.
The concept note prepared by Nigeria to guide this
meeting (S/2015/600, annex) — for which we thank
you, Madam President — documents the importance
of regional arrangements. Strengthening these

15-25379

13/08/2015

Peace and security in Africa

arrangements is a good place to start, especially when
it improves vigilance and increases the surge capacity
needed for a very rapid response. Innovative regional
and subregional initiatives have a critical role to play.
The World Health Organization (WHO) offers its full
support, backed by the provisions of the International
Health Regulations. Decentralized international
organizations like WHO and others, with their regional
and country offices and its networks of collaborating
laboratories and centres, provide strong platforms for
coordinated technical support and capacity-building.
The African Union and the United States Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention are jointly establishing
a communicable disease control system that will help
African nations to be better prepared for outbreaks.
The first step later this year will be the establishment of
an African surveillance and response unit, which will
include an emergency operations centre and workforce.
This will help African nations to participate fully in
the International Health Regulations. Those regulations
have been agreed by all nations and provide the bedrock
for safeguarding security in the face of disease threats.
West African nations have dealt bravely and boldly
with the outbreak, receiving magnificent support from
across Africa. They have shown how the right kind
of health care greatly increases the prospects that
people with Ebola will survive. They have analysed
the health and social needs of around 13,000 survivors,
who experience long-term complications ranging from
tiredness and severe joint pains to visual impairments
that can lead to blindness. They have mounted a vaccine
clinical trial in Guinea, and early results have been
extremely encouraging. Public acceptance of the trial
has been very good. We have learned the importance of
listening to the concerns of communities and winning
their trust and cooperation. We will continue the studies
and mobilize funding for rapid deployment once the
vaccine is approved by regulators
As a contribution to Ebola’s legacy of preparedness,
WHO is putting together a blueprint for the rapid
development of new medical products for any future
outbreak. Next month, WHO, the United States Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention and national
counterparts will evaluate the performance of three
rapid point-of-care diagnostic tests. If the results
are good, that innovation will be another important
contribution to outbreak containment and preparedness
for the future. Right now, the rapid screening of patients
for high-risk procedures, such as those in maternity and

S/PV.7502

surgical wards, helps restore confidence in the safety
of health facilities for patients and health professionals
alike. This is part of recovery.
The Ebola outbreak in West Africa shocked the
world out of its complacency about the infectious
disease threat. We witnessed the decisive role of
vigilance and readiness in countries that experienced
an imported case. All responded to that imported case
as an urgent national emergency and stopped onward
transmission or held it to just a handful of cases. The
world has learned from the Ebola experience. I am
personally overseeing reforms in WHO that include the
establishment of a global health emergency workforce,
an operational platform that can shift into high gear
quickly, performance benchmarks that show exactly
what we mean by “high gear”, and the funding needed
to make that happen.
Let me once again thank all States Members of the
Organization and the United Nations system for their
consistent personnel, financial, logistical and political
support for this vital transformation.
The President: I thank Dr. Chan for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Dr. Nabarro.
Dr. Nabarro: I would like to thank the Security
Council, especially the Nigerian presidency, for this
initiative. I should also like to thank the DirectorGeneral of the World Health Organization, Dr. Margaret
Chan, for her leadership. I also greet all the others who
have been invited to offer briefings today, and who
have really played very key roles in the global response
to the Ebola outbreak.
I should like to focus on three components of the
Ebola response. The first is the impact of decisive and
powerful leadership. The second is the importance of
community ownership of the response. The third is the
value of working together in long-term solidarity
First, with respect to powerful and decisive
leadership,
national
Governments,
regional
organizations and global leaders have stepped up to
the challenge of Ebola like never before. The leaders
of countries that have been affected by the outbreak
have taken charge, articulated clear visions, provided
strategic direction and enabled a massive response to
unfold. The Governments of the affected countries
created mechanisms to engage all the necessary
stakeholders. Local and national health actors have been
playing an essential role alongside other government

15-253793/29

S/PV.7502

Peace and security in Africa

sectors, civil society, private enterprises, scientific
institutions and the media.
Regional and subregional organizations have
been instrumental in channelling attention and
fostering action from the start. This has really been
an extraordinary, collective response. The African
Union established its support to the Ebola Outbreak in
West Africa (ASEOWA) in September 2014. ASEOWA
deployed more than 850 medical workers from
several African countries, and recruited over 4,000
local volunteers, including people who had survived
Ebola. I am sure that we will hear more about that
from Mr. António. The African Union Chairperson,
Ms. Dlamini-Zuma, stimulated a private-sector
fundraising drive in November 2014, which engaged
senior African businesspeople and mobilized more
than $32 million. On 20 July 2015, the African Union
Health Ministers adopted the statute for the African
Centre for Disease Control and Prevention, during
the International Conference on the theme “Africa
Helping Africans”, held in Malabo. The Mano River
Union and the Economic Community of West African
States have worked intensively on inter-country issues
and reinforced national systems for prevention and
response.
At the global level, world leaders have showed
extraordinary initiative and commitment. They have
mounted massive, rapid and coordinated support
to help affected countries take the heat out of the
epidemic. For example, in September, the SecretaryGeneral called for the whole of the United Nations
system to step up its support to the Ebola response.
That followed a request from the Presidents of Guinea,
Liberia and Sierra Leone that the Organization help
them to coordinate the international response. To that
end, the Secretary-General proposed the first-ever
United Nations emergency health mission. Known
as the United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency
Response (UNMEER), the Mission was endorsed by the
General Assembly at the end of September 2014 under
the presidency of Mr. Sam Kutesa, Foreign Minister
of Uganda, as one of his first acts as President of the
General Assembly. UNMEER incorporated enhanced
action from many United Nations entities, and deployed
to the region just 10 days later.
At the same time, the Secretary-General also
established the multi-partner Global Ebola Response
Coalition. It has become an integrated platform
that
engages
Governments,
non-governmental

4/29

13/08/2015

organizations, intergovernmental groups and academic,
philanthropic and private-sector organizations in
weekly meetings. Forty such meetings have taken place
thus far, wich serve as a venue for high-level strategic
coordination and for identifying challenges, enabling
collective and timely adjustments to strategy and
encouraging continued innovative research, along with
incorporating scientific advances.
UNMEER closed on 31 July 2015, having achieved
its core objective and contributed to a scaled-up
response and improved coordination. The World Health
Organization has now taken on the stewardship of the
collective response of the United Nations system and
will continue to encourage everyone to work effectively
together.
The past 12 months of the response have been
financed from multiple sources. One example is the
United Nations Multi-Partner Trust Fund, where 40
Member States have joined together with private
businesses, charities and individuals to contribute
funding to the Ebola response that can be used where
it was most needed. That is going to support logistics
and air travel, clinics and staff, as well as the necessary
elements to ensure community ownership.
On 10 July, the Secretary-General convened the
International Ebola Recovery Conference. Together
with partners, the United Nations, the African Union,
the European Union, the World Bank and the African
Development Bank worked to generate more than
$3.4 billion in new financing. The significant pledges
are catalysing national and regional Ebola recovery
efforts. But I must stress that that work is not cheap, and
the response and the recovery need continued solidarity
and support from Member States.
Moving on to the second of my three points, I
should like to say a little about the response.
I want to stress something that we have come to
recognize in recent months. The response works best
when it is owned by the affected communities. What
we seen is that the implementation of the response has
gone well when people whose health is at risk have felt
in control of their own lives, as well as their deaths,
and when they have been able to shape the response
to suit their interests. People’s concerns and fears are
more easily addressed, important cultural practices can
be made both safe and dignified, and concerns are more
easily addressed. Transmission chains are identified
more quickly, contacts are traced more readily and

15-25379

13/08/2015

Peace and security in Africa

the outbreak ends more rapidly if communities own
the response. The response works really well when
community leaders are part of its direction. Therefore,
when people themselves define the support they
require, and when their leaders help them to access
the assistance they need quickly, when they need it,
challenges and obstacles are swiftly overcome. On
ocassions, however, we have seen that the response
has not consistently prioritized community ownership.
As we move forward, it is now always been seen as an
essential and vital ingredient of the response.
I now turn to my third point, namely, working
together in long-term solidarity. The Ebola outbreak in
West Africa is not over. Doctor Chan has briefed us on
the remaining work to be done. She has also pointed
out the need for technical, operational and financial
solidarity with the thousands of people who are hard at
work in the affected countries, who are stemming the
tide of the current outbreak and who remain vigilant
and ready to respond. They cannot afford to let up on
the response, and they need our collective solidarity.
But there is more.
The thousands of people who have survived Ebola
need dedicated support, because the longer-term
consequences of living through Ebola area becoming
more apparent every day. Far too often, the survivors
face stigma. Their convalescence is often painful
and debilitating: loss of eyesight, severe joint pain,
headaches and extreme fatigue. It is really a serious
issue. Many survivors now need access to dedicated
health care, as well as help to rebuild their lives. Only
then are they able to contribute fully to their families,
to society and to the economy.
Let us now look at the nature of the response. The
importance of an all-of-society response to the emergency
is necessary. That means different actors — from local
leaders to mining companies — contributing their
specialty knowledge and expertise. The contribution is
greatest if all those different stakeholders are helped to
align their activities and coordinate their work with one
another. Strong engagement by all actors is necessary
until the outbreak is brought to an end, and as recovery
is advanced.
Countries need help to comply with the International
Health Regulations and to ensure their people’s health
security. Looking ahead, that means predictable
funding for accessible and effective health systems, as
well as predictable support when a health emergency is
suspected.

S/PV.7502

I would go a bit further in that regard: the coming
years will see unexpected new outbreaks of disease;
we just do not know where, when or how they will
strike. That means that the security of humankind
depends upon being able to anticipate such outbreaks,
to react quickly, to curtail the spread of disease and
to prevent people’s suffering. To get that kind of
response in place depends upon the whole of society
everywhere being meaningfully engaged, with ringfenced support for strong basic health systems and for
community resilience, together with proven capacities
for surveillance, analysis, early warning and rapid
reaction. Societies that collectively recognize those
threats to health, proactively address the challenges
and engage with their health systems in the response
will be at the heart of secure nations and a safer world
in the future. Reducing the risk of health crises does
contribute to a peaceful and a more secure future for
everyone around the world. It needs our collective and
continued engagement, and that is why I am so pleased
to have had the opportunity to brief the Security
Council this morning.
The President: I thank Dr. Nabarro for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. António.
Mr. António: At the outset, I wish to congratulate
you, Madam President, on your delegation’s assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for August
and for inscribing this critical issue on the agenda of
the Council in order to reflect on this difficult chapter
in our nations’ history, show our appreciation to all
stakeholders and reflect on how to better prepare
ourselves to counter any eventual epidemics.
I also thank the Nigerian presidency for inviting the
African Union (AU) to take part in this debate in order
to bring to bear its perspectives on lessons learned from
the Ebola epidemic, given the African Union’s active
engagement in the continent’s coordinated response
in the framework of the African Union support to the
Ebola Outbreak in West Africa (ASEOWA). That was
well underlined by Dr. Chan and Dr. Nabarro, whom
we thank both for their role in tackling this disease
and in coordinating the international effort, including
with the African Union. I look forward to listening to
Mr. Mosoka Fallah and Mr. Per Тhöresson, as well as
to representatives of Council members and affected
countries.
It will be recalled that, following the World Health
Organization (WHO) declaration on 8 August 2014, the

15-253795/29

S/PV.7502

Peace and security in Africa

Peace and Security Council of the African Union, at its
450th meeting held in Addis Ababa on 19 August 2014,
invoked article 6 (f) relating to aspects of its mandate
with regard to humanitarian action and disaster
management and decided,
“given the emergency situation caused by the Ebola
outbreak, to authorize the immediate deployment
of an AU-led military and civilian humanitarian
mission, comprising medical doctors, nurses and
other medical and paramedical personnel, as well as
military personnel, as required for the effectiveness
and protection of the Mission”.
The Peace and Security Council mandate led to
the establishment of ASEOWA. The primary objective
was to contribute to the ongoing efforts to stop the
Ebola transmission in the affected countries, prevent
its international spread and contribute to rebuilding the
health systems. The Peace and Security Council twice
extended the mandate of ASEOWA, which will expire
on 31 December, although the epidemic is deemed
contained and under control.
The African Union Commission is currently
undertaking a comprehensive evaluation of the
ASEOWA mission with a view to identifying lessons
learned and experiences gained. Allow me, however, to
share with the Council nine of the key lessons learned,
among others.
Lesson one concerns a speedy response and
deployment of the urgently needed human resources for
health. It took less than four weeks for the AU support
to the Ebola Outbreak in West Africa to be deployed
following the adoption of the Peace and Security
Council mandate. ASEOWA was established following
the Peace And Security Council mandate of 19 August
and deployed to Liberia by 15 September. By October,
ASEOWA was deployed to the three affected countries.
That is unprecedented.
Once a decision was made in November 2015 to
initiate a surge, increasing the number of ASEOWA
volunteers from the initial 100, it took less than one
month to have close to 835 volunteers working in all
three affected countries. Again, the African Union
Commission moved rapidly, within the space of a
single month, from Lagos through Addis Ababa,
Kinshaha and Nairobi to mobilize health workers and
recruit and deploy volunteers from Nigeria, Ethiopia,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Kenya.

6/29

13/08/2015

In addition, ASEOWA recruited about 4,000 local
volunteers within the three affected countries.
Lesson two regards the underlying principle
and flexibility of ASEOWA. In the context of the
international community’s response to Ebola, the
African Union has the largest deployment of the
much-needed human resources for health, but was
embedded within national ministries of health based on
their needs. ASEOWA’s concept of operations clearly
defines its strategy; a central tenet is that the AU will
support but not dictate to the affected countries. Hence,
ASEOWA volunteers were placed at the disposal of
the countries to support and supplement their health
workers, whose ranks have been badly depleted by the
Ebola virus disease.
ASEOWA worked within the national incident
management system set up by each affected country.
ASEOWA teams were deployed on the ground by the
Governments’ Ebola incident management system to
support the following six pillars of the response as
adopted by the countries: case management; logistics
management; surveillance and contact tracing;
communication and information; social mobilization;
and psychosocial care. The credibility of the ASEOWA
leadership and volunteers inspired trust in the affected
population, from the national leadership to communities,
which provided entry points into national coordination
structures. As a result, ASEOWA volunteers deployed
to the Ebola hottest spots and were instrumental in
drastically reducing Ebola cases by February 2015.
Lesson three regards collaboration with and
coordination among various actors. Although
coordination in the field was particularly challenging
because tasks assigned to some actors were not properly
coordinated, ASEOWA liaised and collaborated
effectively with the United Nations, WHO, the United
States Centre for Disease Control and Prevention,
Médecins Sans Frontières, Red Cross and other
organizations, as well as with Cubans and the Chinese,
with whom the African Union managed and worked
together inside Ebola treatment units in the affected
countries.
ASEOWA remained the central coordinator for
Africa’s response, working with member States and
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) in the field and at the Strategic Emergency
Centre at the African Union Commission in Addis
Ababa to ensure daily coordination meetings in Addis

15-25379

13/08/2015

Peace and security in Africa

Ababa, bringing together member States, development
partners, United Nations and humanitarian agencies
and interdepartmental participation from within the
African Union Commission; coordination between
Addis Ababa and the capitals of the affected countries
and of key development partners; coordination among
medical, logistic and other emergency experts; and
coordination from headquarters to the field offices in
West Africa.
Lesson four concerns partnership, in particular
with the African private sector. ASEOWA received
financial and technical support from partner countries
and organizations, such as the United Nations, WHO,
the United States of America, China, Japan, Sweden,
Norway, the European Union, Turkey, Kazakhstan, and
the World Bank, among others. The African Private
Sector — through the Africa Against Ebola Solidarity
Trust Fund — remains the single-largest financial
contributor to the AU’s Ebola response. In addition,
the African private sector leveraged its assets and
technology for the use of ASEOWA. Through a short
message service code campaign, the private sector
succeeded not only in mobilizing financial resources
for ASEOWA, but also in mobilizing ordinary Africans
to participate in the fight against Ebola. By joining
forces with the Commission in the Ebola response, and
with the commitment to support the African Centre
for Disease Control and Prevention — in the context
of medium to long-term post Ebola measure – the
African private sector has demonstrated the true spirit
of African solidarity: Africa helping Africa.
Lesson five is that technology and innovation
played an important role in the AU response to the Ebola
outbreak. ASEOWA field epidemiologists are equipped
with global positioning devices for contact tracing, and
they use mobile technology to transmit their data and
reports in real time. Software such as ArcGIS, Stata
and Epi Info were used to generate and analyse data.
On our part, the African Union Commission developed
its own process software to manage the recruitment
and processing of volunteers, which contributed
significantly to our ability to process — in two days’
time — and select from more than 500 potential
volunteers provided by each member State. The human
resources process involved verifying credentials,
background checks, medical clearance and insurance.
Technology and innovation are key in responding to
any future emergency.

S/PV.7502

Lesson six pertains to African solidarity, the spirit
of Africa helping Africans. ASEOWA was conceived
in the spirit of African solidarity, and supported by the
African Union’s convening power, political leverage,
its continental reach and its networks in all regions
of Africa, including the diaspora. Technical expertise
came from 18 member States, African Humanitarian
Action, an African humanitarian non-governmental
organization, the Economic Community fo West African
Sates, Africans in the diaspora, as well as from affected
countries. The ASEOWA volunteers included doctors,
nurses, epidemiologists, lab scientists and technicians,
public health officers, social workers, psycho-social
experts, community mobilizers, communications
experts and survivors of EBOLA. They all promptly
responded to the call of the African Union Commission
for help.
Lesson seven has to do with the need to build Africa’s
capacity to deal with future public health emergencies.
Another major lesson learned from the Ebola outbreak
is the need for the AU to put in place a medium- to longterm programme to build Africa’s capacity to deal with
public health emergencies and threats in future. Disease
surveillance and detection, emergency preparedness
for health and natural disasters and the proper
responses are vital. It is therefore imperative that the
capacities and systems most needed to prevent, detect
and respond to public health threats must be reinforced
in order to ensure that, in the medium- to long-term,
African countries meet all the International Health
Regulations and have in place the requisite capacities
and systems. It is in that context that the African Union
Commission reiterates its commitment to speed up the
establishment of the African Centre for Disease Control
and Prevention and to ensure that it is operational in
the next couple of months, as directed by the policy
organs of the African Union. The Centre will partner
with the World Health Organization and other relevant
stakeholders to assist member States in addressing gaps
with regard to compliance with International Health
Regulations, thereby complementing one another and
ensuring effectiveness.
Lesson eight has to do with a cost-effective
mission. ASEOWA deployed close to 850 medical
workers from 18 African countries, and recruited more
than 4,000 local volunteers — including survivors — to
work all over the affected countries. ASEOWA was
flexible enough to deploy its teams to where they
were needed the most and to support the people’s

15-253797/29

S/PV.7502

Peace and security in Africa

priorities. ASEOWA worked with national authorities
to restore critical maternal newborn and child health
care and other medical services in vital health-care
centres. ASEOWA worked with local organizations to
help revitalize hospitals and support strained medical
capacities in an infection-free environment. All that
was accomplished at a cost that was only a fraction of
what other aid interventions usually cost.
Lesson nine involves bridging the gap between
Geneva and New York in the event of public health
emergency of international concern, like Ebola.
Pursuant to article 12 of the International Health
Regulations, the Director-General of the World Health
Organization determines that an event constitutes a
public health emergency of international concern. As
we have witnessed, Ebola was a threat to international
peace and security, for which the Council has the
primary responsibility. Yet there is no role in the
International Health Regulations for the Security
Council. With the impending review of the International
Health Regulations, the African Union wishes to invite
members of the Security Council to consider how best
to address those lacunae, to coordinate with the World
Health Organization and to assess the role of the Council
once the latter determines that an event constitutes a
public health emergency of international concern.
In conclusion, I wish to highlight the fact that the
African Union, the regional economic communities
and national Governments are strengthening their
respective capacities to respond to emergencies and
disasters. Models for emergency response teams,
emergency medical teams and the African Capacity
for Immediate Response to Crises are being tested in
various crisis theatres. ASEOWA saved lives safely,
swiftly, inexpensively and effectively. The ASEOWA
model provides a working template and guidelines for
emergency responders in Africa, and perhaps in other
continents.
The President: I thank Mr. António for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Thöresson.
Mr. Thöresson: First of all, I would also like to
thank you, Madam President, for having organized
this very important meeting. Our deepest gratitude
also goes to Dr. Chan and Dr. Nabarro in particular for
their important briefings and tireless efforts throughout
this period. I also wish to highlight, and express my
gratitude to, the African Union for its absolutely crucial
contributions in fighting the Ebola outbreak.

8/29

13/08/2015

I am honoured to take the floor today on behalf of
the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission. As is well
known, the three worst-affected countries are all on the
agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission, and we have
been closely engaged from the very beginning of the
Ebola crisis. International attention and support at the
outbreak of the Ebola epidemic must now be matched by
equal levels of commitment for the long-term recovery.
In that regard, we welcome the successful outcome of
the Ebola recovery conference on 10 July, where the
international community pledged more than $5 billion
in long-term recovery efforts. We must now make
sure that the donors deliver on their commitments,
because only by staying the course will we ensure that
this does not happen again and that progress made in
peacebuilding can be sustained.
The crisis has exposed gaps in international
peacebuilding efforts during the last decade in
terms of institution-building, security sector reform,
reconciliation and economic recovery. We must
therefore step up our support in the recovery period,
by building strong institutions and supporting inclusive
politics. There is also a need to emphasize regional
approaches by supporting regional frameworks and
capacities. In that regard, we warmly welcome the
important role that the Mano River Union continues to
play.
Moving forward, the Peacebuilding Commission
would like to highlight the following three points.
The first point is the need to strengthen State-society
relations, including institution-building. The successful
national and local community leadership in the Ebola
response should also be built upon now for the coming
recovery phase. Strengthening national and local
institutional capacity should be the focus, including as a
way to improve State-society relations. During the peak
of the crisis, heightened levels of grievances among the
population added further impetus to the need to support
recovery efforts in a way that also strengthens social
cohesion and establishes trust.
Our second point is the importance of the provision
of basic social services throughout the affected
countries. Decentralization of public services is key
to extending State authority and ensuring that citizens
have a stake in the governance of their own countries.
It also contributes to restoring trust between citizens
and the State. Improved access to health care in all
areas of the affected countries is key to achieve real
resilience. That will require capacity-building to enable
15-25379

13/08/2015

Peace and security in Africa

S/PV.7502

the operation of local Government in remote areas and
strengthen governance in the health sector.

to die and remove their bodies, before we moved in new
patients.

The third point is that socioeconomic recovery in
the aftermath of Ebola needs to be a top priority. The
socioeconomic impact of Ebola has been absolutely
devastating. Economic revitalization is a key priority
for the affected countries to be able to emerge out of this
crisis as stronger and more resilient nations. Generating
employment and providing access to education, in
particular for the youth and women, will be critical.
Diversification of the economy will also help to ensure
more inclusive growth and reduce dependency on the
extractive sector. Responsible investments, an improved
business environment and financial inclusion are also
key levers that can help in propelling development.

In August 2014, Ebola struck West Point. West
Point is a slum where 70,000 people live in 5,000
houses deprived of sanitation, with one clinic and one
little school. This was a slum bearing a distrust for
institutions. This was a slum that was characterized by
secret burials and hiding of the sick. It was a daunting
and impossible task. To address Ebola treatment, we
needed to open a transit centre — a holding centre.
However the holding centre was ransacked by the
community because it did not understand that there was
no trust.

Before concluding, let me stress the importance
of better investment in preventive action. We must
move beyond the fire brigade mode of doing business
and build back more resilient institutions and stronger
national systems in the Ebola recovery process. The
Peacebuilding Commission looks forward to continuing
engaging the Security Council and other relevant
parties on the important Ebola recovery process. We
stand ready to continue advocating for long-term
recovery and peacebuilding needs and to accompany
the affected countries on their journey to sustainable
development and peace.
The President: I thank Mr. Thöresson for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Dr. Fallah.
Dr. Fallah: I express to you, Madam President,
and the members of the Security Council, my profound
gratitude for giving me this opportunity to bring
to participants a story on behalf of the voices of the
communities, a story that has done us very well because
we have zero cases this morning. It is a story that is due
to maverick changes made by the people. It is a story
that has three parts: where we were one year ago, where
we are now, and where we have to go.
I would say that this story is tied to the miracle of
West Point. In June 2014, we had the second wave of
Ebola. It was devastating and revealed human suffering
and misery. People were left in rooms with dead bodies;
we could not treat people in a timely fashion. They saw
that their friends and neighbours were dying slowly
and that nothing could be done because our system was
inadequate. There were instances where we took people
to the Ebola treatment unit but we had to wait for others

How did that sad story then became an experiment
and a story today? We realized that, in order to win the
fight against Ebola, we had to involve the community
and give them ownership. We therefore approached the
community to let them know that it was our fear for
survival. It was their threat. They knew the community
better than us and we wanted them to lead us. They
came together and they joined us in the fight against
the threat. They helped us to find all of the missing
contacts. The very holding centre that they had looted
became the holding centre that they supported. They
moved the sick to the holding centre; they supported us.
Within two weeks we saw a dramatic change, such
that the Minister of Health asked us to replicate the
experiment in our communities where there were there
were outbreaks. Wherever we went, we would listen to
the communities. We recognized the leaders and we
gave them the ownership and they led us. We decided
to hunt Ebola one community at a time. Initially we
were on the defensive. But with the involvement of the
community, we then got on the offensive to begin to
strike at Ebola one community after another. We let
them lead us.
That led to the birth of the Community Based
Initiative. We felt that we were being led by the
community and we followed the community, with
banners from other international donors, like the United
States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
media shows and the United Nations. We finally arrived
at the long-awaited zero cases. But the story that we
have to tell is the story of the community members, the
old people, the young people, the teachers who stood
with us in the communities.
Where are we today? This is based on a story about
our recent outbreak, in Margibi County, Liberia. On

15-253799/29

S/PV.7502

Peace and security in Africa

29 June we received information about a new Ebola
case. We moved into Margibi County. In 48 hours we
mobilized the community. We formed an Ebola council
led by community members. They were able to track
all of our contacts, wherever they went. Many of them
had no relationship with Ebola, but they understand it
involved human beings. We went to the Ebola transit
unit and we took photographs of the survivors of their
family as they were recovering and we brought that
back to the community. Working together with the
response team, within 23 days, we were able to work
down and contain the outbreak. It was a time of joy. The
community took the leadership role and we supported
them.
There is an important lesson to learn for the future.
Doctor Nabarro said it so well, as did Dr. Chan. An
important lesson to learn is the power of the community
to survive, to overcome challenges. In fact, all of us
who seek to avert future challenges that threaten us
as humankind must give them the power. We must
recognize the structure of the communities. We must
recognize the leadership, and we must support them. If
we support them through routine health services, they
will be able to protect us when crises come tomorrow.
That is an important lesson that we must learn.
An important lesson we will learn is that we must
build relationships and trust within the communities so
that during the low points they can support us, or carry
out testing where data might be needed. It is based on
trust. It is based on relationship. It is based on the fact
that we are responsive to their needs and must give
them the leadership. I cannot overemphasize the need
to build public-health capacities, so that our hospitals
do not become graveyards but places that will prevent
the next Ebola outbreak by instituting measures that
enhance diagnostic capacity. We are developing the
next generation of public-health practitioners, building
that capacity and importing it in the context of the
community, to every member, so as to ensure recovery,
empowerment and the leadership that has protected us
and will protect us from future outbreaks.
I wish to thank you, Madam President, the
Ambassador of the United States and Mr. Nabarro
for giving me this opportunity to make the voices of
the communities heard. Community-based initiatives
assume that indeed we will work with communities and
give them the support and the tools they need so that
we human beings are able to overcome whatever threats
come our way.

10/29

13/08/2015

The President: I thank Mr. Fallah for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Kononuchenko (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I wish to thank you, Madam President, for
having organized today’s briefing. I am also grateful
to Ms. Margaret Chan, Mr. Nabarro and other speakers
for the updated information of the situation regarding
the Ebola virus.
The decision of the Secretary-General on the
withdrawal of the United Nations Mission for Ebola
Emergency Response on July 31 is clear evidence of
the real progress achieved in countering the epidemic.
At the same time, although there has been a
significant improvement in the situation in Guinea,
Liberia and Sierra Leone, which have been affected by
Ebola, the international community must continue to
take active measures to prevent similar events in future.
As long as there is even a single case of infection, the
threat of the spread of the virus remains real.
At this juncture, a key role in achieving and
maintaining a sustainable zero indicator of infection
will be played by the expert capacity and coordinating
activities of the World Health Organization (WHO).
The Russian Federation continues to make a
significant contribution to international efforts
to eradicate Ebola, including providing bilateral
assistance to the aforementioned States of West Africa,
strengthening international response mechanisms
for emergency public-health and epidemiological
situations, enhancing national readiness on preventing
the transboundary spread of the virus, and carrying out
scientific research to devise new means of diagnosis
and prevention. Russia has allocated $20 million to the
budgets of WHO, UNICEF, the World Food Programme,
the International Civil Defence Organization, the World
Bank and the Ebola Response Multi-Partner Trust
Fund. The total Russian contribution has exceeded
$60 million.
Since August 2014 a Russian mobile laboratory has
been working in Guinea, on the basis of which Russian
experts are providing practical and advisory assistance
to the Guinean authorities. In November 2014, Russia
transferred to Guinea a 20-bed field hospital. In January
2015, in the city of Kindiya, Russian private-sector
contributions helped contribute to the building of a
permanent hospital with 65 beds for the treatment of

15-25379

13/08/2015

Peace and security in Africa

infectious diseases. Russia also is actively working on
creating a vaccine against Ebola.
In the context of the development of RussianGuinean cooperation in the area of combating infectious
diseases, a decision to provide financing of $11.7 million
over three years has been taken in the framework of a
joint scientific research programme aimed at training
staff and providing material and technical support for
the infrastructure of Guinea.
We intend to continue to cooperate fully with our
African partners in ensuring the permanent eradication
of the virus and overcoming its negative consequences.
Ms. Power (United States of America): Let me
begin by thanking Nigeria for keeping the international
community focused on Ebola with this meeting and,
of course, for deploying more than 500 health workers
to the countries affected at the peak of the outbreak,
when they were so desperately needed. I wish also to
commend Nigeria’s swift and methodical response
to two outbreaks within its own borders during the
epidemic, including one in Lagos, a city of more than
21 million people, which show how we can effectively
contain Ebola with the right response.
I would also like to thank all of today’s briefers
for their contributions: World Health Organization
(WHO) Director-General Margaret Chan, United
Nations Special Envoy David Nabarro, the Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission and his representative
here, and the African Union Permanent Observer,
Ambassador Téte António. We express our immense
gratitude to the men and women of their various
organizations on the frontlines of this fight helping
communities rebuild and recover.
Lastly, I wish to thank Dr. Mosoka Fallah, who
took time away from his daily work with his fellow
Liberians to share his story and the story of community
solidarity and leadership. When other people were
fleeing the growing outbreak, he ran headfirst into it.
Where others saw an impenetrate climate of fear and
distrust, he saw what he described here again today,
communities yearning to be empowered to stand up
to this deadly virus, and those communities, with his
support and partnership, went about building their trust
and knowledge, household by household and block by
block. We are in awe of his bravery and determination
and, above, all the compassion he showed for his fellow
Liberians.

S/PV.7502

Let me begin with what we all know. We have
made tremendous progress towards stopping this
deadly outbreak. Acording to WHO, in the week that
ended on 9 August, only three new cases of Ebola were
reported in the affected countries, one in Sierra Leone
and two in Guinea. Three cases in a week across three
countries; how many members of the Council would
have believed that possible a year ago, when we were
seeing three, four or more cases pop up each day in
individual households across the region, when three
new cases arriving in a single field clinic would have
been considered a slow day?
But it would be a serious mistake to take our eye
off the current outbreak or to think that when we end
it our job will be done. So today I want to briefly set
out three steps that the region and the international
community must take to address this outbreak and help
prevent future ones from reaching such devastating
proportions.
First and most obvious, we must work relentlessly
to get to zero. Ebola is a cunning virus capable of
exploiting even the slightest slip-up, delay or other
weakness in our response. A single missed link in the
chain, a contact who is not traced, a burial that is not
carried out safely, a symptomatic patient who is not
properly tested or quarantined, any single mistake or
weakness can itself spawn a new, deadly branch of this
outbreak.
So while the procedures that have been put in place
may feel onerous at times, they are critically important,
as is our constant vigilance. Even when a country gets
to zero, as we have seen, new outbreaks can and will
occur. The true measure of the progress made and
systems put in place will be how early these systems can
detect and then contain any new outbreaks. Consider
Sierra Leone’s Tonkolili district, where on 24 July the
first case of Ebola in more than 150 days was reported.
In response, national and international experts travelled
immediately to the area, where more than 50 people
were quarantined, including 29 high-risk contacts,
two of whom tested positive for Ebola. Contact teams
deployed to trace possible lines of transmission, and
local religious and community leaders were engaged to
inform nearby communities about symptoms and what
to do if they detected them.
This is the kind of effort that is needed to prevent
new outbreaks from becoming epidemics.

15-2537911/29

S/PV.7502

Peace and security in Africa

Secondly, as others have noted, we need to build
up the public-health systems and improve primary
case in the countries affected as well as countries
with similar vulnerabilities, of which there are many.
This means strengthening the institutions themselves
and supporting the people who make them work. As
this outbreak demonstrated, Ebola thrives in places
with fragile, overstretched health systems and limited
public-health capabilities. By allowing the virus to
spread faster and more widely, those vulnerabilities
pose a threat not only to people living in countries with
weak systems but to people everywhere. Last month’s
International Ebola Recovery Conference was aimed
at exactly that — strengthening public health systems
in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone. It is critically
important that all countries deliver on the pledges they
made at the Conference — and before it, for that matter.
Thirdly, we need to understand how our global
health and emergency response architecture allowed
the epidemic to spread so widely before we stepped
in and scaled up. Several critical efforts have been
undertaken to identify crucial flaws in the response,
including the report issued by the WHO Ebola Interim
Assessment Panel and the United Nations High-level
Panel on the Global Response to Health Crises, whose
final report is forthcoming. We urge those involved
to put forward concrete, actionable recommendations
on the systemic reforms needed to ensure timely,
effective and coordinated responses, and we welcome
the commitment that Dr. Chan and Dr. Nabarro have
made to undertaking swift reforms within the WHO.
Those reforms necessitate the support of all partners
and Member States. Here are just a few of the questions
those efforts should seek to answer.
Why did it take the United Nations, its agencies
and all of us so long to be seized by the urgency and
magnitude of this outbreak? What was lost between
staff on the ground — people like Dr. Fallah, people
who were seeing clinics overflow and bodies
abandoned in the streets — and people like us, with
the power to catalyse an effective response? Would
critical resources, time and energy have been saved by
relying on existing United Nations and international
structures to coordinate the emergency response, rather
than creating a new one in the United Nations Mission
for Ebola Emergency Response (UNMEER), or did
UNMEER add value? If we had the response to do over
again, or if we should confront another outbreak, the
bottom line is, what would we do differently?

12/29

13/08/2015

Of course, the value of those exercises rests not
on the diagnoses but on the swift implementation of
any remedies identified. Here, too, the international
community’s continued engagement is crucial. In
September of last year, when the United States had
the privilege of presiding over an emergency meeting
of the Security Council to try to rally international
support for the Ebola response, I noted then that we
knew how to bend the outbreak’s deadly curve — it was
just a question of marshalling the resources and the will
to do it. “The math is simple”, I said at the time; “the
sooner we act, the more lives we will save” (S/PV. 7268,
p. 9). The same is true today, only we are no longer
just talking about this Ebola outbreak, but about other
disease outbreaks that will inevitably follow. Get to
zero. Build more resilient public-health systems that
everyone can access. Learn from our mistakes. If we
do that, we will go a long way towards preventing the
next outbreak from taking so many lives and tearing
apart so many families and communities. The math is
still simple. The sooner we act, the more lives we save.
I would like to close, finally, by telling the Council
about just one of those lives saved. On 24 July 2014, just
over a year ago, a 44-year-old emergency-room doctor
named Philip Ireland was headed to a staff meeting
at John F. Kennedy Memorial Hospital in Monrovia,
Liberia, when he was struck with a headache so severe,
he saw flashes of light. His heart rate shot up and he
felt feverish. He suspected he had Ebola, but the few
clinics in Monrovia taking suspected patients were
overflowing. So he quarantined himself at home. His
mother made her own personal protective equipment
suit out of rain gear and household gloves so that she
could care for him. But Dr. Ireland’s condition continued
to deteriorate, until by the seventh day he could not feel
his own pulse and was rushed to an Ebola treatment
unit. His first night in the unit, he had diarrhoea 46
times and vomited 26 times. “I woke up barely alive, in
a sea of mess,” he said. But in what he later described
as “the most touching act of kindness one could ever
imagine”, a physician’s assistant named Patrick came to
Dr. Ireland the next morning, bathed and dressed him
and put him in a clean bed. Then Patrick prayed with
him. Dr. Ireland said,
“That man has changed my wheel when it comes to
how to give empathy and care for a patient. I now
know, because I was a patient who was dying.”
Day by day, Dr. Ireland got stronger, and 14 days
later he was released, Ebola-free. Today, Dr. Ireland is

15-25379

13/08/2015

Peace and security in Africa

back in JFK Memorial Hospital in Monrovia, where he
is not only treating patients again but is also helping to
train a new generation of Liberian doctors and nurses.
He sees that as part of his duty, a way of rebuilding a
health system decimated by the virus that almost took
his life. And at the end of each day, he goes home to
his wife and five children. That is one life — one life
saved in an outbreak that to date has taken the lives
of more than 500 health professionals and more than
11,000 overall. Just imagine for one moment how glad
we will be, the next time around, if we take the steps
today that will save thousands of lives later.
Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Nigerian presidency of the Council
for this month for organizing this meeting on the Ebola
epidemic, which affected three West African countries
so severely from December 2013 and whose effects
continue to trouble some of them today. I would also
like to thank today’s briefers, Dr. Margaret Chan, Dr.
David Nabarro, Ambassador Tété António, Mr. Per
Thöresson and Dr. Mosoka Fallah, for their statements.
The very particular attention given to the Ebola
epidemic by the United Nations and the rest of the
international community is testament to the degree to
which our planet remains vulnerable in some areas,
and to which the international solidarity, demonstrated
by the multifarious efforts that it brought together,
is what is required to create an adequate response
for combating the negative effects of this plague and
similar natural disasters. As is clearly highlighted in
today’s concept note (S/2015/600, annex), it was not
only Liberia, Guinea and Sierra Leone that suffered so
severely from its effects, with thousands of deaths, but
other countries in the same subregion as well, if to a
lesser degree, that saw the disease’s effects, including
Nigeria, Senegal and Mali. Even countries outside the
African continent were affected.
The Ebola epidemic spread so fast that it was
considered a threat to international peace and security.
We should recall that on 18 September the epidemic was
the subject of an emergency meeting of the Security
Council (see S/PV.7268), which generally is not called
on to discuss public health issues. In view of the scale
of Ebola and the threat it posed to international peace
and security, resolution 2177 (2014), proposed by the
United States, was sponsored by 134 States Members
of the United Nations and adopted unanimously by the
members of the Council. The resolution demonstrated
the ability of the international community to mobilize

S/PV.7502

in the face of this extraordinary crisis. We commend
the reaction of the international community, led by
the Security Council, in its collective grasp of the
seriousness of the situation, particularly through the
adoption of the resolution and its call for international
aid to be mobilized in combating this scourge.
The deaths caused by Ebola, the precariousness of
basic social health services and the chaos among their
existing structures, including the closure of hospitals
in some countries, were both a result and the visible
symptoms of the weakness of the health systems of
the countries most affected. We also saw how slowly
international aid was deployed, despite the fact that
it was available, as well as the stigmatization of the
entire African continent and the excessive and insulting
protective measures taken by several countries — the
practices of quarantine, isolation and even tacit embargo
are still deplorable even considering the right of States
to defend and ensure their own security, including as it
relates to health issues. That state of affairs was broad
justification for the appeal on 29 August 2014 to the
Secretary-General by the leaders of the three countries
most affected pleading for the aforementioned measures
to be lifted. For its part, the Peace and Security Council
of the African Union, at its sixth extraordinary meeting
in Addis Ababa on 8 September, made a similar urgent
appeal aimed at ensuring that those countries were not
isolated.
As the Secretary-General has emphasized, Ebola
was not merely a public-health crisis. Its humanitarian,
social and economic consequences are serious and
could threaten the political stability of the countries
involved. Ebola has had an negative effect on various
socioeconomic sectors in Liberia and all the countries
affected in the region. We have seen, for example,
measures taken by some international transport
companies to restrict international shipping access to
the countries most affected by Ebola, which had an
immediate negative impact on their economies. The
effects caused a collapse in the countries’ various
socioeconomic sectors and dealt a further blow to the
living conditions of the populations.
We recognize that Liberia — a country emerging
from a long civil war — has experienced delays with
regard to peacebuilding and the process of gradually
withdrawing the United Nations Mission in Liberia.
Nevertheless, we welcome the surge in solidarity on a
bilateral basis prompted by Ebola. In that connection,
we commend the efforts of individuals of the countries

15-2537913/29

S/PV.7502

Peace and security in Africa

that deployed medical teams and military personnel on
the ground. In the epidemic of Ebola, we saw the full
support among international organizations, regional
and subregional organizations, such as the Mano River
Union, the Economic Community of West African
States, Médecins Sans Frontières and the United
Nations Development Programme — and above all
the resolve of the African Union Peace and Security
Council, which, for the first time in its history, decided,
at its meeting in Nairobi on 19 August 2014, to send a
civilian-military medical team to Liberia.
We note the statement made by the Deputy DirectorGeneal of the World Health Organization that
“It is possible to contain and minimize the spread
of an Ebola epidemic as long as the international
community acts rapidly and effectively. In that
fight, priority attention must particularly be given
to children, women and other vulnerable categories
of people.”
That assertion retains its validity today in the
ongoing fight against the epidemic in Sierra Leone and
Guinea. But vigilance must be maintained given the
emergence of isolated cases in Liberia, which had been
declared Ebola-free. We hope that the international
community will draw on the lessons learned from these
cases by adopting an early warning system so that we
can react in a more timely manner to future outbreaks
of that nature.
I would like to conclude by paying homage to the
victims, including those in the medical corps who
honoured the Hippocratic oath by not abandoning those
who were ill and by giving their best, even at the cost
of their own lives, in treating them. Among them there
were eminent epidemiologists and foreign physicians.
I also pay homage to the United Nations contingent on
the ground, who did not waver in the exercise of their
mission.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I too
would like to thank you, Madam President, for having
organized this Security Council debate almost a year
after the first meeting of the Council (see S/PV.7268)
devoted to the Ebola epidemic, held in September 2014.
I would also like to thank all the speakers for their
briefings.
At the outset, France would like once again to pay
tribute to the victims and the local and international
personnel who were intimately committed to the sick
since the beginning of the epidemic. If the situation has
14/29

13/08/2015

clearly improved in the three countries most affected, it
is the fruit of the work on the ground of a solid strategy,
endowed by significant human and financial resources.
In that regard, we commend the work of the United
Nations, whose related teams played a key role at the
strategic and operational levels. We equally commend
the exemplary response of the African Union.
In spite of those encouraging results, the Ebola
epidemic has not ended. The international community
must remain mobilized to conquer the virus. It
is essential to pursue our efforts in maintaining
strengthened epidemiological surveillance and a
response capacity beyond the zero-Ebola objective. The
complete eradication of the virus in the three affected
countries remains our priority.
Since the beginning of the Ebola crisis, France has
been fully committed to the countries affected, notably
in support of the efforts of the Guinean authorities.
We have mobilized more than €220 million, including
€160 million from contributions raised from the State
budget. In Guinea, our support for the authorities
includes in particular the training and protection of the
actors involved in the crisis by setting up two training
centres in France and in Guinea. Our support also
includes medical leadership through the establishment
of four Ebola training centres, a centre for treating
nursing staff and the financing of four laboratories.
In addition to these efforts to overcome the
epidemic, we have already focused our attention on
the recovery of the countries involved. Just as it was
at the forefront of the emergency response to the
epidemic, France has actively participated in those
recovery efforts by mobilizing more than €150 million
in additional funding. Overall, France will have raised
approximately €350 million in response to the epidemic
and to help the affected countries in recovery.
The Ebola crisis has highlighted the fragility of
the health-care systems of the affected countries.
Recovery efforts should focus on strengthening those
systems based on a regional approach. France is already
implementing several projects with our African and
international partners. We support the establishment
in Guinea of regional alert-and-response teams to the
epidemic. We are also establishing a network of public
health institutes to monitor the risks of epidemics in
West Africa. This project will be connected to a network
of laboratories led by the Pasteur and Institut Mérieux
Institutes, and will be supported by strengthening
hospital hygiene at the regional level.
15-25379

13/08/2015

Peace and security in Africa

Not only does the epidemic not recognize
borders, but it has affected all sectors of society of
those countries — education, economies and political
processes have been disrupted. French support for
the most affected countries covers all those areas.
We intend to strengthen our cooperation in the region
with our local and international partners. We need to
work together both to put an end to the epidemic and to
ensure the resilience of health-care systems and their
capacity to prevent similar health crises in the future
and to support sustainable development in the region.
In conclusion, further consideration must be given to
how to improve the response of the international system
as a whole to health crises, both through multilateral
forums and on the ground. The epidemic should be taken
as an opportunity to build our capacities to cope with
significant health challenges. The epidemic reminds us
that we need to have robust early warning and response
capacities, and in particular how badly we need the
International Health Regulations of the World Health
Organization. France will organize on 29 October in
Paris a high-level meeting on lessons learned by the
many actors involved the response in West Africa.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I would like to
begin by congratulating the Nigerian presidency of the
Council for convening this important meeting. Allow
me to also thank Dr. Margaret Chan, Director-General
of the World Health Organization; Dr. David Nabarro,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General on Ebola;
the Deputy Permanent Representative of Sweden on
behalf of the Chair of Peacebuilding Commission;
and especially Ambassador Téte António, Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations.
I would like to especially welcome the participation
of Dr. Mosoka Fallah, who spoke directly from Liberia,
a country that has been so heavily affected by the Ebola
epidemic. I thank him very much for sharing his direct
experience of the epidemic with the Council.
We acknowledge the adoption by the Security
Council of resolution 2177 (2014), which declared the
Ebola crisis to be an international threat to peace and
security, as that decision helped to highlight awareness
of the epidemic and to increase international assistance
to Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea. We also commend,
and express our gratitude to, the Secretary-General for
his efforts to help generate impetus for donor events
that have helped raise much-needed funds to combat
Ebola in the West Africa subregion. We also extend our
gratitude to the Member States, financial institutions

S/PV.7502

and international and regional organizations that
supported this initiative and showed solidarity to the
affected peoples and communities.
Resolution 2177 (2014) calls for support to affected
countries in intensifying prevention and response
activities, as well as the dedication of adequate
capacity to prevent future outbreaks. Such measures,
combined with the efforts of the Secretary-General’s
high-level panel on the global response to health crisis,
as well as the ongoing reforms at the World Health
Organization — which Dr. Chan has again outlined
here this morning, especially the recommendation
that it develop a global health emergency work
force — have the potential to safeguard against future
threats to international peace and security in the form
of epidemics.
We highlight the African Union Peace and Security
Council initiative to establish the African Union support
mission for the Ebola outbreak in West Africa, which
is a concrete example of how regional organizations
can play a central role in responding to crises in their
respective geographic areas. We also commend the
adoption by African Health Ministers of the statute of
the African Centre for Disease Control and Prevention,
at Malabo in July.
The daily progress in curtailing the spread of
the disease gives us hope that the Ebola outbreak is
coming to an end and the economies of the affected
countries will again be on the right track, so that the
bright prospects they had before the outbreak will
finally become a reality. From the thousands of lives
lost in 2014 and 2015, Ebola cases have fallen to an
encouragingly low level: two cases total in Guinea and
Sierra Leone, which brings us to a zero-case reality.
Although the Ebola outbreak is not the only threat
to peace and security on the agenda of the Council, it is
nevertheless a relevant study of best practices on how
lessons learned can be used in future. In particular, the
lessons learned from the international community’s
collaborative efforts can be adapted to establish evermore innovative and flexible partnership arrangements
that draw on our respective strengths and help build
and consolidate peace and stability, not only in Africa
but in conflict areas around the world.
Another lesson learned from the Ebola outbreak is
that, similar to the more mainstream threats of terrorism
and violent extremism, contemporary challenges to
international peace and security require early and

15-2537915/29

S/PV.7502

Peace and security in Africa

timely intervention, cannot be contained within
borders, will proliferate if there is weak infrastructure,
require regional approaches and close collaboration
with civil society and will nullify any efforts that are
not inclusive, thus making it harder to find durable
solutions.
Thanks to the commitment of the international
community and determined leadership at the national,
subregional, regional and international levels, the Ebola
outbreak has been contained. That is a major success
that we can collectively celebrate and learn lessons
from. This meeting of the Security Council is another
important contribution and an opportunity for us to
take stock and remain vigilant to respond effectively,
and avoid, future outbreaks of disease that pose a threat
to human security at the international level.
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank the Nigerian presidency for convening this
meeting on the global response to the outbreak of Ebola
in West Africa. We also thank the briefers for their
statements.
The recent outbreak of Ebola produced important
lessons learned and best practices, foremost the
importance of having a coordinated system at the
regional, subregional and global levels to address, at
an early stage, scourges that threaten health and cause
health emergencies affecting international peace and
security. Early-warning systems require coordinated
participation while avoiding duplication of effort on
the part of the various agencies of the United Nations
system, civil society, the private sector and regional
and subregional organizations, which are fundamental
and irreplaceable pillars. We appreciate the fact that
some United Nations agencies have revised their
initial response protocols and decided to restructure in
search of more effective mechanisms to combat such
epidemics.

13/08/2015

moments of the epidemic, even at the cost of risking
their lives. Such gestures of generosity and solidarity
deserve special recognition.
We stress the importance of a proper process
of recovery after the crisis. Several of the countries
affected by the outbreak of Ebola was their economies
collapse, thereby exposing the vulnerability of their
public health systems. We support and encourage
the efforts of the Peacebuilding Commission and the
various agencies and programmes of the United Nations,
especially the World Health Organization, as well as
other organizations, in building national capacity in the
areas most affected by the crisis.
Finally, we agree with the Secretary-General, in
the sense that the outbreak of Ebola serve to reveal a
world united in the face of the problem. However, our
investments and sacrifices may be lost if the job is not
properly completed. So long as there are Ebola cases in
any part of the world, we are all at risk.
Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Madam President,
for convening this important meeting. I also thank Dr.
David Nabarro, Dr. Margaret Chan, Mr. Téte António,
Mr. Per Thöresson and Dr. Mosoka Fallah for their
comprehensive briefings. At almost the same time last
year, we met (see S/PV.7268) to consider the serious
consequences of Ebola and how to deal with this
unprecedented type of threat to international peace and
security.

We have learned the importance of preventing
scenarios of discrimination against the people and
countries affected. It is imperative to take measures
that include a cross-cutting approach to respect for
human rights to prevent new forms of exclusion and
stigmatization.

The unity within the Council and the intensified
coordination of regional and international efforts guided
the effective response to the Ebola outbreak and the
establishment of the United Nations Mission for Ebola
Emergency Response (UNMEER), which completed its
tasks a few days ago, having achieved the key goals
of its mission. I offer my thanks and appreciation to
the entire staff of UNMEER for their sacrifices and
efforts to control the spread of Ebola. We also thank
all countries that provided medical equipment and
financial resources. We hope that the World Health
Organization (WHO), which has assumed UNMEER’s
responsibilities, will be able to halt the spread of Ebola
altogether.

Resolution 2177 (2014), which my country
co-sponsored, includes the idea that a health crisis could
threaten international peace and security. We therefore
pay special tribute to all regional and subregional
actors who did not hesitate to assist in the most difficult

We must capitalize on this international achievement
and completely finish our work, especially given
the fact that the ongoing negative indications, while
limited, could reignite the danger. Guinea and Sierra
Leone, for instance, continue to suffer Ebola virus

16/29

15-25379

13/08/2015

Peace and security in Africa

infections, despite the decline in the number of cases
and the shrinking areas of transmission. The resurgence
of Ebola in Liberia following the announcement that it
was Ebola-free requires the international community
and the stakeholders to support the affected countries
in preventing the rebound of Ebola cases.
The public health systems of the countries of West
Africa constitute a major obstacle to the elimination
of Ebola. The Governments of the affected countries
should, with the assistance of international and regional
organizations, scale up and improve their health-care
systems. It is clear that Ebola spread very quickly
because of the weakness of those systems. We must also
establish monitoring, surveillance and early detection
systems, especially in areas of migration and crossborder movement, in order to prevent transmission at
the regional and international levels.
The countries of West Africa should invest in and
benefit from the human resources that were developed
during the Ebola response period so as to strengthen
the confidence of the international community in
their national health services. That will enhance the
engagement of local communites in post-Ebola recovery
strategies. The capacities of those communities could
be built up so as to strengthen their countries’ economic
development. The international community cannot
ignore the serious impact of Ebola on the socioeconomic
situation of those countries, especially given the fact
that the three countries most severely affected are
on the agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission. We
commend the Secretary-General for convening the
international conference on Ebola last month, which
stressed the importance of ongoing investment in those
three countries.
In conclusion, we call on the international
community to maintain its support for the affected
countries by providing resources and assistance in
order to eliminate Ebola and for the post-Ebola recovery
strategy, as well as in strengthening preparedness in
facing the challenges raised by the virus.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates Nigeria’s initiative to convene today’s
meeting on Ebola. I thank Dr. Margaret Chan, DirectorGeneral of the World Health Organization (WHO), and
Dr. David Nabarro, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral on Ebola, for their briefings. I listened carefully
to the statements made by Ambassador António,
Mr. Thöresson and Dr. Fallah.

S/PV.7502

The Ebola epidemic broke out in West Africa
in late 2013. It was the most severe outbreak of the
disease, with the broadest geographical scale and the
longest duration, in the 40 years since the virus was
first discovered. The virus has posed not only a serious
threat to the lives, health and security of the inhabitants
of the affected countries, but also challenges to the
economic and social development of those countries.
Since the epidemic began, the United Nations, the
World Health Organization and other agencies have
taken emergency measures and actively coordinated
with the international community in combating the
epidemic together. At present, thanks to the efforts of
all parties concerned, Ebola prevention and control
have made significant progress and the efforts to
combat the Ebola epidemic have achieved conclusive
results. The Ebola epidemic has seriously impacted
the economic and social development of Sierra Leone,
Guinea, Liberia and other West African countries. The
international community should draw lessons from
the epidemic and focus on the post-Ebola recovery
and reconstruction of the affected countries, with an
emphasis on the following points.
First, poverty alleviation and development must be
accelerated so as to lay a solid material foundation for
the prevention of the recurrence of the Ebola epidemic.
The fundamental reason for which the virus was
able to run rampant throughout the region is poverty.
Only eradicating poverty and achieving development
as soon as possible can ensure a solid material basis
for preventing the epidemic from recurring. The
international community should continue to attach
growing importance to the international development
agenda, effectively increase development assistance,
and actively help the affected countries in developing
their economies, creating employment opportunities,
eradicating poverty, improving livelihoods, developing
expertise, improving national governance and building
the capacities of the Governments concerned to ensure
their peoples’ prosperity, health and security.
Secondly, a long-term vision must be developed
to help African countries establish and improve their
public health systems. The Ebola epidemic has revealed
the weaknesses of the public health systems of the
African countries concerned. China hopes that the
international community will help African countries
to build more hospitals and laboratories and purchase
advanced instruments and equipment, while actively
supporting their efforts to establish public health

15-2537917/29

S/PV.7502

Peace and security in Africa

emergency response and management mechanisms,
improve grass-roots prevention and control systems,
enhance the training of medical personnel, and
strengthen prevention awareness within the general
public, while fully upgrading the necessary hardware
and the software.
Thirdly, coordination and synergies must be
strengthened in the face of such non-traditional security
challenges as the Ebola epidemic. No country can
address these on its own. The international community
should foster a sense of the common destiny of
humankind while it works as one and shares the highs
and the lows together. United Nations bodies such as
the Security Council and WHO, as well as international
financial institutions such as the World Bank and
the International Monetary Fund, should strengthen
coordination, bring their own own advantages into
full play, and continue to support the African Union,
the Economic Community of West African States, the
Mano River Union and other regional organizations in
playing their special roles in preventing and controlling
the epidemic. They should also help the countries of
West Africa to emerge from the shadow of the Ebola
crisis as soon as possible and achieve socioeconomic
recovery.
Africa is China’s good friend and brother. We
have gone through thick and thin together. China
sympathizes with the affected African countries over
the impact the epidemic. Ever since the outbreak of the
epidemic, China has been among the first to provide
assistance and has delivered the most large-scale
foreign assistance in the health sector in its own history,
thereby playing a leading and promoting role in the
international response to the epidemic. On numerous
occasions, China has dispatched large chartered planes
to the three West African countries to deliver goods,
with a cumulative value of $120 million, in the four
rounds of assistance to the affected countries and 13
neighbouring countries. China has also dispatched over
1,200 epidemic disease-control experts and medical
workers, and also helped Sierra Leone and Liberia to
build a biosafety laboratory, an Ebola treatment centre
and other important facilities.
As of July, the Chinese medical assistance team had
tested over 5,000 virus samples and treated over 800
patients. China has also helped the affected countries
train over 13,000 medical workers. Recently, Foreign
Minister Wang Yi of China visited Sierra Leone,
Guinea and Liberia to obtain first-hand information on

18/29

13/08/2015

the results achieved by the three countries in combating
the epidemic and to learn about the needs and
aspirations of the three countries in terms of their postEbola economic and social reconstruction. At the next
stage, in response to the specific needs of the African
countries, China will enhance its assistance to these
countries in terms of health-care systems, cooperation
in production capacity, infrastructure-building and
human resources development so as to help African
countries accelerate their development and enhance
their capacity to address health emergencies. China is
also carefully studying the recovery plan of the three
West African countries and the Mano River Union,
and is actively considering a new round of assistance
measures.
The Chinese Government will also provide the
United Nations Ebola Multi-Partner Trust Fund with
an additional $5 million in cash to support the United
Nations in its ongoing leading and coordinating role
in the recovery process for the affected areas. China
pays close attention to the health and well-being of
the African people, and is ready to join hands with the
international community to make a greater contribution
to peace and development in Africa.
Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening this important meeting, for
keeping this theme on the agenda and, in particular, for
the way that Nigeria responded to the challenge of Ebola
within its own borders, as well as for your leadership in
helping so many others.
I welcome the briefings by Director-General
Chan — and thank her for beaming in from Hong
Kong — Special Envoy Nabarro, Mr. Téte António
and Dr. Fallah, who spoke so movingly about the
determination of communities to survive. I want to
express my thanks to Dr. Nabarro for his tireless work
in coordinating the international Ebola response and
to Dr. Chan for her leadership of the World Health
Organization (WHO). I welcome her commitment to
better equipping the organization for future responses.
As others have said, all of us have a great deal to
learn from what happened this last time. I want to pay
particular tribute to Dr. Fallah’s bravery and the power
of civil society that he represents in combating this
disease.
The African Union has made a significant
contribution to the fight against Ebola. All 835
African health workers deployed by the African Union,

15-25379

13/08/2015

Peace and security in Africa

including the 190 Nigerians who volunteered as part of
that effort, are a testimony to the region’s commitment
to defeating Ebola.
In September last year, the United States Centres
for Disease Control and Prevention predicted that up
to 1.4 million cases could emerge in West Africa by
early 2015, posing a clear threat to international peace
and security. It is important to remember that that was
a real risk, but today the number of cases stands at just
over 27,000. The Ebola epidemic has been brought
under control. The Council usually discusses bad news.
Today, we should take a moment to mark that progress
and take steps to ensure that it lasts.
Curbing the spread of that terrible disease has
required hard work and sacrifice, in particular on the
part of local people in affected areas, but also of national
Governments in Sierra Leone, Liberia and Guinea
and health-care workers from across the entire world.
Tragically, over 11,000 people have died. That number
would have been far greater without their dedication.
We can be proud that the international community
rallied to support the efforts to defeat Ebola.
The United Kingdom played its part. In Sierra
Leone, we committed over $660 million and built six
treatment centres and three diagnostic laboratories.
With the expertise of both our military and civilians,
we supported a command-and -control function that
made both the national and district responses more
effective. In total, over 1,300 military and health-care
workers deployed to support the response. Throughout
the crisis, we responded with pace, ambition and
innovation working with many others, including China,
Cuba, Denmark, Sweden, New Zealand and Australia.
Our collective efforts are working. From a peak of
over 500 new cases per week in Sierra Leone, we saw
only one last week. But that is still one too many. The
international community must remain committed to the
region and to getting to zero. As the recent cases in
Liberia show, even when a country has reached zero,
we cannot drop our guard. To get to zero and stay there
we must maintain our resolve and our support. The
affected countries are rightly taking steps to transition
out of crisis and into recovery, helping millions of
children back to school, restoring basic health-care
services and kickstarting economic activity. That all
requires the backing of everybody here.
We thank the Secretary-General for holding the
remarkably successful International Ebola Recovery

S/PV.7502

Conference in July. It will now be important for donors
to work closely with both the affected countries and with
each other to best coordinate activities for the benefit
of the region. The United Kingdom will continue to
stand by Sierra Leone and the region. We have pledged
$370 million in support of President Koroma’s two-year
ebola recovery strategy and our commitment to Ebola
recovery, including debt relief through the International
Monetary Fund, is now over $500 million.
Collectively, we must learn the lessons from this
crisis to improve the international and national health
systems. We therefore welcome the work that is being
carried out by the Secretary-General’s High-level Panel
on the Global Response to Health Crises. It is clear that
we need to achieve three things. First, WHO reform at
the headquarters, regional and country levels is needed
if it is to properly coordinate and lead responses to
humanitarian and health crises. Secondly, we need
more investment in prevention and preparedness so that
national health systems have the early warning triggers
and safe affordable technologies to allow them to respond
quickly and effectively to future outbreaks. Thirdly, we
need swifter rapid-response mechanisms, with stronger
links between the health and humanitarian sectors, so
that they are able to respond to health emergencies in a
coordinated way.
The response in Sierra Leone showed us the
effectiveness of a joint, cross-Government and
multinational approach that allowed us to rapidly design
and deliver an emergency response — what Sierra
Leone’s Permanent Representative Vandi Minah calls
more vividly a complete “jigsaw puzzle” of a response.
All of that was done in very closely partnership
throughout with the Government of Sierra Leone, and
only President Koroma’s strong leadership made it
possible.
We cannot wipe out the suffering this disease has
inflicted, but we can commit clearly today to reaching
zero. And we must prepare deliberately and effectively
both to prevent and to tackle disease outbreaks in the
future.
Mr. Gasso Matoses (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank you, Madam President, for giving us the
opportunity today to hear some of those who were
at the front line of the response to the epidemic and
reconstruction and development efforts of the countries
affected. Their opinions and views are essential to
Member States in making informed decisions on the
steps to take in the future in order to put an end to

15-2537919/29

S/PV.7502

Peace and security in Africa

13/08/2015

the final remnants of the epidemic and in helping to
strengthen the response and adaptation capacity of the
local, regional and national authorities and institutions.

over the past year that should enable us to determine
where we have succeeded and where we need to
improve.

Today, Dr. Chan has sent us a very optimistic
message. Naturally, we share that optimism, which
is the result of a series of assertive decisions made
over the past months and year. One of those is clearly
illustrated by the example of Nigeria’s swift and
transparent reaction when the threat of Ebola crossed
its borders. That was a model of good practices from
which we all need to draw the appropriate lessons. The
initiatives aimed at strengthening regional cooperation
mechanisms are also extremely encouraging. Those
include the initiatives of the Mano River Union, the
Economic Community of West African States and, in
particular, the African Union, which Ambassador Téte
António has just outlined for us. Furthermore, it is
important to acknowledge the recovery plans that were
presented at the high-level conference convened by the
Secretary-General by the affected countries of Guinea,
Liberia and Sierra Leone. Spain fully endorses those
recovery plans.

Thirdly, we need to focus on the rebuilding and
improving of the health-care systems of the countries
most affected and of those that could be vulnerable in
the future. We need to recognize that local health-care
assistance and regional assistance at the first signs of
an outbreak of an epidemic are two of the weakest links
in the chain. Once acknowledged, it is essential that we
strengthen our focus to try to solve those problems.

We find ourselves at a time of cautious optimism.
Thanks to the work of thousands of professionals and
volunteers, many of whom have given their lives, we are
closer to the end of the crisis. Above all, this has been
made possible thanks to the work and commitment of
local communities, as Dr. Fallah and Dr. Nabarro have
described so eloquently, which have made it possible
for us to speak today of being close to the end of the
crisis. We are close to the end, but not there yet. As
several speakers have stated, we must not let down our
guard. While Ebola is no longer in the headlines and
the number of infections fell to zero only a short while
ago, we need to be aware that the Ebola virus has not
disappeared but remains hidden, and we need to be
prepared for it.
We have spoken at length today of the need to be
prepared, and preparation should accordingly focus on
three areas. First, we should focus on research. We have
had very encouraging news about the new experimental
vaccine, and Spain is strongly committed to the new
initiative, which will make it possible — once properly
tested and verified — for the vaccine to be made
available to all those in a vulnerable situation.
The second area of preparedness is, as we have
just heard, the need to make rapid response resources
constantly ready for deployment on the ground. The
United Nations has had ample experience in this area
20/29

Exactly one year ago today, the Spanish priest
Miguel Pajares died in Madrid. Just a few weeks later,
another Spanish priest succumbed to Ebola. Both men
gave their lives helping those affected in Liberia, and
through their memory I pay tribute to all the victims
of the epidemic and all the humanitarian workers who
have paid with their lives in that crisis and in others.
A year ago, the impact of the virus demonstrated
that it could spread beyond the countries immediately
affected. We also realized that the crisis had become
more than just a localized health emergency. That
led the Security Council to take action. At the time,
although not a member of the Security Council, Spain
co-sponsored resolution 2177 (2014), which was a
milestone in the evolution of the Council itself. Spain
co-sponsored the resolution because we thought at that
time — as we still do — that the concept of threats
to international peace and security should cover not
only traditional threats, but also others that, like the
Ebola epidemic, could threaten millions of lives and
the stability of entire regions and countries that, in
many cases, are already vulnerable and fragile, thereby
undermining post-conflict achievements and undo
progress towards sustainable development.
The cases of Guinea, Sierra Leone and Liberia
have been exemplary models in that regard. We
therefore believe that any security sector reform in
those countries, or any plan for stabilization or border
management, cross-border mechanisms for fighting
organized crime or the trafficking of illicit goods and
drugs — in short, anything that could pose a threat to
peace and security — must resolutely take into account
the new threat of an epidemic or pandemic that, while
starting off as a health issue, has a far broader impact.
In that area, I fear that our attitude has been more
reactive than proactive. I shall therefore conclude by
stating my belief that it would be a good idea for the

15-25379

13/08/2015

Peace and security in Africa

Council to consider how we could better incorporate the
lessons learned from this crisis into the peacebuilding
architecture and into Peacebuilding Commission, in
particular. That would be the question that I ask on the
issues raised today.
Mr. Špokauskas (Lithuania): I thank the briefers
for their comprehensive interventions, as well as
for their dedicated selfless work in fighting the
Ebola outbreak in West Africa. I also commend the
Nigerian presidency for its initiative to convene this
timely Council meeting, as well as for its meaningful
contribution to fighting Ebola.
The outbreak has been brought under control now,
yet it continues to claim reappear in Sierra Leone
and Guinea. As Dr. Chan and numerous others noted
earlier this morning, it takes only one infection and one
delayed collective response to spark another disastrous
epidemic. There is simply no room for complacency.
As we look ahead, we must not forget the lessons that
should have been learned and the mistakes that should
not be repeated.
First of all, the epidemic has once again proven
that prevention and early action are key to making
future crises less devastating and costly. Ebola has
struck countries that have only recently come out of
conflict, impairing their hard-won path to peace and
development as their fragile health-care systems and
governance structures struggled with that new invisible
enemy. At the same time, the outbreak highlighted the
importance of national Governments’ rapid initial
efforts to combat the outbreak and of an effective early
response, as well as the vital role of grass-roots and
community organizations in reducing transmission
rates and engaging in prevention efforts, such as those
that were so powerfully advocated by Dr. Fallah earlier
this morning.
The timely involvement of regional and subregional
organizations was instrumental. The rapid deployment
of trained medical and support personnel — coordinated
by the African Union support to the Ebola Outbreak in
West Africa — helped to save thousands at the peak of
the outbreak. The African Union Commission, with the
support of bilateral partners, has advanced the initiative
to establish an African centre for disease control that
has the potential to contribute to greater preparedness
and resilience in tackling similar epidemics on the
continent. These initiatives testify to the leadership and
ownership of the region, and should be encouraged.

S/PV.7502

The United Nations system, working closely with
the World Health Organization, has demonstrated its
ability to mobilize and ensure an immediate, effective
and coordinated contribution in combating the outbreak.
The United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency
Response and the Global Ebola Response Coalition
enabled and facilitated this unprecedented response and
cooperation. The engagement of the Security Council
has also helped to focus the international community’s
attention on the peace and security threats posed by
Ebola to fragile post-conflict nations. United Nations
peacekeeping and political missions in the affected
region, in particular the United Nations Mission in
Liberia, supported efforts to combat and prevent the
further spread of the epidemic. That in turn helped to
sustain the effort to bring Ebola cases down to zero
thereby supporting the post-Ebola recovery effort in the
crisis-affected countries.
The United Nations pledging conference on
Ebola in early July demonstrated the international
community’s ability to maintain its attention on putting
the most affected countries on the path to recovery. The
confirmation by the World Health Organization that
the newly developed vaccine against the deadly virus
is highly effective and could help to prevent its spread
also provides hope that with the necessary mobilization,
prevention mechanisms and adequate resources an
Ebola epidemic of such scale will never happen again.
The Ebola crisis has disrupted the peacebuilding
efforts of the three West African countries, while
affecting their economies, trade and tourism, basic
health care and social services, food security and
education. It has changed livelihoods and broken
community ties with a disproportionate impact on the
most vulnerable groups, such as women, children and
the elderly. The burden of the epidemic was particularly
harsh on women because of their role as care givers,
health personnel and providers for their families.
Each of the Ebola-affected countries has seen larger
numbers of women victims of the epidemic than men.
The outbreak has also affected women through loss of
livelihoods since productivity in the agriculture, trade
and service sectors fell sharply and is yet to recover.
Therefore, besides being physically affected by the
epidemic, women have seen reversals in their economic
and social empowerment. Inevitably, effective
preventive and recovery strategies must be developed
to ensure that women have full say on all related
matters, both as beneficiaries and as decision-makers.

15-2537921/29

S/PV.7502

Peace and security in Africa

The epidemic’s negative impact on children is also
multifaceted. Birth registrations of more than 70,000
children were disrupted during the Ebola outbreak,
thereby depriving them of their rights and leaving
them in a social no-man’s land where they become
vulnerable to marginalization as non-citizens and
easy prey to human traffickers, recruiters and illegal
adoption handlers.
Ebola orphans are another highly vulnerable group.
Across the affected countries, some 30,000 children
have been orphaned by Ebola, nearly 60 per cent of
whom live in isolated rural areas. Some are shunned
and stigmatized due to baseless fears of infection.
Too many face increased risks of physical and sexual
abuse. Female orphans are particularly vulnerable
to sexual exploitation, rape and teenage pregnancy.
Post-Ebola recovery strategies must therefore include
adequate child protection measures and provide for
a viable future through reintegrating such children
into community life, empowering them to support
themselves and receive education, while also providing
guidance and psychosocial counselling.
Strengthening the resilience of Ebola-affected
countries requires ensuring that all vulnerable groups
have a say in their future. That can only be done
through strengthening institutions, rule of law, good
governance and respect of human rights, including
through multi-stakeholder dialogue and civil society
engagement. The United Nations system and the
international community must remain vigilant and
support Ebola recovery long after the crisis is no
longer front-page news. Moreover, we should ensure
that the painful lessons of the epidemic are not lost
in bolstering our preparedness and response to future
health emergencies.
Ms. Chávez Colmenares (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): My country welcomes
the convening of this briefing of the Security Council
and the concept note (S/2015/600, annex) to guide
our deliberations on the Ebola virus disease and its
current status. The pandemic has tragically affected the
friendly peoples of Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone,
thereby impacting the entire region of West Africa and
the world over the past year and a half.
In commending the holding of this meeting of the
Council, we consider it equally important to address
this issue in the appropriate political forums, including
the General Assembly and the Economic and Social

22/29

13/08/2015

Council, in view of its clear economic and social
dimensions.
We also thank Dr. Nabarro, Dr. Fallah, Dr. Chan,
Ambassador António and Mr. Thöresson, Deputy
Permanent Representative of Sweden, for their
comprehensive statements regarding the current
situation in the fight against the Ebola virus.
The Ebola outbreak became a regional crisis in
West Africa that demanded urgent attention and whose
consequences were made evident in the collapse of
health systems, the shutdown of schools, the increased
rate of internally displaced persons and refugees,
the closure of farms and businesses, and the overall
contraction of the economies of the most affected
countries. Resolution 2177 (2014), adopted by the
Council on 18 September 2014, recognizes the threat
posed by Ebola and the need for a coherent approach
that is both coordinated and comprehensive.
We welcome the latest report published by the
World Health Organization (WHO), which highlights
a significant reduction in the incidence of the outbreak
following the declaration of Liberia as a territory
free of Ebola in May and despite the three new cases
presented earlier this week in Sierra Leone and Guinea.
We congratulate the peoples and Governments of those
countries on the results achieved after more than a year
of hard and sustained struggle.
The gravity of the health problem has demanded
a comprehensive and multidimensional approach on
the part of the international community, which has
been involved by way of international, regional and
national organizations, and the economic and social
sectors. Global mobilization has been manifest through
multiple contributions of various kinds made in
solidarity to address the devastating consequences of
the pandemic. Venezuela contributed generously to the
Ebola Response Multi-Partner Trust Fund.
In that context, we recognize the selfless efforts of
the interdisciplinary teams of men and women around
the world dedicated to fighting the Ebola virus and
the work of representatives and of the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General on Ebola and his colleagues,
WHO, the African Union, the Economic Community
of West African States, the Mano River Union, the
international medical brigades and the States Members
of the Organization. Latin America and the Caribbean
have been present from the beginning in the form of 450
Cuban doctors who contributed as fellow human beings

15-25379

13/08/2015

Peace and security in Africa

working in solidarity on the ground. Moreover, we
welcome the Secretary-General’s initiative to convene
on 10 July the high-level international conference on
post-Ebola recovery efforts, in close cooperation with
the Governments of Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone.
For Venezuela, the leadership of the brotherly
peoples of Africa through their Governments and
regional and subregional institutions is essential to
formulateing strategies in the new phase when the
whole region is declared definitively Ebola-free. The
economic and social recovery from the crisis must
be a priority on the international agenda, given the
contraction in the gross domestic products of the
affected countries, including more than 70 per cent
since the start of the crisis. The structural causes of the
crisis must be addressed substantively in the search for
a more just and equitable model, since the pre-eminence
of a capitalist, impoverishing and exclusionary system
is unsustainable over time and is the leading cause of
world inequities whereby the countries of the South are
precisely the main victims.
Moreover, in the context of the peacebuilding
architecture, it is fundamental to prioritize a sustainable
development approach for these African countries,
especially given the social and human repercussions of
the virus. We appreciate the efforts of the Peacebuilding
Commission and encourage it to continue strengthening
them in the future.
For its part, together with international efforts to
prevent the spread of the virus, on 18 October 2014 the
Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America
held an special summit in Havana to address the fight
against Ebola and to motivate political will towards
prevention and training of interdisciplinary teams both
to prevent health threats affecting the region and to
contribute on the ground to eradication efforts.
At this stage, where the most affected States remain
fragile in the face of chaos and the the consequences
of the crisis, the international community must not
relent in its cooperation in support of those nations. We
also need to ensure that continued efforts are made to
tackle poverty through the use of inclusive, sustainable
economic and social models and that the necessary
structural measures are taken so that the pandemic
never recurs. The devastating humanitarian crisis in
various segments of society caused by Ebola, which
particularly affected children and women, is a call on
us to engage in deeper reflection and to take action with
respect to the major challenges that remain in terms of

S/PV.7502

cooperation with the brotherly peoples of Africa in the
fields of both security and peacebuilding.
After years of exploitation and colonialism, the
region is now encountering major crises, which its
people have faced with exemplary dignity and courage.
Despite the immense challenges, there have been efforts
to raise awareness in the rest of the world to mobilize
concerning the human right to international solidarity
on this and other important issues.
We are therefore convinced that overcoming this
crisis requires us to reflect on how cooperation in its
many dimensions can contribute to the development of
the great human and geographical potential of Africa,
a continent with great cultural diversity and a rich
history. It is important, therefore, that we promote new
sustainable cooperation models in solidarity with the
peoples and the Governments of Africa, bearing in
mind their right to self-determination.
The post-Ebola focus is an opportunity to
implement a comprehensive socioeconomic, political,
humanitarian and cultural approach focusing on
the empowerment of the African people in their
development processes, with the ongoing full support
of the international community, in a spirit of solidarity,
so as to cooperate in the strengthening of their health
systems, in which regional bodies will also have a key
role to play.
The crisis has taught us about the need to improve
our coordination mechanisms as well as our health-care
protocols at the international level and to create earlywarning and updated technology-transfer systems in
the field of public health, on a free and accessible basis,
giving priority to prevention and education.
We must ensure that access to new initiatives to
combat Ebola such as the development of a vaccine
and all means for treating it should be available to all,
without any social or economic discrimination. All
States and institutions are called on to work towards
this goal in a decisive manner. We must also avoid and
punish any stigmatization of individuals and nations
victims of Ebola, through an ethical, responsible social
response that does not unduly dramatize the situation,
ensuring also the provision of adequate educational
programmes that ensure a scientific and humane
approach to the pandemic and to other diseases that
several affect developing countries.
Finally, Venezuela reaffirms its commitment to
the African peoples in their struggle against poverty

15-2537923/29

S/PV.7502

Peace and security in Africa

and social exclusion and to support their right to
development through the promotion of international
cooperation and solidarity, especially with respect to
threats such as the one that this terrible scourge has
posed to humankind.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I wish to join others in
congratulating you, Madam President, and the delegation
of Nigeria for having convened this important briefing.
I wish also to thank Dr. David Nabarro, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General on Ebola; Dr. Margaret Chan,
Director-General of the World Health Organization;
His Excellency Téte António, Permanent Observer
of the African Union; His Excellency Per Thöresson,
speaking on behalf of the Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission; and Dr. Mosoka Fallah for their respective
presentations to the Council this morning.
Let me also take this opportunity to commend the
contribution and pledges made by various countries to
fight the disease and the many brave doctors and healthcare workers engaged in tireless efforts to counter this
deadly disease. We warmly welcome the successful
outcome of the recent International Ebola Recovery
Conference, on 10 July, at which the international
community pledged more than $5 billion for long-term
recovery efforts.
In associating itself with the statement delivered by
the representative of Sweden on behalf of the members
of the Peacebuilding Commission, Malaysia wishes to
make the following brief comments.
From the United Nations Development Programme
report entitled “Recovering from the Ebola crisis” to the
recent International Ebola Recovery Conference and the
various meetings held at the United Nations concerning
the Ebola crisis, there are a considerable number of
lessons learned that we could gather from the Ebola
crisis. Many of them have been clearly outlined in the
concept note prepared for today’s briefing (S/2015/600,
annex). These lessons learned will be important for
future strategic planning to prevent future outbreaks
and enable early detection of potential crisis situations.
My delegation further believes that the Ebola crisis
has presented a unique opportunity for the international
community to reassess its approach to assisting postconflict countries. It also has provided valuable
perspective to the countries affected, particularly on
what else is needed to maintain stability and preserve
the hard-won peacebuilding gains made. Malaysia
continues to believe that there is a need to place further

24/29

13/08/2015

emphasis on building resilience and strengthening
national capacity in consolidating support for postconflict countries.
Malaysia underscores that close coordination within
the United Nations system is crucial to maintaining the
focus of the international community on the recovery
period of the Ebola crisis, with the aim of generating
greater political commitment and contributions to
the countries affected. Continued coordination and
cooperation are equally important so as to ensure the
optimal and efficient use of resources. In addition,
proper planning between the United Nations and the
Governments of the affected region will be essential to
ensuring that the efforts towards recovery are carried
out in a safe and effective manner.
My delegation also wishes to underline the three
key priority directions for the engagement of the United
Nations system in peacebuilding, namely, inclusivity,
institution-building, and sustained international
support and mutual accountability. We believe that
these key priorities remain relevant in assisting the
Ebola-affected countries, particularly in developing
a coherent strategy linking the development, security
and political aspects.
Malaysia is further encouraged to note the strong
engagement and commitment of many regional
organizations, particularly the African Union, the
Economic Community of West African States and the
Mano River Union, in the fight against Ebola. Certainly
a coordinated national and regional response has been
fundamental in easing the difficulties faced by the
Ebola-affected countries.
We also take this opportunity to commend the role
played by the Peacebuilding Commission in the fight
against Ebola. It has been instrumental in maintaining
the focus of the international community on the Ebola
crisis and coordinating efforts with all partners,
including regional and subregional organizations. We
believe that the Commission’s role is equally important
at this point in time to build the capacity and resilience
of the countries affected.
While we have seen remarkable progress in the
efforts made to contain the disease thus far, Malaysia
concurs with others that we must remain vigilant and
continue to strive towards getting to zero and staying
at zero. At this juncture, it is vital to ensure the
unwavering support of the international community for
the countries affected to assist them to progress further

15-25379

13/08/2015

Peace and security in Africa

during the recovery period. We are of the view that
for the affected countries to come out of this process
stronger and more resilient, we need to invest not only
in hospital and medical facilities and infrastructure but
also in peoples and Governments in order to build a
sustainable future for the peoples of the region.
On our part, the Government of Malaysia, in
collaboration with Malaysia’s private sector, has taken
the initiative to continue to contribute in kind as well
as financially to the Ebola-affected countries since the
beginning of the spread of this deadly disease, in 2014.
Recently we also contributed $100,000 through the
Ebola Response Multi-Partner Trust Fund. Malaysia
has also offered two of its public-health specialists to
Sierra Leone to assist in monitoring and controlling the
pandemic. The first specialist left Malaysia in April and
the other in June. Their roles are to monitor and give
symptomatic treatment to those who are not admitted to
the hospital. Malaysia sincerely hoes that these modest
contributions will help the Ebola-affected countries in
this important recovery phase.
In conclusion, we will continue to monitor the
situation closely to see how we can further support the
countries affected, whether in the immediate or longer
term. Malaysia wishes to assure the Security Council of
its full support and cooperation in working closely with
all partners in assisting the countries in this important
recovery period.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): We
congratulate Nigeria on its initiative in arranging
today’s briefing. Ebola was and remains a truly global
threat. It is fitting that the Security Council was, and
has remained, involved in dealing with that threat and
in ensuring international preparedness in dealing with
any recurrence of Ebola or of any other deadly disease
of similar proportions. We would like to thank all the
briefers for their statements, which, among other other
things, described the range and depth of the responses
to last year’s outbreak at the international, regional,
national and community levels.
The Secretary-General’s establishment of the
United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response
(UNMEER) was a new and appropriate reaction as the
first-ever United Nations emergency health mission.
In part, it came in response to the Council’s call, in
resolution 2177 (2014), for a comprehensive response
to the epidemic. We would like to acknowledge the
leadership of the United States in the adoption of that
resolution and in the mobilization of the international

S/PV.7502

response. We also want to acknowledge the terrible
human toll wrought on the affected States of West
Africa, and the enormous amount of work they and
their peoples did to bring the outbreak under control.
New Zealand joined the international response, giving
to the trust fund and deploying medical personnel
to Sierra Leone to work alongside their British and
Australian counterparts. We also worked with Pacific
nations to enhance their preparedness to respond to an
Ebola outbreak.
Thankfully, the outbreak in West Africa has now
been contained and rolled back. That is rightly cause
for considerable satisfaction. However, the Council
should not miss the opportunity to learn from the
UNMEER experience, both its successes and mistakes.
Others have spoken extensively on the crisis and the
global response, and we endorse their views and
assessments. There are four additional points I would
like to emphasize.
First, preparations should be made to ensure rapid,
focused reactions to future health threats. International
responses drawing on all relevant frameworks, such
as the International Health Regulations, must be
coordinated across regions, particularly where crossborder transmission is occurring. The speed in this
instance with which a United Nations trust fund was
mobilized, and its lower administration costs, should be
a benchmark for establishing funds where urgent action
is required in future. The report of the Ebola Interim
Assessment Panel of the World Health Organization
(WHO) on the WHO response is a positive step towards
ensuring that we learn as many lessons as possible from
the Ebola outbreak, so that future health responses are
quicker, more effective and better coordinated.
Secondly, the rapid and far-ranging nature of
the outbreak caused widespread fear across the
globe. We should remind ourselves that such fear,
although understandable, should not drive States to
impose unhelpful, and ultimately counterproductive,
restrictions on movement during pandemics, other than
those in line with the International Health Regulations.
While a crisis can be intense for a number of countries,
or even a subregion, in a continent as large and diverse
as Africa, calibrated approaches to restrictions are
often called for. We applaud those countries that took
steps to reopen borders and reinstate air links as safely
and quickly as possible.
Thirdly, we recognize that the logistical burden of
mounting a large international response in a short period

15-2537925/29

S/PV.7502

Peace and security in Africa

can be heavy and a severe strain on local systems. Close
coordination amoang responding countries is vital.
Our own experience demonstrated the value of having
country responses led by a single donor as part of the
wider WHO-coordinated response. At the same time,
the roles of the Economic Community of West African
States and the African Union were vitally important in
coordinating among States within the subregion most
affected by the outbreak.
Fourthly, the international community, particularly
the United Nations system, must maintain support to
affected areas in order to avoid any further resurgence.
The progress in developing vaccines is very encouraging,
but we must also acknowledge that the next health crisis
could come from an as-yet unidentified threat. In our
region, preparedness undertaken in the context of the
Ebola outbreak to respond infectious diseases will have
long-lasting effects for the Pacific’s ability to combat
other emerging health threats.
Lastly, I would again like to commend Nigeria
for taking the initiative to arrange today’s briefing. It
has done us a great service both in marking a situation
that posed a very real threat to regional and potentially
global security and in providing an opportunity for
reflection on how we, the international community,
dealt with that challenge and can do better in the future.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Nigeria.
My first words in my national capacity must be to
thank all five of our briefers, the largest number we have
had in a long time. I would like to thank Dr. Margaret
Chan for taking time out of her home leave to participate
in today’s meeting, and Dr. David Nabarro, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, for his compassion,
passion and pursuit of Ebola. I thank Ambassador Tété
António for his dedication to the African cause and
Mr. Per Thöresson for the work of his delegation in the
Peacebuilding Commission. And I thank Dr. Mosoka
Fallah very much for laying his life on the line and for
his spirit of sacrifice. I believe that together they have
all brought invaluable perspectives to the discussion
we are having today. Their in-depth comprehension of
the subject and this important issue underscores the
essence of our briefing today, and indeed reinforces the
urgency of concerted and relentless efforts in the fight
against the Ebola virus disease.
We all recall that the outbreak of Ebola in countries
in West Africa was not merely a national or regional

26/29

13/08/2015

humanitarian crisis but a truly global one of almost
unprecedented proportions. It was a clear demonstration
of a health threat that had an alarming ability to ignore
national borders and spread rapidly to potentially any
country on this planet. The epidemic revealed gaps and
weaknesses in health sectors and proved a strain on
Government revenues, especially in the affected areas.
It is for that reason that we welcome the solidarity,
commitment and determination demonstrated by
people, Governments, institutions, non-governmental
organizations, civil society and private-sector entities
across the world. We recognize the contributions of all
those who have confronted and still continue to tackle
the outbreak with a collective resolve to achieve zero
infections and ensure that that is sustained at zero all
over the world.
On 29 May, the world welcomed the news that
Liberia had been declared Ebola-free. The celebration
turned out to be short-lived with the emergence of a
new case, and indeed of other new confirmed cases in
Sierra Leone, an indication of an ever-present threat
and a reminder to all that we must remain vigilant
until the Ebola virus is totally eradicated. I believe that
Nigeria, having encountered and vigorously overcome
the Ebola virus disease, can share lessons from its
experiences in the fight, which included high levels of
vigilance and contact-tracing, the rapid introduction of
the requisite control measures, strong Government and
community commitment, prompt intervention on the
part of the World Health Organization in collaboration
with the Government, and the unalloyed commitment
of dedicated health workers. We also embarked on
a robust compaign to create public awareness of the
disease, and successfully avoided the dissemination of
false information, rumours and undue panic among the
citizenry. At one point, in fact, it was taboo to shake
hands.
At the international level, there can be no doubt that
the adoption of the landmark resolution 2177 (2014), led
by the United States, strengthened the international
community in its willingness to act in a coordinated and
concerted manner to eradicate the disease. In our view,
what is now required is the institution of substantial
preventive and early-response mechanisms that focus
on capacity-building and the strengthening of health
delivery systems. On our part, we have contributed
$5.5 million to the solidarity fund instituted by the
Economic Community of West African States to tackle
the Ebola virus outbreak in the subregion. We think
that this and similar contributions could be effectively
15-25379

13/08/2015

Peace and security in Africa

utilized to put in place preventive measures as part
of a framework to reduce the response period to the
epidemic.
We must also underscore the need to forge strong
and sustainable regional and international partnerships,
as the African Union (AU) has demonstrated and as
we heard so eloquently from Ambassador António.
Its sterling leadership in the fight against the Ebola
epidemic, mainly through the African Union support
to Ebola Outbreak in West Africa, is noteworthy.
Nigeria commends the AU for mobilizing the private
sector, which has contributed up to $32.6 million to the
Ebola Fund, as announced by the Chairperson of the
AU at the Ebola international conference on 10 July.
We also commend the Secretary-General for convening
the conference, which attracted huge participation
and tremendous expressions of financial and material
support for the affected countries.
We believe that Africa must take the lead in
addressing its own challenges. That is why we
appreciate the efforts that culminated in the recent
convening of the International Conference on Africa’s
Fight against Ebola, held in Malabo only three weeks
ago. The Conference was successful in highlighting the
imperative to bridge the capacity gaps, especially in
the areas of human resources and the training of health
professionals in the affected countries.
We strongly support regional approaches to
tackling the Ebola virus and other pandemics. That is
why, in our view, the recently established Mano River
Union Consolidated Ebola Recovery Trust Fund is a
welcome initiative for allocation and disbursement
arrangements, in consultation with partners. The
commitment of African regional subregional
organizations clearly demonstrates that regional
arrangements have a crucial and pivotal role to play
in combating the ongoing threat of the Ebola virus
disease and, indeed, any future pandemic. The crisis
has necessitated that regional actors in Africa work in
concert with the rest of the international community
and relevant stakeholders, especially the World Health
Organization, to systematically tackle the epidemic.
When regional organizations assume leadership in
response to health emergencies, they engender a sense
of inclusiveness and are more likely to gain the trust of
local populations.
The United Nations Development Programme
report released earlier this year, to which the

S/PV.7502

representative of China referred earlier and which is
entitled “Recovering from the Ebola crisis”, attests to
that, as it notes that “a regional perspective could have
greatly enhanced the effectiveness of the response” to
Ebola. The report recommends measures, such as joint
investigation missions, the sharing of best practices
between bordering districts and establishing a biosafety
protection level for laboratories. Nigeria is not only in
support of those recommendations, but also calls on
all Member States and partners to commence their
implementation as soon as possible. The achievement
of these goals will ensure that Ebola and all similar
epidemics will be controlled and contained in a more
timely and effective manner.
The recent vaccination trial currently being
undertaken in some affected countries is also worthy
of mention in this conversation. The results published
online recently in the British journal The Lancet suggest
that the vaccine may be highly effective beginning 10
days after inoculation. Even as these studies continue,
there is an urgent need to make the vaccine more widely
available to the many people who are still exposed and
still susceptible to the infection. I believe that this is the
time for definitive and rapid collective action.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Sierra
Leone.
Mr. Minah (Sierra Leone): At the outset, I wish to
join others in commending you, Madam President, for
this initiative in keeping the issue of Ebola in front of
the international community. I wish you all the best for
your month as President of the Council.
We can all agree that we have turned a corner.
From the beginning of the outbreak of Ebola, a sense
of pervasive fear invaded all our collective thoughts
and the three nations directly affected. We now have
a sense of collective hope and optimism for the future.
This has come at a very high cost. In Sierra Leone, we
are determined not to look back in anger or frustration,
or to find fault, but to learn the hard lessons that we are
supposed to learn and develop the best practices that we
are supposed to develop.
As we sit here today, we sit in remembrance of
those who have made the ultimate sacrifice: the health
workers, the doctors, the burial teams, and the innocents
who have been struck down by this disease. We can do

15-2537927/29

S/PV.7502

Peace and security in Africa

13/08/2015

our best to commemorate them by making sure that our
collective actions from this point on fully justify the
faith they had in us and the loss that their families now
endure.

There is a sense in this crowded global diplomatic
agenda that each issue should enjoy its 15 minutes of
fame and promptly move off the stage. However, we
know that that should not be the case with Ebola.

As we move forward from emergency to recovery
and resilience, we as States — Sierra Leone and, I am
sure, my colleagues in Liberia and Guinea — do so in
the firm conviction that we fully recognize that the
primary responsibility for the care, safety and health
of the citizens of our countries lies with our political
leadership. Therefore, we know that the heaviest
burden falls on us. However, we continue to look to the
international community to ensure that we discharge
our burden in the manner in which we wish to discharge
it.

We are told that even after 42 days of no new cases,
there is a possibility of relapse. We are also informed by
the best scientific minds that in any region where Ebola
has appeared, it might reappear again. The question is
not if Ebola will reappear; it is how we respond as a
nation and a community when it does. Therefore, the
health systems, the early warning systems and the
cross-border surveillance must be in place. We look to
Nigeria and Uganda as States that have effectively and
efficiently combatted the appearance of the Ebola virus
disease so asto learn lessons about early warning and
about how to move swiftly and effectively to curtail the
threat.

Our health systems — health-care delivery and
management — were found wanting. We are grateful
for the teams and the material, financial and other
support that we received, but we realize that these
systems must be rebuilt, and they must be rebuilt
better than they were before. To that end, we look to all
nations that have fully developed health-care systems
to see what we can learn and what we can adapt to our
local conditions. We will also make sure that we hear
the message that comes loud and clear from the lowest
and simplest communities within our nations — that
anything done in their name must include them in the
planning, the design and the execution, and must fully
reflect their local cultures and values.
We are mindful to ensure that the Ebola virus
disease, if it does comes back, is successfully
combatted. We are mindful of the fact that the mosaic
of various responses must be complete. That is what
we also refer to as a jigsaw puzzle. In other words,
quite simply put, the logistical, scientific, diplomatic
and national efforts must all be in harmony. There can
be no disjointed efforts; there can be no duplication.
Within the United Nations, the Secretary-General has
made it quite clear that the various institutional silos
should not operate as such, but operate as one. Within
the subregion of West Africa, we fully embrace the
belief that if one State remains affected, all of us are
still at risk. Therefore, Guinea’s successes are Sierra
Leone’s successes and Liberia’s successes; Liberia’s
relapse is also the relapse of Guinea and Sierra Leone.
Therefore, we stand together and we hope that we shall
succeed together.

28/29

I speak to the Council as the national of an
exhausted but grateful nation that looked to the world
community, put out a hand seeking assistance, and
received the assistance it needed. As I said before, we
are fully mindful of our national responsibilities. We
are fully mindful of our national failings, and realize
that we must do better by our populations without
reluctance or hesitation. There is a sense that the
first public health mission is perhaps something of an
anomaly; some consider it a bit far-fetched, perhaps,
but it has shown its mettle. It has proven to us all that
it is worthwhile. The risk in setting up such a health
mission of unprecedented proportions has met with
success. Resilience, quite simply put, means that the
nations affected must be able to withstand any future
pandemic or epidemic that comes down the line.
The Ebola virus disease, unfortunately, has
threatened our peacebuilding gains, and we therefore
welcome the strong and vocal initiative of the
Peacebuilding Commission and the peacebuilding
architecture to take the lead in sounding the alarm
and the warnings. We also appreciate the efforts of
the non-governmental organizations that were out in
the field at the very outset, including Médecins Sans
Frontières, which made the call and continued to sound
the alarm loudly and vociferously. They also now
warn that we should not be complacent and that, as we
approach the last mile, we should not start celebrating
prematurely.
It has, as I said before, been a long and difficult
path that has led to losses and bereavement and had a

15-25379

13/08/2015

Peace and security in Africa

heavy cost. National democratic systems of governance
have been fully tested and pushed to the breaking
point. There were missteps and mistakes, but I believe
that at the end our relationship with the international
community has been strengthened. Our relationship
with the United Nations system has been strengthened,
and we believe that the strength of any relationship lies
not in whether there are disputes, disagreements or
discord, but in how we deal with those disputes when
they arise.
I do believe that the nascent Ebola recovery and
resilience communities that have arisen — which of
course include Dr. Nabarro and Dr. Chan — are ones
that now understand each other. From the national
systems, the national leadership and the national Ebola
recovery response teams, there is a sense that the
medical protocols that have been developed have to
be followed. There is a sense within the communities
now that the Governments of the respective affected
countries now work for them. There is a sense at the
global-community level that we are all in it together
and that if we can establish the firewall in West
Africa, the risk to the rest of the world will diminish
correspondingly.
We are all committed to seeing the back of this
disease, but beyond that we are grateful for the efforts
being made at the regional, subregional, continental
and global levels to ensure that there is a proper system
of disease control, not only at the regional level but
also at the continental level, so as to make sure that any

S/PV.7502

epidemic and pandemic that does come along will be
swiftly dealt with. As our medical doctors in Freetown
have said to us, it would be a tragedy if we were to
successfully deal with Ebola, only to have cholera
come down the line in two months’ or half a year’s
time. Therefore, there has to be a medical firewall and
a system of improvement.
In closing, while we aspire to a system of medical
excellence, we have now made sure that our Ministry
of Health aspires in the short term to a national health
system of reasonable competence — in other words, one
that can deliver satisfactorily to its citizens whenever
we have this kind of pandemic or epidemic. It has been
a year and a half of fear, but going forward I do believe
that we have learned the hard lessons and can therefore
look forward with hope and cautious optimism. The
international community has stood by Sierra Leone and
the affected States, and it is incumbent on the affected
States to stand by their citizens.
As we go forward and approach the busiest period in
the diplomatic calendar, it is gratifying that the various
agencies and institutions of the United Nations family
have remained focused on the Ebola virus disease and
its eradication. Our watchword must be vigilance so
that we can achieve the much-desired resilience.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m.

15-2537929/29
