A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/211
17 February 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 101
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/49/611)]
49/211.

Implementation of the Convention
on the Rights of the Child

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 44/25 of 20 November 1989, by which it adopted
the Convention on the Rights of the Child,
Recalling also its resolution 47/112 of 16 December 1992 and Commission
on Human Rights resolution 1994/91 of 9 March 1994, 1/
Taking note of the report of the Committee on the Rights of the Child on
its second to fifth sessions, 2/ and the meeting of the States parties to
the Convention on the Rights of the Child, held in New York on 10 October
1994,
Reaffirming that the rights of children require special protection and
call for continuous improvement of the situation of children all over the
world, as well as for their development and education in conditions of peace
and security,
Profoundly concerned that the situation of children in many parts of the
world remains critical as a result of inadequate social and economic
conditions, natural disasters, armed conflicts, exploitation, illiteracy,
hunger and disability, and convinced that urgent and effective national and
international action is called for,

1/
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1994,
Supplement No. 4 (E/1994/24), chap. II, sect. A.
2/
Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-ninth Session,
Supplement No. 41 (A/49/41).
95-76687

A/RES/49/211
Page 2

Mindful of the important role of the United Nations and of the United
Nations Children’s Fund in promoting the well-being of children and their
development,
Encouraged by the fact that an unprecedented number of States have to
date become signatories and parties to the Convention, thereby demonstrating
the widespread political commitment that exists to strive for the promotion
and protection of the rights of the child,
Convinced that the Convention, as a standard-setting accomplishment of
the United Nations in the field of human rights, makes a positive contribution
to protecting the rights of children and ensuring their well-being,
Recalling the recommendation in the Vienna Declaration and Programme of
Action, 3/ adopted by the World Conference on Human Rights at Vienna in June
1993, that measures be taken to achieve by 1995 universal ratification of the
Convention, and the universal signing of the World Declaration on the
Survival, Protection and Development of Children 4/and Plan of Action for
Implementing the World Declaration on the Survival, Protection and Development
of Children in the 1990s, 4/ adopted by the World Summit for Children in New
York in September 1990, as well as their effective implementation,
Seriously concerned about those reservations to the Convention that are
contrary to the object and purpose of the Convention or otherwise contrary to
international treaty law, and recalling that the Vienna Declaration and
Programme of Action urges States to withdraw such reservations,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General of 20 September
1994 on the status of the Convention, 5/
1.
Takes note with appreciation of the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the status of the Convention on the Rights of the Child;
2.
Recalls with deep satisfaction the entry into force of the
Convention on 2 September 1990 as a major step in international efforts to
promote universal respect for and observance of human rights and fundamental
freedoms;
3.
Expresses its satisfaction at the number of States that have
signed, ratified or acceded to the Convention since it was opened for
signature, ratification and accession on 26 January 1990;
4.
Urges all States that have not done so to sign, ratify or accede
to the Convention as a matter of priority, with a view to reaching universal
ratification by 1995;
5.
Emphasizes the importance of the full implementation by States
parties of the provisions of the Convention;
6.
Urges States parties to the Convention that have made reservations
to review the compatibility of their reservations with article 51 of the
Convention and other relevant rules of international law, with the aim of
withdrawing them;

3/
Report of the World Conference on Human Rights, Vienna,
14-25 June 1993 (A/CONF.157/24 (Part I)), chap. III.
4/

See A/45/625, annex.

5/

A/49/409.

A/RES/49/211
Page 3

7.
Calls upon States parties to submit their reports to the Committee
on the Rights of the Child on time, in accordance with the guidelines
elaborated for that purpose;
8.
Welcomes the constructive and useful results achieved by the
Committee on the Rights of the Child during its first seven sessions;
9.
Also welcomes the consideration by the Committee on the Rights of
the Child of the reservations and declarations entered by States parties to
the Convention as a part of its important functions in overseeing the
effective implementation of the Convention;
10.
Notes with appreciation the elaboration by the Committee on the
Rights of the Child of a preliminary draft optional protocol to the Convention
on involvement of children in armed conflicts; 6/
11.
Requests the Committee on the Rights of the Child, in accordance
with article 45 (a) of the Convention, to invite the United Nations Children’s
Fund, in collaboration with the Centre for Human Rights of the Secretariat, to
submit reports on specific issues related to, inter alia, the exploitation and
abuse of children, in order to increase awareness of the provisions of the
Convention and their implementation and to support concrete action at national
and international levels;
12.
Expresses concern at the increasingly heavy workload of the
Committee on the Rights of the Child and the resulting difficulties it faces
in the fulfilment of its functions;
13.
Approves the recommendation contained in the resolution adopted by
consensus at the meeting of the States parties to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child on 10 October 1994, in which the States parties reaffirmed the
recommendation made by the Committee on the Rights of the Child regarding the
increase to three of the number of annual sessions of the Committee as from
1995, as well as the number of sessions of the pre-sessional working group;
14.

Authorizes the Secretary-General to implement that recommendation;

15.
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the provision of
appropriate staff and facilities, within the overall existing budget
framework, for the effective and expeditious performance of the functions of
the Committee on the Rights of the Child;
16.
Requests bodies and organizations of the United Nations, within
the scope of their respective mandates, to intensify their efforts to
disseminate information on the Convention, promote understanding of it and
assist Governments in its implementation;
17.
Invites intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to
intensify their efforts with a view to disseminating information on the
Convention to adults and children alike and to promoting understanding of it;
18.
Notes the establishment by the Economic and Social Council of two
open-ended working groups to elaborate, respectively, (a) a draft optional
protocol to the Convention on the involvement of children in armed conflicts,
and (b) guidelines for a possible draft optional protocol to the Convention on
the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography, as well as the
basic measures needed for their prevention and eradication;

6/

E/CN.4/1994/91, annex.

A/RES/49/211
Page 4

19.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly
at its fifty-first session a report on the status of the Convention;
20.
Decides to consider the report of the Secretary-General at its
fifty-first session under the item entitled "Human rights questions".
94th plenary meeting
23 December 1994
