S/PV.7196

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7196th meeting

Wednesday, 11 June 2014, 9.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Churkin/Mr. Pankin/Mr. Iliichev . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Ms. King
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Llanos
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Araud
Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein
Ms. Murmokaitė
Ms. Lucas
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Gasana
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
United Nations peacekeeping operations
New trends
Letter dated 1 June 2014 from the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2014/384)

14-42664 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1442664*

S/PV.7196

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

The meeting was called to order at 9.35 a.m.

of the Secretary-General was essentially a harbinger of
the universal Organization.

Adoption of the agenda

I am sure that I speak for all members of the
Security Council and all those present today when
I say that, through his activities at the head of world
diplomacy, which are commensurate with his wealth of
experience and professionalism, inexhaustible energy
and commitment to universal ideals, Mr. Ban Ki-moon
is indeed serving the international community. I wish
him every success in his noble work for the benefit
humankind.

The agenda was adopted.
United Nations peacekeeping operations
New trends
Letter dated 1 June 2014 from the Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2014/384)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance with
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure,
I invite the representatives of Bangladesh, Belarus,
Brazil, Cyprus, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Egypt, Ethiopia, Guatemala, India, Indonesia, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Malawi, Malaysia, Morocco,
the Netherlands, New Zealand, Pakistan, Peru, the
Philippines, Senegal, Spain, Sweden, Thailand, Turkey,
Ukraine, the United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay
and Viet Nam to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2014/384, which contains a letter dated
1 June 2014 from the Permanent Representative of the
Russian Federation to the United Nations addressed to
the Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on
the item under consideration.
I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and before giving him
the floor I would like to make an important statement.
In a few hours, Mr. Ban Ki-moon will depart on yet
another international tour. It will be a long and difficult
one. Clearly, there is something symbolic in the fact that
on 13 June — his seventieth birthday — the foremost
diplomat on the planet will be travelling to the highest
world capital, La Paz. He will go there from Brazil,
where he will attend the opening of the soccer World
Cup championship, which, as we know, is also marking
an anniversary. It is also highly symbolic that the birth

2/64

11/06/2014

I now give the floor to the Secretary-General.
The Secretary-General: I thank the Russian
Federation for providing this important opportunity
to collectively examine trends in United Nations
peacekeeping. I also thank you, Mr. President, for your
very kind words of encouragement and support. I am
deeply touched by such strong official and personal
support for my work as Secretary-General. I can assure
you, the members of the Council and the other Members
of the United Nations that I will devote all my energy
and time to working with you to achieve everything
that we are working together to achieve in terms of
peace, stability, development and human rights. I count
on your continuing support and leadership.
This is a key moment for this flagship United Nations
activity. We face huge peacekeeping challenges. New
phenomena are affecting our work and new approaches
are on display. I would therefore like to highlight four
aspects of peacekeeping that are particularly important
for discussion at this time.
First, United Nations peacekeeping operations are
increasingly mandated to operate where there is no
peace to keep. We see significant levels of violence
in Darfur, South Sudan, Mali, the Central African
Republic and the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, where more than two-thirds of all our military,
police and civilian personnel are operating.
Secondly, some United Nations peacekeeping
operations are being authorized in the absence of
clearly identifiable parties to the conflict or a viable
political process. When there is no clear path towards
peace, crises will inevitably recur and peacekeeping
operations are much more likely to struggle to meet
their mandates. In Mali, no comprehensive agreement
was in place and the situation remains precarious. In the
Central African Republic, while there was a political

14-42664

11/06/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

framework for transition, the process has been gravely
undermined by intercommunal violence. In South
Sudan, conflict has re-emerged.
Thirdly, United Nations peacekeeping operations are
increasingly operating in more complex environments
that feature asymmetric and unconventional threats.
Whether acting in self-defence or implementing our
mandate to protect civilians, we need to ensure that
United Nations peacekeeping operations are undertaken
in full compliance with international human rights and
humanitarian law obligations.
Fourthly, we need to build on what I see as the
renewed commitment of the Security Council to
responding to our changing world. Resolution 2098
(2013), on the Democratic Republic of the Congo, was
a milestone. It signalled the resolve of the Security
Council to address the changing nature of conflict
and the operating environment of United Nations
peacekeeping, and it matched that resolve with credible
capabilities, provided thanks to the contribution of
troop -contributing countries. The results are tangible
improvements in the lives of people living in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
However, a broader discussion is needed on how
United Nations peacekeeping should adapt to new
demands and what capabilities and resources it needs
to adapt. We must also ask what are the limits of United
Nations peacekeeping and whether it is always the
right tool. As we approach the 15-year anniversary of
the Brahimi report (S/2000/809), it may be necessary
to again take stock of evolving expectations of United
Nations peacekeeping and how the Organization can
work towards a shared view of the way forward. To this
end, I have asked the Secretariat to initiate work on a
review of United Nations peacekeeping.
Mandates, political leverage, logistical support,
training, accountability, rules of engagement,
technological innovation, and clarity on the caveats of
troop- and police-contributing countries are just a few
areas that may warrant review. Laying the groundwork
for the extension of State authority, including building
justice and corrections capacities, is also essential in
the first phases until national and other partners are
able to take over. Reinforced efforts to ensure adequate
force protection and capabilities may be required.
We must also use all possible forms of technology
that can enable our peacekeeping personnel to operate
more safely and cost-effectively. We will continue to

S/PV.7196

consult with the legislative bodies on the deployment
of unmanned, unarmed aerial vehicles based on the
experience we have gained with their deployment to the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Speed is also critical. When civilians are under
imminent threat, every minute counts. While there
have been improvements in the mechanisms and speed
with which the United Nations deploys uniformed
personnel, it does not have a standing reserve force that
it can deploy on short notice once a Council decision
is taken. It must rely on its Member States for force
generation, coupled with its own strengthened planning.
It is important that we all work together to ensure that
we are able to deploy or reinforce our missions, when
necessary, as quickly as possible.
We need to have a clear-sighted view of what
capabilities peacekeeping will need if it is to the meet
the challenges ahead. Peacekeeping will need to be more
mobile, flexible and adaptable. It will be important for
the Security Council to address significant capacity
gaps. With the recent establishment of the Office
for Peacekeeping Partnership, we now have in place
a further means of assessing the deployments of
uniformed personnel, and we have a mechanism to
identify areas that require adaptation and improvement,
in partnership with Member States.
Ensuring effective command and control is another
key challenge. When they choose to contribute a
contingent to a particular operation, troop and police
contributors should work with the mission leadership as
one. We need cohesive and unified command structures,
and we count on our troop and police contributors to
work towards this common objective.
Finally, in addressing these new challenges, our
engagement with regional organizations must continue
to deepen and diversify. Arrangements that will allow
us to draw more effectively from regional standby
capacities could help us meet the need to respond rapidly
in new and changing environments. We are engaged in
a dialogue with the African Union, European Union and
the Collective Security Treaty Organization to that end.
The continued use of United Nations peacekeeping
by the Security Council testifies to its continuing
relevance and its unique universality and legitimacy.
The demand for peacekeeping will remain, but
this has also raised concern as the global budget to
support operations approaches $8 billion. We must be

14-426643/64

S/PV.7196

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

responsible and accountable stewards of the financial
and human resources entrusted to us.
But we should also recall that United Nations
peacekeeping is a strong and effective tool that is
protecting people, saving lives and helping countries
to emerge from conflict. These effects are real and
measurable. We must be prepared to make the necessary
investments in peacekeeping and peacebuilding, and we
must bring to bear the full range of tools at the disposal
of the international community to consolidate peace
and achieve an enduring political solution to conflicts
wherever we are called to act.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement.
I now give the floor to the members of the Security
Council.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): Mr. President, allow me
to start by congratulating you on your 40 years of
dedication to diplomacy — an exceptional milestone
that many of us will never reach and that speaks
volumes of your great contributions to the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, Russia and international
affairs. I wish you four more decades in Russian and
international diplomacy. Given your vitality in the
Council, I am convinced that you will easily reach that
goal.
I would like to thank you, Sir, for convening this
open debate on new trends in peacekeeping. As a
dedicated troop- and police-contributing country for
the past decade and as current Chair of the Security
Council Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations,
Rwanda appreciates such inclusive interaction
involving Council members, the larger United Nations
membership and the United Nations leadership on
this very timely and important topic. I also thank the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon,
for being here today and for his briefing.
While our discussion here today revolves around
new trends such as robustness, new technology,
inter-mission cooperation and multidimensional
mandates, for the sake of brevity I will focus on three
areas, namely, technology, robust peacekeeping and a
few remarks on regional partnerships.
Rwanda has positively engaged in discussions on
the introduction of new technology into peacekeeping
theatres that could help to mitigate many threats faced
by peacekeepers and civilians alike. As it has been

4/64

11/06/2014

presented, such technology has the potential to identify
and monitor armed groups and arms trafficking, assist
patrols heading into hostile territory, and assess the
movement of displaced refugees. However, like other
members here today, Rwanda shares valid concerns
that need to be addressed in moving forward. Questions
still exist regarding control of information collected,
confidentiality and third-party impartiality.
The unmanned, unarmed aerial assistance being
used in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is there
on a trial basis. Once its achievements and efficacy
on the ground are confirmed, then we can support
its systemic integration into the requirements of
peacekeeping mandates as the situation of a particular
mission would dictate. In order for that to happen,
however, a comprehensive and enforceable United
Nations framework governing the collection and
dissemination of drone-collected intelligence and data
would be essential in mitigating public and regional
concerns.
Given the nature of current threats to peacekeeping,
Rwanda believes that the deployment of robust
peacekeepers is essential not only to effectively
protecting civilians, but also to their own protection
in increasingly hostile and volatile environments.
However, we cannot expect peacekeepers to engage
in robust peacekeeping tasks without the necessary
preparation and resources. If we do not have the
ability to insert forces and to conduct casualty and
medical evacuations or air lifts, then we have major
problems and should not have deployed in the first
place. Thus, in order for robust peace operations to
work, the peacekeeping community must agree on the
development of robust ideas at the strategic level and
adequately prepare forces at the operational and tactical
levels. In particular, it requires the timely provision of
defence stores, strong regional stand-by capacities and
the timely deployment of enablers.
Allow me to emphasize that while Rwanda supports
well-prepared and well-planned robust peacekeeping
when it is called for, we do not believe that peacekeepers
have a role to play in asymmetric warfare. Rather, all
stakeholders in the region must make a concerted effort
to train and develop asymmetric warfare strategies.
That being said, we should not continue to focus on
military solutions and related strategies while losing
track of the peaceful settlement of conflicts. We need
political robustness now more than ever.

14-42664

11/06/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

The challenges we have identified in all of these
new trends in peacekeeping are related in any actual
sense not to the Organization’s ability or creativity in
enhancing the performance of its mandates, but rather
to the double standards related to using those good
initiatives. It is absurd that there are those who use
these advantages in the way they choose and only when
it fits their interest.
How else can we explain that with the new
technologies and the robust mandate of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), it
has chosen to fight some armed groups, while ignoring
others, such as the longest-surviving group in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo — the
Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda (FDLR).
I recall that the FDLR is a movement that committed
genocide in my country 20 years ago and that has been
terrorizing the Congolese people, raping women and
girls, and recruiting children. It is a negative force
that has been the cause of most other rebellions in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Whose interests are those supposedly good
initiatives serving, while the people we are supposed
to protect are still being raped and killed? Rwanda has
called upon the Council many times to hold MONUSCO
accountable. It is known by all that investing resources
where there is no transparency and accountability is a
waste of time and money and bleeds responsibility.
On regional partnerships, Rwanda believes that
when talking about the strategic future of United
Nations peace operations, we must consider the
Organization’s ability to function successfully with
partners organizations that can share the burden and
bring their own comparative advantages to the table.
That is especially true on the African continent, where
we have seen critical partnerships in Liberia, Sierra
Leone, Darfur, Somalia, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Mali and currently, South Sudan.
While the role of regional organizations is
recognized in Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations, the added value and increasing role they have
gained in recent years requires less of an ad hoc process
and a more of a streamlined framework within the United
Nations peacekeeping architecture. This will take
time, but it is essential to allowing us to cope with the
inevitable challenges related to resources, preparedness
and the political and operational aspects of cooperation.
Next month during our Council presidency, Rwanda

S/PV.7196

will convene a high-level open debate mainly to discuss
the evolution of regional partnerships in peacekeeping.
Their role in helping to secure international peace and
security is rapidly expanding, and the status quo must
be adapted to reflect that evolution.
Let me end by thanking the women and men who
put their lives at risk in the name of international peace
and security, and those who are no longer with us but
whose sacrifice will never be forgotten. It is for their
sake and for that of those whom they protect that we
should strengthen our peacekeeping abilities.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank the Russian Federation for convening this open
debate on new trends in the peacekeeping operations of
the United Nations. I would also like to thank SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for his briefing.
Peacekeeping operations are of great significance
because they contribute to the maintenance of
international peace and security. Peacekeeping
operations began in the 1940s. They have changed from
traditional missions based on ceasefire monitoring to
multidimensional ones with increasingly complicated
tasks. In recent years, in addition to armed conflicts,
there have been threats, such as terrorism and crossborder organized crime. The solutions have also
changed. Sometimes that has led to contradictions
with the fundamental principles of maintaining peace,
namely, the consent of the parties, impartiality, and the
non-use of force except in cases of self-defence or in
defence of the mandate.
Chad is participating in four of the 16 peacekeeping
operations across the world with more than 1,600
Blue Helmets, and has made significant sacrifices in
subregional African peacekeeping operations and those
of the United Nations. Chad’s participation, while it
may be modest, confirms its strong commitment to the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. Three aspects of the trends in United Nations
peacekeeping call for our attention: the issue of robust
mandates; the intervention of international forces
alongside and in support of peacekeepers; and the use
of aerial surveillance systems, or unarmed pilotless
drones.
In regard to United Nations participation in peace
enforcement operations, in particular in offensive
activities — for example, that authorized by resolution
2098 (2013), which created a rapid reaction force, the
Force Intervention Brigade of the United Nations,

14-426645/64

S/PV.7196

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

within the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) — Chad notes that the Intervention
Brigade enabled the defeat of the Mouvement du
23 Mars and a return to security and stability in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo even if
other negative forces, such as the Forces démocratiques
de libération du Rwanda and the Allied Democratic
Forces, continue to run rampant and pose an ongoing
threat to the stability of the Great Lakes region. In
that respect, we support the Secretary-General in his
intention to create, as necessary, rapid intervention
forces within certain United Nations operations in
conflict areas where the protection of civilians poses a
major challenge.
With respect to the intervention of parallel
international forces alongside and in support of
peacekeepers, in recent years we have seen such
forces intervene in several conflicts. That situation is
explained, on the one hand, by a lack of resources on
the part of regional organizations and the weakness of
the States concerned. The recent experience of the use
of such parallel forces demonstrates that the Security
Council mandates are not always used in line with the
principles and requirements of the Organization. The
existence of parallel international forces alongside
peacekeepers sometimes creates overlap and confusion
in the implementation of mandates and can lead to
friction and competition in coordinating activities.
Sometimes, parallel forces deployed in support of
peacekeeping operations find themselves on the
front lines and must take the upper hand over the
peacekeeping operation mission. That is not conducive
to unifying energies and actions.
The issues of effective joint efforts and ensuring
consistency in mandates should be examined. That being
so, we think that we should stress the use of a regional
focus in the settlement of crises by strengthening the
intervention capabilities of subregional and regional
organizations, as those organizations provide an
alternative, given that they are closer, faster and more
flexible. The African Union Mission in Somalia and
the former African-led Support Mission in Mali are
concrete examples of the efforts of the African Union.
In regard to drones, the Secretary-General’s
report of 5 March (S/2014/153) provides the example
of MONUSCO, where their use has provided that
mission with strengthened capacities for intelligence,
monitoring and surveillance. It has allowed for more

6/64

11/06/2014

effective action against illegal activities of armed
groups, notably those involved in the trafficking of arms
and precious minerals. Nevertheless, we would like to
express our concern regarding an ongoing lack of clarity
on the use of drones and the use of the information and
images collected. The use of drones, whether armed or
unarmed, raises concerns and questions, all of which
should be duly addressed.
In conclusion, we reiterate our support for United
Nations peacekeeping operations, as well as for the
noble cause that the Blue Helmets defend. We pay
tribute to all peacekeepers, including our compatriots,
who have given their lives in the service of peace across
the world. This discussion, given its importance, merits
being followed up at the level of the Council and the
General Assembly.
Mr. Llanos (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We thank
the presidency of the Russian Federation for convening
this open debate and for the concept note (S/2014/384,
annex) on a theme of importance and relevance to the
Organization. We also thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.
Peacekeeping operations are an important tool
in the work of the Organization under its peace and
security pillar. The international recognition of that
tool rests, in part, on its origin and the principles that
inspire the missions, namely, impartiality, the consent
of the parties and the non-use of force except in cases
of self-defence or defence of the mandate.
Peacekeeping operations have changed from a
traditional concept, basically serving the functions of
observation, monitoring and reporting on ceasefires
between and among States, to a scenario in which the
conflict situations that occur are often intra-State and the
operations are assigned multiple responsibilities. That
has resulted in so-called multidimensional mandates,
robust mandates or even, in some exceptional situations,
the establishment of a force intervention brigade,
as in the case of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. This new scenario requires thorough
analysis and discussion, which, as we see it, should be
held with the entire United Nations membership, and
in particular, with the troop-contributing countries
and police-contributing countries. In that regard, the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations of the
General Assembly has a particular role to play.

14-42664

11/06/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

My delegation favours a multidimensional focus as
the approach to conflict resolution, since it transcends
the mere cessation of hostilities and involves tasks
that include the facilitation of political processes;
the protection of civilians; the protection of human
rights; the promotion and support of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration; the restoration of the
rule of law and the promotion of national reconciliation.
The complexity of such tasks demands that the
Council provide clear, realistic mandates, along with
sufficient resources for their attainment. Perhaps
we should explore a structure that would, among
other things, provide for strengthening the civilian
component and an efficient comprehensive matrix for
the remaining components, through which the United
Nations agencies on the ground would be subordinate
to the leadership of a given mission. Furthermore, we
must develop more precise regulatory frameworks
based on lessons learned. We stress the need to
take effective steps to strengthen the focus on fully
integrated missions. As we indicated earlier, we believe
that it is important that those steps should arise from
an interaction between the General Assembly and the
Security Council.
We appreciate the Secretary-General’s suggestion
regarding a review of the peacekeeping operations
under the Charter of the United Nations. With respect
to the so-called robust mandates and intervention
brigades, we share the President’s concerns regarding
to the principles of impartiality and consent. The use of
force by the United Nations will always entail political
implications and will always be susceptible to generating
unforeseeable consequences. For that reason, political
control of such decisions should be strengthened, and
the mechanisms for their implementation should be
precisely spelled out, paying special heed to the views
of troop-contributing countries. Along those lines, the
progressive development of international law demands
the elaboration of clear and precise rules of engagement
that take into account the new challenges involved and
provide for appropriate mitigation measures.
The possible use of force should be determined
by weighing such varied factors as mission capacity,
public perception, humanitarian impact, staff security
and protection and, most importantly, the impact of
such actions on the national and local consensus with
regard to the mission. Peacekeeping operations should
be aimed at de-escalating violence on the ground and
returning to forms of persuasion that do not involve the

S/PV.7196

use of force. Should the use of force be authorized, we
believe that neighbouring countries and countries of the
subregion should not undertake the tasks that involve
the use of force. It would seem desirable for individual
units to have clearly defined and differentiated
functions.
Whatever function is ultimately adopted, we stress
the importance of reinforcing a gender perspective in
all peacekeeping operations and of remaining vigilant
so as to ensure that all ground operations include a
gender component, as provided for in resolution 1325
(2000).
With regard to the use of new technologies, in
particular the use of unarmed drones, my country
supports the principle derived from the Brahimi
report( S/2000/809) concerning the need to provide
all peacekeeping operations with better information
for the execution of their mandates, for developing and
planning their specific tasks, and for evaluating their
results. Drones are a good tool for accomplishing such
tasks and, in principle, my country supports their use.
However, we need to establish the legal framework for
their use. In that regard, we propose the development of
a legal study and the creation of a framework for their
operational use to be submitted to member States for
their review and approval.
Finally, with respect to cooperation between
missions, my country sees peacekeeping operations
as a flexible and useful tool in dealing with rapidly
unfolding situations or as part of regional clusters.
Nonetheless, norms in this instance should also be
more precisely defined. Inter-mission cooperation must
always emanate from a process of consultation and
should be accompanied by the respective memorandums
of understanding that fully document their legal
grounds. The consent of troop-contributing countries
is fundamental, along with the presentation of a status
report on the situation of the contributing mission, as
well as a clear definition of the mandate and the use of
force in the receiving mission.
Peacekeeping and peacebuilding are among the
permanent objectives of my country’s foreign policy.
We view the concept of peacekeeping operations as
a broad one, involving both the maintenance and the
promotion of peace—one whose civilian and military
components should work in a coordinated fashion
with an integrated focus. Only a focus of that nature
is capable of maintaining the link between security

14-426647/64

S/PV.7196

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

and development and of creating better conditions for
preventing future conflicts.
As a troop-contributing country, we reiterate our
commitment to the Organization in the noble task of
contributing to peace and security.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg thanks the Russian Federation for taking
the initiative to organize this debate on peacekeeping
operations, an important topic that comes directly
under the purview of the Security Council. I also
thank the Secretary-General for his statement and for
his personal commitment, within the context of his
priorities under his mandate, to the task of building
a strengthened partnership for peacekeeping and for
enhancing the ability of the United Nations to ensure
the protection of civilians.
I fully endorse the statement to be made by the
observer of the European Union.
Since the deployment of military observers
to monitor the truce in the Middle East in 1948,
peacekeeping operations have been at the core of United
Nations endeavours. They have constantly evolved
in complexity and diversity. They have often been
conducted in difficult environments where their role is
no longer limited to overseeing a ceasefire or a simple
line of demarcation. The Security Council recognized
that shift when it adopted resolution 2086 (2013). In so
doing, the Council defined more robust mandates for
strengthening the protection of civilians.
On that basis, the Council decided, in adopting
resolution 2098 (2013), to provide the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
with an intervention brigade in order to prevent the
expansion of the armed groups in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and to neutralize
and disarm them in a “robust, highly mobile and
versatile manner”. That strengthened mandate has
already borne fruit against the Mouvement du 23 mars
and other armed groups. It should continue to remain
in force. In the case of MONUSCO, the implementation
of that mandate has also made it possible to bolster the
protection of civilians and thus to fill in some of the
gaps in that area revealed by the report of the Office
of Internal Oversight Services (A/67/787). The mandate
itself is one thing. Those responsible for peacekeeping
operations still need to have the will and the capability
to implement their mandate.

8/64

11/06/2014

In that context, I would like to stress the contribution
of new technologies that can improve understanding of
a given situation and thereby strengthen the safety and
security of peacekeepers deployed in difficult terrain.
A trial application has been in place in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo since last December, with the
deployment of drones under MONUSCO’s mandate.
Those drones also enable the Mission to monitor the
movements of armed groups and thus to enhance
the information available for military operations. In
addition, they enable better surveillance of displacedpersons camps. The information thus obtained improves
the Mission’s effectiveness with respect to civilian
security in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo. That positive experience should encourage us
to equip other United Nations operations with similar
systems according to their needs.
I will not dwell on the theme of inter-mission
cooperation. The temporary transfer of personnel and
equipment from one operation to another to address
a sudden deterioration in one situation is sometimes
necessary in the short term. But the recent case of South
Sudan has shown the limits of that approach. Without
being able to significantly increase the resources of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS),
the Security Council was well advised, in adopting
resolution 2155 (2014), to reframe the Mission’s mandate
by making the protection of civilians its top priority and
authorizing UNMISS to utilize all necessary means to
ensure the protection of civilians.
Peacekeeping operations have a crucial role to play
in protecting highly vulnerаble populations, especially
women and children. It is also essential that we deploy
capacities specifically dedicated to those tasks,
particularly advisers on the protection of children and
women. Nor should we forget that in the context of
peacekeeping operations, Blue Helmets are often the
first to deal with situations of violations concerning
women and children or of violence towards them. The
fate of those women and children depends largely on
their ability to handle such situations properly.
Peacekeepers should therefore have specific
training before and during their deployment to enable
them both to cope with these situations and take the
necessary decisions that arise. We welcome the fact
that in resolution 2143 (2014), the Security Council
recommended that the United Nations and troop- and
police-contributing countries provide targeted and

14-42664

11/06/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

operational training in order to prepare their staff to
help prevent violations against children.
I would like to conclude by expressing
Luxembourg’s deep appreciation for the commitment of
the peacekeepers, police officers and civilian staff who
do a vital job, often in difficult conditions, in order to
carry out the demanding mandates the Security Council
entrusts to them. We pay homage to the memory of
the more than 3,200 men and women who have given
their lives since 1948 in performing their duties in the
service of the United Nations for the maintenance of
international peace and security. The best tribute we
can give them is to learn the lessons of the past and to
improve the tool we possess in peacekeeping operations,
in the interests of the civilians those operations are
mandated to protect, and to labour unceasingly to
create the political conditions our Blue Helmets need
to succeed.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his statement
and the Russian presidency for taking the initiative
to organize this debate among the Security Council,
the Secretariat’s peacekeeping officials and troopcontributing countries, whose commitment I take this
opportunity to commend.
I associate myself with the statement to be delivered
by the observer of the European Union.
I would like to make four points. First, despite
some of the new contexts in which they are deployed,
the role of peacekeeping operations is still to bring a
peace process to a successful conclusion. There is no
doubt that the classic situation — of a theatre of war
where a peace agreement has already been signed by
the time an operation deploys — is now an exception.
More often than not we find ourselves in ambiguous
situations that range from a tacit halt to hostilities
to a ceasefire disputed by armed elements, but the
challenge still lies in initiating and concluding a
process that leads to a lasting peace. In that context,
the role of a peacekeeping operation is simultaneously
military — it must stabilize the security situation
and deter potential troublemakers — and political, in
supporting, facilitating and backing up a peace process,
including by addressing the root causes of the conflict.
One cannot work without the other.
Secondly, peacekeepers’ operational priority
must always be the protection of civilians. Civilians
are the first victims of modern conflicts. Twenty

S/PV.7196

years after the genocide in Rwanda and the conflicts
in the former Yugoslavia, the United Nations has
made significant progress in putting the protection
of civilians at the heart of peacekeeping operation
mandates. In environments that are complex and, as the
military put it, non-conducive, robust implementation
of peacekeeping operation mandates, in general, and
the protection of civilians, in particular, is essential.
We have seen the relevance of this approach in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo with the Force
Intervention Brigade created within the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). The situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo also emphasizes
the degree to which this approach depends, beyond its
mandate, on a peacekeeping operation’s management
team, on the force’s capacity and on the attitude of the
troops deployed on the ground. In South Sudan today,
everything should take a back seat to the need for the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan to protect
civilians.
Thirdly, peacekeepers should provide support
to the host State’s authorities while preserving the
goal of achieving a transition that can consolidate its
emergence from crisis. If a State is failed or fragile,
peacekeepers can legitimately help to restore the State’s
authority and assist it, particularly with disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, security sector
reform and justice. That requires the United Nations to
develop its expertise in those areas, at the very least
in order to better coordinate international action and
assist the authorities on the ground. That is a challenge
that the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
will have to deal with when it deploys there.
Clearly, peacekeeping operations cannot and should
not be a substitute for the efforts of countries themselves
or of international donors. That is not their job. On the
contrary, they must always be focused on enabling an
emergence from crisis and re-establishing both the local
authorities and the United Nations country teams at the
heart of peacebuilding efforts. It is up to the Council to
ensure that those efforts are reflected in its decisions,
first of all, but also in the actions and the structure of
the resulting operations, and in the renewal of every
mandate, which should be not a routine matter but a
tool for the dynamic management of a peacekeeping
operation.

14-426649/64

S/PV.7196

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

Fourthly, peacekeeping operations must be flexible
as well as stronger. They have become major machines
with staffs that can exceed 20,000. Deploying such
organizations is a challenge, particularly in emergency
situations. Its complexity is further complicated by the
constraints imposed by certain resources, such as force
multipliers, logistical support, military and civilian
expertise, trained personnel — including in the area of
languages — and, especially, funding.
In regard to the subject of languages, I would like
to make my annual plea to the Secretariat — which I
am doing as I reach the end of my term, without much
hope of being heard — that it is perhaps more useful to
have personnel who speak the language of the country
concerned than the language of New York. In other
words, in French-speaking missions it is perhaps more
useful to recruit French speakers than people who
can write reports to New York in English. We know
perfectly well that the Secretariat does in fact make it a
priority to choose English speakers.
At the other end of the spectrum, a peacekeeping
operation must be adaptable in the peacebuilding
phase too. It must be able to adjust its approach,
adapt the size of its civilian staff and support the host
State or the country team and donors in taking over
responsibility. We should therefore step up our efforts
to make peacekeeping operations more flexible in both
directions. On the one hand, that means displaying an
ability to deploy rapidly that is not always the case today,
as the example of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali shows. On the
other hand, a peacekeeping operation should be able to
draw down its military personnel in order to restore to
the host State its responsibilities, and it should be able
to do it rapidly and to propose such action itself.
That flexibility also depends on making the best use
of modern technologies. We welcome the experiments
being done with the tactical use of surveillance drones
within MONUSCO and soon, we hope, in other theatres
too. They will enable us to ensure not only forces’
security but also to economize on personnel. The
recent presentation by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations on the first results of the experiments in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo convinced us of
their usefulness and relevance, and we should pursue
them.
Inter-mission cooperation is another avenue. When
unforeseen events threaten to destabilize a country,

10/64

11/06/2014

cooperation between missions is an appropriate
response that can help missions that need them to
strengthen troops and equipment in a timely way. We
should pursue this line of attack further; this is about
budgets as well as efficiency.
Our discussions today should enable peacekeeping
operations to make advances that render them more
robust, more flexible and able to create conditions
that are conducive to successful political processes
wthout making the countries concerned dependent
on peacekeeping activities. France will continue its
efforts in that direction within the Council. It will
also continue to support the many initiatives on all
such areas taken by the Secretariat, in particular, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, whether in
drawing up mandates or considering strategic reviews
or at regular briefings.
Like my colleague from Luxembourg, I cannot
conclude without commending the commitment of
peacekeepers of all nationalities, who sometimes pay
with their lifes for their dedication in the service of
peace. On this occasion, I would like to pay tribute to
them.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): The Republic
of Korea sincerely appreciates the initiative of the
Russian presidency to organize today’s open debate
on new trends in peacekeeping operations. We are also
grateful to the Secretary-General for his participation
and insightful briefing.
Peacekeeping operations remain an essential tool
for the Security Council to fulfil its responsibility to
maintain international peace and security. However
peacekeeping missions increasingly face diversified
threats and multifaceted challenges. They are now
evolving to better meet the new demands, including where
there is no peace to keep, as described by the SecretaryGeneral. It is therefore incumbent on the Council to
seek prudent and realistic strategies to qualitatively
upgrade United Nations peacekeeping operations.
The Republic of Korea, which accomplished postwar State reconstruction with the full support of the
United Nations, attaches great importance to all United
Nations peace efforts and has actively participated
in peacekeeping operations as a troop-contributing
country. Today, I would like to share some of our
thoughts on how to achieve the proper balance between
peacekeeping principles and the new demands.

14-42664

11/06/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

First, regional and subregional ownership is
crucial for peacekeeping operations to carry out robust
mandates. In reality, impartiality does not guarantee
the safety of peacekeepers and sometimes triggers
anti-United Nations sentiments. The key in that regard
is the clear and broad support given to a peacekeeping
mission. The support granted to the Force Intervention
Brigade in the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to
which the host Government consented at the explicit
request of a regional body, is a good example.
Secondly,
the
quantitative
expansion
of
peacekeeping operations should be balanced with the
focused prioritization of mandates and the streamlining
of staff. Clear, credible and achievable mandates enable
missions to achieve their goals. The possible overlapping
of roles of peacekeeping civilian components, the
United Nations country team and other development
partners should be avoided. Sequencing the deployment
of troops, police and civilians is recommended, as in the
case of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic,
in particular when inactivity is expected in the case of
simultaneous deployment.
Thirdly, inter-mission cooperation can benefit
from past lessons. Recently, the experience of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan illustrates that
such cooperation requires more time and greater costs
than expected. Securing critical enablers is always a
tremendous challenge. A prolonged crisis will test the
capability of the dispatching missions and give rise to
the option of a new force generation. To maximize the
usefulness of inter-mission cooperation, we request that
the Secretariat establish more systematic guidelines.
taking into account all relevant factors, including a
cost-benefit analysis and the scope of cooperation.
Fourthly, we believe that modernizing peacekeeping
operations could provide solutions to some challenges
that we face. Unarmed unmanned aerial vehicles
(UAVs), for example, can monitor the movement of
conflicting parties and help to prevent a possible
crisis. The UAVs utilized by peacekeeping operations
do not even need to be equipped with state-of-the-art
technology. The use of UAVs can be cost effective
and practical, especially in risky areas or those that
are difficult to access. Efforts should be made to take
political and legal concerns into account in meeting the
requirement of respect for sovereignty, transparency
and confidentiality. We look forward to the report

S/PV.7196

of the expert panel organized by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field
Support in that regard.
Fifthly, discussions related to peacekeeping
operations in the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations, the Fifth Committee of the General
Assembly and the Security Council need to be linked
with a view to enabling a comprehensive review of the
military, legal, civilian and budgetary implications.
We would like to propose that the Secretary-General
establish a system-wide cooperation framework
among peacekeeping operation-related entities and
submit a comprehensive report on the direction of the
development of such United Nations operations.
As the Secretary-General also pointed out, since
the landmark Brahimi report of 2000 (S/2000/809),
there has been a sea change in the environments where
peacekeeping operatiosn carry out their mandates. It
is true that the Security Council should carefully avoid
burdening peacekeeping missions with tasks that
exceed the principles of a United Nations peacekeeping
operation. However, the role of a peacekeeping
operation 10 years ago was different from that of
today. It is natural to assume that its role 10 years from
now will also go beyond today’s boundaries to meet
the upcoming challenges. We would therefore like to
emphasize the importance of keeping an open mind to
embracing the necessary changes.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
the President for having convened this open debate.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
important introductory statement. Conflict has changed
dramatically over the past 30 years and United Nations
peacekeeping has struggled to keep up. It is therefore
right that we consider the changes that we have seen
and those that we would like to see.
Conflict today is less often inter-State and more
predominantly internal, asymetric and multilayered. It
is driven by a wide range of factors. Some of the most
recurrent of those are economic and political exclusion,
which denies a free future for all, corrupt or venal State
institutions that curtail or abuse fundamental rights
and freedoms, and untrustworthy or inept security
apparatuses that favour one or other segment of society.
Addressing those complex and interwoven issues
demands a more sophisticated peacekeeping response
than before. In the past, we had one main model of
peacekeeping, namely, an interposition force deployed

14-4266411/64

S/PV.7196

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

along some form of recognized, albeit perhaps
disputed, boundary. The force created a physical and
political space, in which a ceasefire could be solidified
and a sustainable agreement negotiated. However, the
most recent example of such a traditional force was
the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea,
authorized in September 2000. No United Nations
peacekeeping operation established in the past 14 years
follows that traditional pattern.
Today, there are at least seven different models
of peacekeeping operations authorized by the United
Nations. That is not a bad thing in itself. It shows that
we are adapting but, of course, not all those models
have proved to be equally effective. However, the move
away from the so-called traditional model reflects the
realities of today’s world. Infantry battalions deployed
to be largely static monitoring presences are not often
able to respond adequately to the sophisticated threats
and complex environments that we now face.
To ensure that peacekeepers can respond adequately
to the new challenges, they need to have the necessary
tools and capability to deliver the required effect.
One such tool is inter-mission cooperation, enabling
peacekeeping missions to share scarce resources when
faced with sudden crises. Inter-mission cooperation
should help missions to implement their mandates, not
provide a pretext for protracted budget wrangling or
questions about security.
Another tool is new technology aimed at supporting
peacekeepers in the areas of protection, information
gathering and intelligence analysis. That is a natural
evolution and one that we should seize with both hands.
For instance, unmanned unarmed aerial systems can
be used to observe the area around an exposed patrol
base and provide warning of the movement of armed
groups in the base’s direction. That information can
then be used to deploy a rapid reaction force to deter
any would-be attackers.
We have seen the positive impact that the
deployment of such unmanned aerial systems has had
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo as part of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I would like
to acknowledge the Secretariat’s drive and innovative
thinking in delivering that impact. The use of such
systems should be considered in other theatres where
peacekeepers are expected to cover huge areas with
limited numbers of personnel, such as in South Sudan
and Mali.
12/64

11/06/2014

At the heart of any peacekeeping operation is the
mandate agreed by the Security Council. We have a
responsibility to make sure that mandates are clear
and not overloaded. We need better prioritized and
sequenced mandates that promote an integrated military
and civilian response. That requires discipline from
everyone, including Security Council members. But
it also requires an understanding that not everything
needs to be included in the first phase or the first budget.
We need to make clear the strategic goals of deploying
a peacekeeping operation and what tasks we are asking
peacekeepers to fulfil in order to achieve those goals.
The overarching objective should be to try to sustain
or create the conditions in which a lasting peace can
be agreed between the warring parties and achieved by
them or through external facilitation or mediation.
Exit strategies should be part of the discussion right
from the start when mandates are negotiated. In many
of today’s conflicts that will mean prioritizing security
and the protection of civilians in the early phases.
Peacekeepers need therefore to be willing to take the
necessary risks to protect civilians. Where the nature
of the conflict demands, that should include conducting
targeted offensive operations to neutralize and deter
armed groups from threatening or attacking civilians.
Such robust action is not a radical departure from
what the Council has been asking of peacekeeping
missions with protection-of-civilian mandates for some
years. One of our closest partners is the African Union,
and that partnership has generated several models that
we have collectively benefited from — in Somalia,
Central African Republic and Mali. Quick deployment
and a readiness to adopt a robust posture and to use
force in pursuit of the mandate give us other important
tools in the peacekeeping toolbox.
Sadly, it is clear that we will continue to need
peacekeeping operations for the foreseeable future. To
ensure that United Nations peacekeeping is effective,
we need to remain flexible in how we mandate missions,
taking advantage of capabilities offered through new
technology, using scarce resources intelligently across
missions and working in partnership with those ready
and willing to address new conflicts. We should
not waste time trying to codify the ever-changing
peacekeeping landscape. That risks limiting how we
respond to conflict through an institutionalization
of our response. Doing so would be a sure way to
constrain our freedom of action and a sure way to fail
in responding to the next conflict.

14-42664

11/06/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

We owe it to the people of the world suffering in
conflict situations to maintain as effective a response as
possible, and we owe it to the peacekeepers to provide
them with the tools and clarity they need to do their
jobs effectively, jobs that they willingly and bravely
undertake on behalf of the international community in
the pursuit of international peace and security. I take
this opportunity to pay tribute to them.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): I thank you, Sir,
for organizing this highly pertinent open debate. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive briefing.
Lithuania associates itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union by the Head
of its Delegation to the United Nations.
Since the inception of the United Nations,
peacekeeping has developed to become an indispensable
tool for the maintenance of international peace and
security. Nearly 70 missions have been deployed over
that time, and the experience and lessons learned
from those missions continue to feed into the concept
of peacekeeping as it evolves further, owing to the
changing nature of conflicts and the requirements on
the ground. While today’s trends in peacekeeping can
pose considerable challenges, they also highlight the
inherent adaptability of United Nations peacekeeping,
which remains one of its major strengths.
Today, let me focus on three issues: ensuring
capabilities needed to implement peacekeeping
mandates, inter-mission cooperation, and the use of
modern technologies.
Former United Nations Secretary-General Dag
Hammarskjöld once noted that “peacekeeping is not a
job for soldiers, but only soldiers can do it”. Owing to the
multidimensional character of today’s peacekeeping,
the troops on the ground must be able to respond
quickly to the multiple challenges at hand. Besides
traditional peacekeeping tasks, they must provide
effective protection of civilians and their human rights,
humanitarian assistance, and, in cooperation with
country teams and relevant regional and subregional
actors, engage in early peace- or State-building. That
raises new demands for the peacekeeping partnership
of the Security Council, Member States, the Secretariat
and the relevant regional organizations.
Highly mobile units and task forces with
appropriate equipment and sustainability capabilities
are increasingly preferable to traditional infantry

S/PV.7196

battalions, which are best suited to operate in static
configurations. Approaches that integrate infantry,
police and gendarmerie, engineering and support
structures are being tested in real time. The operational
readiness of troops and their preparedness for rapid
deployment are an increasing necessity. A capabilitydriven and qualitative rather than quantitative focus
must be maintained in order to ensure the effectiveness
and operational value of peacekeeping forces in the
highly volatile and rapidly changing crisis situations in
which peacekeepers carry out their missions today.
Such complex, multidimensional environments
also raise new demands for peacekeeper training and
readiness to perform an increasing variety of tasks.
Being able to read the signals of and act accordingly
to deal with gender-based violence, rape as a tool of
war, and the abuse and recruitment of children is key
for implementing protection-of-civilian mandates.
Because of the increasing focus on civilian protection
and humanitarian issues, human rights and gender
sensitivity training is essential for peacekeepers to be
able to carry out their tasks properly.
Predeployment assessment is critical for ensuring
that peacekeeping contingents meet United Nations
standards, including with regard to the protection of
civilians. Even more importantly, all personnel must
respect the values of United Nations peacekeeping and,
first of all, the principle of “do no harm”. All allegations
of misconduct involving peacekeeping personnel, in
particular those related to sexual exploitation or abuse,
must be examined thoroughly, and those responsible
must be brought to account. A zero-tolerance policy
with regard to sexual misconduct, wherever and
whenever it occurs, must be strictly implemented.
Let me now turn to inter-mission cooperation.
While the concept paper (S/2014/384, annex) notes
that inter-mission cooperation should not affect the
implementation of particular mission mandates, we
believe that such cooperation could in fact help their
implementation and should therefore be an inherent
feature of overall mission planning. As crises multiply
and the United Nations peacekeeping budget keeps
growing, we believe that peacekeeping should not
be seen as a patchwork of separate missions, but as
a global enterprise in which efficiency gains and
synergies should be identified so as to provide added
value and benefit for all mandates. Broader regional
and operational theatre thinking and assessment of
crisis situations and conflict trends should take place,

14-4266413/64

S/PV.7196

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

possibly going as far as preparing contingency plans
for inter-mission support, the involvement of regional
and subregional actors, and options for emergency
redeployment in crisis situations.
Emergency redeployment to tackle the situation in
South Sudan, which has involved missions in volatile
situations, can offer a valuable case study for the future.
Cases of inter-mission cooperation in West Africa and
the Middle East can also serve as examples, while
opportunities for greater cooperation at the regional
level are explored. At the same time, cooperation
should also be strengthened on the global level, notably
through the implementation of the Global Field Support
Strategy and the use of the capabilities available at
global and regional service centres.
Finally, let me touch upon the use of advanced
technologies in United Nations peacekeeping. Lately,
discussions at the United Nations have focused on
unmanned aerial vehicles, whose added value was
recently demonstrated at a Secretariat briefing on their
use in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. However,
the range of advanced technology that is or could
be used to enhance implementation of the complex
peacekeeping tasks of today is much wider. Global
positioning system technology in mission vehicles,
infrared capabilities on aircraft and helicopters, the
reduction of missions’ ecological footprint through
water-saving equipment, and the use of cellular or
satellite communications as early warning mechanisms
by civilians in conflict areas are just some examples.
Technology can be employed not just to enhance
situational awareness and facilitate the decision-making
process, but also to bring peacekeepers closer to the
communities they are mandated to protect. It is also
important to reinforce the deterrence element, shrinking
the space in which perpetrators can act undetected and
with impunity. Finally, the use of advanced technology
could result in substantial resource efficiencies and
would allow the United Nations to optimize the use of
critical enablers.
At the same time, technology cannot replace troops
and police officers on the ground and should be seen
as only performing an enabling and supporting role.
Situational awareness without adequate troop capability
to act is of little use. The human factor remains crucial
in peacekeeping operations. Besides helping to better
protect civilian lives, a smart use of technologies in
peacekeeping would also help to protect the lives

14/64

11/06/2014

of peacekeepers, as the toll of peacekeeper deaths is
becoming unacceptably high.
Only a short while ago, on 29 May, the United
Nations marked the International Day of United Nations
Peacekeepers. Let me conclude by paying tribute and
expressing our deep appreciation and respect for all the
peacekeepers, who put their lives at risk to protect the
lives of others and, at times, pay the ultimate price in
the line of duty.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): The Nigerian delegation
thanks the delegation of the Russian Federation for
organizing this topical debate. We are especially
appreciative of the concept note (S/2014/384, annex)
provided to guide our discussions today, and we
welcome the opportunity to share our perspectives
on this very timely subject. We also want to take
this opportunity to thank the Secretary-General, not
only for his statement, but especially for his abiding
commitment to peacekeeping.
The concept note that you have provided,
Mr. President, identifies at least six distinct new
trends in peacekeeping, and I would like to mention
them in their order: the nature of conflicts, which
is changing from inter-State to intra-State; robust
mandates characterized by the use of pre-emptive force
and targeted offensive operations; the deployment of
United Nations peacekeeping operations in parallel
with foreign military forces, both national and
regional; the technical strengthening of United Nations
peacekeeping operations through the use of hightechnology equipment; the operational strengthening
of United Nations peacekeeping operations through
inter-mission cooperation; and the greater complexity
of contemporary multidimensional mandates.
Since the end of the cold war in the 1990s, United
Nations peacekeeping operations have undergone
substantial changes from the classical concept
of peacekeeping, which entailed impartiality, a
non-combative posture, intervening with the consent of
the warring parties and the prior existence of a peace
agreement or ceasefire. That is principally because, in
the post-cold-war era, conflicts have moved from being
largely inter-State to being intra-State. The nature of
those intra-State conflicts is such that there is often
no ceasefire or peace agreement in place before a
peacekeeping operation is deployed. The dynamics of
the conflict make it difficult or indeed impossible to
achieve a ceasefire.

14-42664

11/06/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

As those conflicts often present a threat to
international peace and security, the international
community cannot be bystanders without taking
action. That has led to a situation where, as indicated
in the concept note, peacekeeping operations have been
deployed in theatres with elevated risks, where there is
little or no peace to keep and where peacekeepers face
unconventional threats and greater risks to their safety.
In such situations, the classical model of peacekeeping
would prove inadequate and almost ineffective.
A major concern arising from the new trends
in United Nations peacekeeping operations relates
to the well-being of peacekeepers, who have been
increasingly subjected to harsh and risky conditions
while they are required to serve as a protective force. In
several instances, troops and their civilian counterparts
have been fired upon, abducted or ambushed. Some
have, in the course of carrying out their mandates, had
their weapons seized and yet others have been killed
by armed groups. Peacekeepers have also been attacked
through the use of improvised explosive devices.
The changing dynamics in the peacekeeping
environment and the concerns of troop- and
police-contributing countries for the safety of their
personnel have led to the approval of more robust
mandates for peacekeeping operations. That is
illustrated in the adoption of resolutions 1933 (2010),
2098 (2013) and 2100 (2013), which respectively
empowered the United Nations Operation in Côte
d’Ivoire (UNOCI), the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
to undertake pre-emptive measures to fulfil their
mandates, including the use of force. The robust
mandates given to peacekeeping missions exemplify
the Council’s determination to meet the new challenges
in peacekeeping operations.
One significant new trend in peacekeeping is the
deployment of United Nations peacekeeping operations
in parallel with foreign military forces already on the
ground. The military forces may be from one country or
may be deployed by a regional organization involving
personnel from its member States. Examples of that
can be seen in Mali, where French forces have been
deployed since January 2013 under Operation Serval.
The United Nations peacekeeping force MINUSMA
was later deployed in July 2013 to replace the Africanled International Support Mission in Mali and operates

S/PV.7196

side by side with the French forces under separate
commands. Resolution 2100 (2013), which established
MINUSMA, authorized the French forces under
Operation Serval to intervene, upon the request of the
Secretary-General, in support of MINUSMA when the
Mission is under serious and imminent threat. Thus
far, MINUSMA and the French forces have worked
together to restore peace to areas previously seized
by rebel groups, and in the process, they have made
very significant progress in the protection of civilians,
which is a primary concern for the Council.
Another example of where a United Nations
peacekeeping operation will be working in parallel
with regional forces is in the Central African Republic.
In that case, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA), which was established by
resolution 2149 (2014) of April 2014 to replace the
African-led International Support Mission in the
Central African Republic (MISCA) on 15 September
2014, will work side by side with Operation Sangaris,
made up of French forces. Operation Sangaris has
been deployed in the Central African Republic since
December 2013 with the aim of working with MISCA
to restore security, protect civilians and stabilize the
humanitarian situation in the Central African Republic.
When MINUSCA is eventually deployed, in September
2015, Operation Sangaris will have been on the ground
for nine months. The particular situation in Central
African Republic is that MINUSCA will also have
to work in parallel with another international force,
namely the European Union force, which is made up of
personnel from France and Estonia.
One of the new trends in United Nations
peacekeeping operations is the use of unmanned aerial
vehicles (UAVs), or drones. While some members
have concerns about the use of UAVs in peacekeeping
missions, we believe that modern technology should
rightly be considered as we seek solutions to the
evolving challenges of peacekeeping. We share the
view of Under-Secretary-General Ladsous that the
United Nations cannot continue to work with twentiethcentury tools in the twenty-first century.
As has been noted, drones could be use to reduce
the risk on the ground for United Nations peacekeepers.
That is significant when we consider the fact that 106
United Nations peacekeepers died in 2013, and another
22 civilians lost their lives, while serving in United
Nations peacekeeping operations. According to the

14-4266415/64

S/PV.7196

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

United Nations, an average of one United Nations
peacekeeper is killed every 30 days. UAVs could make
it possible to reduce the number of peacekeepers on
the ground. The implication of that is that it could also
potentially help to reduce the number of peacekeepers
and civilians killed in peacekeeping missions.
Another critical way in which drones could
contribute to making peacekeeping operations more
effective is in the area of surveillance. A drone
operating silently at several thousand metres above the
ground can observe and transmit images in real time
to its controllers on the ground. That translates into
real-time information, which in certain circumstances
could allow for the kind of rapid response that makes
the difference between life and death or allow for
monitoring the movements of combatants in conflict
situations. Drones could also help in the protection of
civilians, especially those displaced by conflict. The
benefits derived from the use of drones, in our view,
make the case for their sustained application in the
context of peacekeeping operations.
Inter-mission cooperation has been aptly described
as a tool that enables the United Nations to fill critical
gaps in personnel and/or equipment in situations, such as
humanitarian crisis or other emergencies. That has been
the practice since June 2005 when the Security Council
adopted resolution 1609 (2005), which authorized the
temporary redeployment of personnel between the
peacekeeping operations in Sierra Leone, Côte d’Ivoire
and Liberia. Subsequently, the Council approved
inter-mission cooperation in resolution 1951 (2010) of
November 2010 between the United Nations Mission in
Liberia and UNOCI and resolution 1650 (2005) between
the United Nations Operation in Burundi and MONUC
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In recent
times, we have seen units redeployed to the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan from United Nations
peacekeeping operations in Haiti, Côte d’Ivoire, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Darfur within
the framework of inter-mission cooperation.
While acknowledging the progress that has been
made by the United Nations, we believe that a coherent
standardized training programme for current and
prospective peacekeeping contingents on inter-mission
cooperation is very essential to overcoming the
challenges in inter-mission cooperation and to ensure
that all forces have a common understanding of their
critical role in the process.

16/64

11/06/2014

United Nations peacekeeping mandates have
transformed from simple ceasefire monitoring and
have become multidimensional. That in effect requires
peacekeeping operations to carry out multiple tasks
usually under very challenging circumstances.
Those tasks, as we know, range from disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration to peacebuilding,
nation-building, the setting up of institutions of rule of
law, the strengthening of human rights protection, the
protection of civilians, the promotion of democracy and
good governance, as well as promoting security sector
reforms. Peacekeeping operations are now staffed with
child protection advisers, gender advisers, experts in
planning elections and a broad range of other personnel
with expertise in various fields. In light of the resource
constraints faced by peacekeeping operations, it would
seem logical for the United Nations to prioritize the
various mandates in a multidimensional operation
and accord the greatest priority to the most urgent and
attainable tasks.
Experience
shows
that
multidimensional
peacekeeping operations face challenges in terms of
the technical expertise required to comprehensively
implement effective peacebuilding programmes.
Achieving that will require that efforts are undertaken
by troop-contributing countries to conduct specific
training and scenario-based exercises aimed
at enhancing the capacity of multidimensional
peacekeeping missions to deliver on peacebuilding
programmes. We endorse the view that there should
be a sequencing of tasks in multidimensional missions
with the utmost priority accorded to the most important
mandate of peacekeepers, which is the protection of
civilians.
We believe that the time is ripe for a deepening
synergy between the Security Council and United
Nations Member States, particularly the troop- and
police-contributing countries, for a more cohesive
mandate design. We take this opportunity to pay tribute
to peacekeeping personnel who have lost their lives in
United Nations peacekeeping operations. We are in
their great debt, and the greatest tribute we believe
we can pay them is to attempt to beat our swords into
plowshares.
Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan): I
thank you, Sir, for organizing this thematic discussion
on “United Nations peacekeeping operations:
negotiationsew trends”. It is the right time for the
Security Council to have such a debate and the concept

14-42664

11/06/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

note (S/2014/384, annex) is really excellent. In one way,
it is too excellent, for it raises so many fundamental
points, the sum of which would require well over a
week’s worth of discussion, which we do not have time
for. We also thank the Secretary-General for his clear
analysis this morning and salute Under-SecretaryGeneral Ladsous for his leadership of the Department.
I have the honour to disagree most respectfully with
many of the arguments presented by my colleagues this
morning. I would like to begin by dispelling certain
myths about United Nations peacekeeping. It is a myth,
for example, to state that United Nations peacekeeping
today is more complex than it was in the 1960s or 1990s. It
is also a myth to state that the Force Intervention Brigade
is a new feature in United Nations peacekeeping. It is a
myth to state that classic peacekeeping was inter-State
while current peacekeeping is intra-State. It is also a
myth for us to believe that more civilians are killed now
in conflicts than in the past.
The reality is that the environments facing the
United Nations in the 1960s — in the Congo, for
example — or in Bosnia and Herzegovina in the 1990s
were no simpler then than those we face today, and the
United Nations Operation in the Congo, the United
Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) and the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
were just as complex as anything we have now.
Secondly, the recently created Force Intervention
Brigade is almost exactly the same as the rapid
reaction force in Bosnia and Herzegovina, created by
resolution 998 (1995). The only difference being one of
presentation, not of substance: the rapid reaction force
was created “to enable UNPF/UNPROFOR to carry
out its mandate” (resolution 998 (1995), para. 9), while
resolution 2098 (2013) authorizing the establishment
of the Force Intervention Brigade refers specifically of
neutralizing armed groups. The effect was largely the
same, however. An add-on to an existing peacekeeping
operation, ostensibly founded on Chapter VI principles,
but increasingly becoming Chapter VII in orientation,
was employed to pursue — for reasons entirely
justified — a specific party to the conflict. The routes
were slightly different in appearance, but the destination
was the same.
Finally, while there once was a preponderance
of classic missions, the most demanding challenges
facing the United Nations from 1948 onward were
in conflicts not of an international character. Also
contrary to popular perception, civilians have always

S/PV.7196

borne the brunt of the casualties in war, from the time
of Herodotus onward. The only exception being the
First World War and even in that war, when the civilian
deaths caused subsequently by the influenza outbreak
are factored in, the numbers were huge.
So what is the current trend? The current trend is a
repetition of previous cycles in peacekeeping, only the
challenges posed by transnational organized crime and
international terrorism accentuate the overall demands
on peacekeeping, as the concept note correctly implies,
and yet the means to address them are diminishing.
At the heart of our growing incapacity is this
unfortunate fact — fewer countries than ever before
are willing to field troops and formed police units
for peacekeeping duty with commanders who are
ready to take extreme risks, even if the cause — such
as protecting civilians — is noble. In more specific
terms, fewer countries than was the case 20 years ago,
will accept casualties when there is no direct national
interest at stake for the contributor. And almost all
contributors will interfere in United Nations operations
when the situation becomes markedly more dangerous
than normal.
And when the challenges posed by a group like
the Mouvement du 23 mars mount, we are forced to
reconsider add-ons again, like the Force Intervention
Brigade, and ponder in other cases whether we should
contract private security firms, simply because there
is little willingness by a growing number of troopcontributing countries to take extreme risks.
But even when we establish a force intervention
brigade, legal questions abound, and questions raised
20 years ago return to the fore, about whether a
peacekeeper acting under an initial Chapter VI mandate,
and who is considered to be a civilian and therefore,
in legal terms, a protected person under international
humanitarian law, should also be in a force, part of
which — the brigade — is given, under Chapter VII,
the authority to use military force aggressively. Both
the Rapid Reaction Force and the Force Intervention
Brigade were successful in fulfilling their intended
roles, yet these so-called Chapter VI 1/2 mandates still
need an intense discussion.
Years ago, many of us felt that the blending of
chapters was inadvisable from a security standpoint,
and was also legally very problematic. We believed
instead that certain Chapter VI mandates needed
agreed triggers built into them, which, if tripped, would

14-4266417/64

S/PV.7196

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

switch the geometry completely into Chapter VII. The
TCCs would know this before they joined the operation
and would be prepared for, and have accepted, that
possibility. The Council and the General Assembly,
particularly the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations, need to re-enter this discussion.
Here, I would like to state that it is disastrous the
Special Committee cannot agree anymore on outcomes.
I served for several years on the Committee and it was
never like this. We have to do better and discuss these
fundamental issues with a view to reaching agreement.
The same can be said of the Fifth Committee and the
troop reimbursement rate to TCCs, based upon General
Assembly resolution 67/261 and the figure derived from
the survey (A/68/813 and A/68/859).
Returning to the need for us to adopt a new
operating calculus for how we delineate surgically
between consent and enforcement, even were this to
be possible, if large numbers of TCCs are not willing
to accept casualties there is little we can usefully
discuss. The increasing unwillingness to accept high
risk has also, in part, led the United Nations to think
of using modern technologies, such as unmanned
aerial observation platforms. My delegation supports
this initiative, and we commend the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations for it.
But we all need to analyse this together very
carefully. When Dag Hammarskjöld first heard,
in a discussion with leaders in the Middle East on
27 August 1958, the term “a United Nations presence”,
he instinctively knew how he could develop it further.
He understood better than anyone else that there were
more alternatives to peacekeeping than simply a stark
choice between either the deployment of United Nations
battalions or the sending of an observer mission. The
presence of only one official in theatre, with a small
office, meant to Hammarskjöld that the entire United
Nations was there as a whole. But, crucially, this
presence required skilled humans to fill the void — to
make the United Nations felt.
The lessons from the United Nations Mission of
Observers in Tajikistan must be borne in mind, in this
regard. It was a military observer mission established
in 1994 with only 40 unarmed military observers
deployed in Tajikistan, and yet it was credited in the
first two years with saving a very large number of lives,
and potentially the country altogether, simply by being
everywhere. Whenever a situation grew critical in one
remote corner or another and demanded the observers
18/64

11/06/2014

be there — day or night, hail or snow — somehow they
were always there.
So what is needed most for a successful
peacekeeping operation is not just the best equipment
or the best-trained soldiers, and not even modern
fighting units equipped with artillery and tanks. What
is needed, above everything else, are remarkable field
commanders and field officers. Every United Nations
peacekeeping operation deployed in a dangerous
theatre needs the very best company and battalion
commanders. They must be fearless, or at least show
no fear. They must know what military honour is; have
a clear understanding of their mandate, the concept of
operations and their rules of engagement; and know
that their supreme duty is to protect civilians when
required to do so. Every time civilians are deserted by
the United Nations, rather than protected, not only do
the civilians tend to suffer, but of course the United
Nations credibility takes a body blow. These body
blows, rather disturbingly, seem to be accumulating,
as the recent report of the Office of Internal Oversight
Services (A/68/787) shows us.
We should perhaps have a field commanders
academy, which instills in young commanders the sort
of leadership that could be required of them. With the
right commanders, and with us the Member States
willing to accept more risk ourselves on behalf of the
Organization, we can better ensure that United Nations
peacekeeping will remain the flagship activity of the
Organization.
Ultimately, if we do not accept the risks, we believe
that Sir Brian Urquhart was right all those many years
ago when he argued that if the Member States could
not do it, the United Nations might need its own a
standing force — a force that knew how to carry out
the very mandate set for it by the Council, and which
would not be subject to the influences and whims of the
Member States, and whether they decided to participate
or not, and if they participated presented countless
caveats. This may still be radical thinking to some, yet
inevitably we are headed in that very direction if the
threats to international peace and security expand. We
very much believe, therefore, that we need to discuss
more seriously Urquhart’s still profound thoughts in the
months ahead.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
thank you, Sir, for convening this debate to discuss the
critically important issue of peacekeeping. I thank the
Secretary-General for his opening statement.
14-42664

11/06/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

As we meet, nearly 100,000 peacekeepers and
17,000 civilian personnel are deployed in peacekeeping
missions around the world. Day after day, they put their
lives on the line to protect people from communities
and nations different from their own and to uphold
the fundamental principles set out in the Charter of
the United Nations. The United States thanks those
individuals for their service, as well as the 122 countries
from which they come.
Let me begin by saying that, on many of the issues
involved in peacekeeping, we all agree on the key
points. We agree that peacekeeping is an absolutely
essential part of the Council’s work and driven by our
shared moral commitment to protecting the defenceless
from the scourges of war and conflict. This sense of
shared purpose is also driven by our having witnessed
the horrific human consequences of the times when
the United Nations has failed to stop the slaughter of
unarmed civilians.
This year, we are marking the twentieth anniversary
of the Rwandan genocide; next year we will do the
same for Srebrenica. Rwanda and Srebrenica taught
the world and the United Nations an extremely costly
but important lesson. In order to fulfil their basic duty
to protect civilians, peacekeepers need clear, robust
mandates. This is another of the points on which we all
can agree, and on which we have agreed repeatedly in the
mandates for peacekeeping missions authorized since
that time. Indeed, many of the current peacekeeping
missions have robust mandates empowering them to
use force to protect human lives.
However, that does not mean that peacekeeping
missions should rely predominantly on the use of
force to protect civilians. As is affirmed by resolution
2086 (2013), which the Council unanimously
supported, effective peacekeeping is multidimensional
peacekeeping. That means that we must use all of the
tools in our tool box to prevent situations in which
the use of force is necessary to save lives, and work
methodically to lay the foundations for greater peace
and stability.
All of that said, in circumstances in which force is
necessary to protect innocent lives missions must fulfil
the responsibilities set out by these robust mandates. In
fact, the credibility of all of our commitments around
the world to protecting civilians — which can be a
deciding factor in determining the behaviour of those
who would otherwise attack civilians — is inextricably
tied to our living up to our word in each and every

S/PV.7196

mission. As such, the failure to hold to this commitment
in one mission can undermine the legitimacy of all of
the others.
We have seen that these more robust approaches
can be highly effective. The accomplishments of the
Force Intervention Brigade in the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo demonstrate that clearly. The
success of that initiative truly has many fathers and
mothers, from the region that put forward the idea of
a neutral force focused primarily on combatting armed
groups in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to the
mandate that represents our collective commitments,
to the contributing countries Malawi, South Africa and
Tanzania, and to the troops who have performed so
bravely and professionally on the ground in extremely
challenging conditions. This effort has not only made
the individual peacekeeping mission more effective
and more credible, but also supported broader efforts to
promote peace and stability in the Great Lakes region.
If we agree that we have a moral imperative
to protect people at risk; if we have learned that
peacekeeping missions need robust mandates to
fulfil that commitment; and if we have unanimously
authorized missions with such mandates, the question
then is how we can give those robust missions the tools
they need to be as effective as possible.
First, we in the Security Council need to set forth
clear priorities in mandates, particularly through
the sequencing of tasks — not because we think that
some goals are less important than others, but rather
because our experience has demonstrated that certain
objectives cannot be pursued until others have been
met. For example, it is difficult to rebuild a broken
judiciary when it is not safe enough for people to leave
their homes. Such prioritization will make missions
more effective and more efficient. The Council’s
newest peacekeeping mission, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic, offers a solid example of
the Council’s efforts to set such priorities, as well as
proof of its benefits.
In addition, now that we have clearer, more robust
mandates, we must do a better job of ensuring that
missions have the capabilities needed to fulfil them.
Among those necessary capabilities we count access
to new technology, from wireless radios and satellite
phones to unmanned, unarmed aerial vehicles. We
believe that those best suited to determine what

14-4266419/64

S/PV.7196

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

capabilities are required are the missions themselves,
and specialists from the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations. To move such decision-making to the
Council would not only take it away from the experts
who know best, but also would dramatically hinder and
politicize the process of obtaining crucial capabilities
required to implement Council mandates and save lives.
Another way we can make missions more effective
is to allow for greater inter-mission cooperation. We
have seen how that can be a smart way to temporarily
move resources rapidly to respond to emergencies
and scale up missions on short notice, as Council
members unanimously authorized in South Sudan,
through resolution 2132 (2013). The more flexible such
arrangements are, the more swiftly we will be able to
respond to the next unexpected crisis.
Lastly, I would like to highlight an additional issue
related to peacekeeping that deserves our attention.
In March, the Office of Internal Oversight Services
released a report on the protection of civilians in
peacekeeping missions, focusing specifically on the
use of force to protect civilians. Its key finding is that
in United Nations peacekeeping operations, “force is
almost never used to protect civilians under attack”
(A/68/787, para. 79). The report highlights a number of
apparent reasons for the failure to use force to protect
civilians, as well as recommendations for how to
address that.
While recognizing that the use of force is only one
tool for protecting civilians, my Government believes
that the Council would benefit from a thorough briefing
of the report’s serious and concerning conclusions.
The Council would also benefit from a discussion of
the report’s implications for our work going forward.
At its essence, the report reveals a significant gap
that has emerged between the commitments we set
down on paper — which constitute a responsibility to
act — and the way that missions perform in practice.
The larger that gap grows, the more vulnerable civilians
become and the less credible the Organization and the
peacekeepers that represent it become.
I hope that this is another point on which we can all
agree and that today’s discussion will contribute to the
Council’s work to make peacekeeping more efficient
and effective.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation appreciates the Russian initiative

20/64

11/06/2014

to convene today’s open debate. I thank SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for his briefing.
United Nations peacekeeping operations, as an
important United Nations tool in the maintenance of
international peace and security for over six decades,
have significantly contributed to the settlement of
conflicts and disputes, and the restoration and building
of peace. Meanwhile, given the changing nature of
conflicts and disputes in recent years, the concept and
practices of peacekeeping operations have displayed
new trends and characteristics.
How can United Nations peacekeeping operations
fulfil evolving requirements, grow in effectiveness and
better promote political settlements, while ensuring a
stable and sustainable security environment for peace
consolidation and peacebuilding? The subject merits
the international community’s in-depth consideration
within a peacebuilding framework. I wish to focus on
the following five points.
First, continued adherence to the guiding
principles of peacekeeping — that is, the parties’
consent, impartiality and the non-use of force except
in self-defence or implementation of the mandate — is
fundamental to winning the confidence and support
of Member States for peacekeeping operations and
ensuring their smooth conduct. China approves of
innovations and improvement in certain peacekeeping
practices, in the light of current developments and
realities, but the basic principles are key to ensuring
the healthy development of such operations and should
be upheld over the longer term. Any practice that
deviates from or weakens those principles will hamper
the operation’s impartiality and objectivity and, worse
yet, could transform the United Nations into a party to
conflict, thereby undermining the conflict resolution
efforts of the international community.
Secondly, in implementing peacekeeping mandates,
United Nations peacekeeping missions should strictly
abide by the Council’s resolutions and fully respect the
leading role of the countries in question. The deployment
of peacekeeping missions is not a goal in itself and
cannot substitute for the responsibilities and obligations
of the host Government and the parties to the conflict
concerning the protection of civilians. Such missions
should instead focus on promoting peace and stability
in conflict situations through political settlement and
reconciliation processes, and on helping the countries

14-42664

11/06/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

S/PV.7196

in question effectively to assume their responsibilities
for the protection of their own nationals.

AU and other regional organizations in peacekeeping
operations.

Thirdly, it is very important to ensure the
dovetailing of peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts
and to consolidate the fruits of those efforts in order
to ensure lasting peace and stability. In determining
the mandates of peacekeeping operations, the Council
should attach priority to the urgent need for security and
stability, while focusing on long-term perspectives by
taking into account the current realities of the country
in question, strengthening coordination between
peacebuilding and peacekeeping, and strengthening the
country’s capacities, while ensuring a smooth transition
from peacekeeping to peacebuilding through a realistic
and practical exit strategy.

China is a firm supporter of and participant in United
Nations peacekeeping operations, and we have over the
years contributed a total over 20,000 peacekeepers.
As the largest troop-contributing country among the
permanent members of the Security Council, we have
at present more than 2,000 peacekeepers serving in
10 peacekeeping operations. For the first time, we
have deployed a security troop to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali and are ready to raise the number of our troops
deployed in the United Nations peacekeeping operation
in South Sudan, thereby making a bigger contribution
to the restoration of peace and stability in South Sudan
in the nearest future.

Fourthly,
strengthening
the
effectiveness
of peacekeeping operations requires continuous
improvements in scope and management. Nearly half
of peacekeeping missions now comprise over 10,000
troops. Many missions are deployed in increasingly
complex environments. An effective response to
the resource and equipment challenges faced by the
operations requires improved management and efficient
use of resources. Through inter-mission cooperation
and other means — including the rationalization of
resource allocation in the light of developments on
the ground and the timely adjustment of the scale
and mandate of the mission — the Security Council,
the troop-contributing countries and the Secretariat
should strengthen their coordination and collaboration
and work together to ensure the smooth deployment
of peacekeeping operations and the implementation of
their mandates.
The wider use of unmanned aerial vehicles and other
advanced technologies in peacekeeping operations will
require in-depth study and discussion by Member States
on its legal implications and operational management.
Fifthly, great attention and support should be
given to the important role of the African Union (AU)
and other regional and subregional organizations
in the maintenance of peace and security in Africa.
Today, more than half of United Nations peacekeeping
operations are deployed in Africa. The United Nations
and the international community should increase their
coordination and cooperation with African regional
organizations in the field of peacekeeping operations,
increase their support to the AU and other regional
organizations so as to help Africa build its peacekeeping
capabilities, and give full play to the advantages of the

China will continue its active participation in
United Nations peacekeeping operations, and is ready to
work with the international community in contributing
to the further development of peacekeeping operations
and the maintenance of international peace and security.
Ms. King (Australia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important debate. We also thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing and for his tireless
efforts to build a flexible and sustainable United
Nations peacekeeping force, able to respond not only
to the challenges of today but also to anticipate those
of the future.
Peacekeeping is at the very core of the United
Nations. We are all indebted to those who have served
as United Nations peacekeepers, and my country
acknowledges those who have given their lives in
pursuit of this noble cause. Over the past seven
decades, 1 million Blue Helmets have deployed in
over 70 operations across four continents, serving with
distinction to prevent the outbreak of conflict, manage
and contain violence and support countries in building
peace after conflict.
As we have heard this morning, including from the
Secretary-General, much has changed over the years in
terms of the context for United Nations peacekeeping
operations, yet the essential purpose of peacekeeping
has remained the same, as have many of the means
that peacekeepers employ to achieve their purpose. Let
us take, for example, the proactive use of force. The
United Nations has a history of using offensive action
to counter threats. The solemn phrase “by all necessary
means” has featured in mandates over many years as

14-4266421/64

S/PV.7196

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

a powerful statement of the Council’s intent to uphold
international peace and security.
As the Ambassador of Jordan has referenced,
as far back as 1961 the United Nations Operation in
the Congo launched offensive operations against
Katangese forces. One could argue that this was the
genesis of multidimensional peacekeeping. In Sierra
Leone in 2000, troops of the United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone engaged in combat operations against the
Revolutionary United Front. Special forces, artillery
and attack helicopters were used in that operation — the
same capabilities being employed to excellent effect by
the Force Intervention Brigade of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) today, with strong
support from the Council.
The protection of civilians is now rightfully
established as a central tenet of United Nations
peacekeeping, reflected in the fact that the majority
of the Council’s peacekeeping missions are clearly
and specifically mandated to protect civilians. The
Secretary-General’s pronouncement in April that
United Nations peacekeepers should not wait for
instruction from Headquarters before taking action
to protect civilians was an unambiguous directive
affirming the need for proactive force measures for that
specific purpose. We must all now work to ensure that
the intent of the Council and the commitment of the
Secretary-General are operationalized effectively to
the benefit of the civilians who require protection.
One of the most pronounced new peacekeeping
trends in recent years has been the inexorable growth in
the demand for peacekeeping. Today, its scale and size
are unprecedented. A record number of United Nations
military, police and civilian personnel are serving on
more missions than ever before — deploying to vast,
remote and volatile environments where increasingly
they confront non-State actors employing deadly
unconventional tactics and where, as the SecretaryGeneral has said, there is in fact no peace to keep and
the risk of violence reoccurring is constant.
Yet public expectations are increasing about what
peacekeeping can achieve. Scrutiny of peacekeeping
effectiveness has never been more acute, the drive for
efficiency never more pressing. So as we mobilize to
confront those challenges, we must commit ourselves
to adapting, innovating and continually improving. We
must strengthen our capacity to deploy rapidly where

22/64

11/06/2014

the lives of civilians are at risk. Facing uncertainty,
missions should be planned in a more flexible and
iterative manner.
By prioritizing mandate elements and sequencing
tasks using benchmarks, we can better meet mission
objectives. Recent experiences in Mali and South
Sudan show that we need to improve planning and
mission support, whether generating fresh troops or
through inter-mission cooperation. We must continue
to strengthen ties with regional and subregional
organizations whose member States are so often the
first responders when conflict erupts. We welcome
Rwanda’s advice that we will have an opportunity to
examine this in more detail next month.
We must embrace new technologies in support of
peacekeeping. Unarmed, unmanned aerial systems
providing intelligence day and night have been crucial
in helping MONUSCO to neutralize armed groups
preying on civilians in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Simple measures, such as installing perimeter
lighting and cameras around United Nations bases,
can free personnel from static security tasks so they
may increase active patrolling, expanding further their
protective footprint.
Those cost-effective enablers will not lessen the
demand for boots on the ground or for other air assets in
the sky. Rather, they allow those in the field to achieve
their mandates in a safer, more effective and efficient
manner. We encourage the Secretary-General to deploy
those resources as he sees fit to meet the needs of each
mission. We must all work collaboratively with the new
United Nations Panel of Experts examining how other
technologies can be leveraged to support peacekeeping.
Of course, technologies only augment human capacity,
so we must redouble our efforts to improve training to
better prepare personnel to conduct mission tasks and
to confront the risks they face.
Ultimately, peacekeeping will only ever be a bandaid measure without a stable peace. That is where
the coordination of peacekeeping and other Council
instruments is so crucial. The now routine partnering of
peacekeeping with preventive and protective sanctions
measures, such as arms embargoes, is a vital factor in
mitigating conflict and preserving the space for postconflict reconstruction. We must not lose sight of the
importance of the civilian side of peacekeeping to help
build national capacities to address local problems.
Done effectively, security sector reform; disarmament,

14-42664

11/06/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

demobilization and reintegration; and reforms of justice
and rule-of-law institutions can be the glue that binds a
nation in the post-conflict phase.
The doubling of a number of United Nations police
authorized by the Council over the past decade reflects
a growing recognition that strengthening the rule of
law is the basis for lasting stability and security. United
Nations police are performing ever-expanding roles,
from combating sexual violence and transnational
crime to engaging communities to prevent conflict.
We believe that the role of police in peacekeeping is
something the Council should examine in a more
systematic way.
To conclude, we must all see today’s debate as
an opportunity to take stock, revisit our assumptions
and question current practices in peacekeeping.
Collectively, as the peacekeeping partnership, we must
resolve to heed the lessons learned and we need to
continually refine our approach. We owe this to the men
and women who serve as United Nations peacekeepers
and to the many people they protect in our name.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, we congratulate you on the coming
40 years and on your effective and lucid diplomacy.
Argentina would also particularly like to commend
the Russian Federation because tomorrow, 12 June, is
Russia Day. We very much hope that your delegation
will enjoy an excellent day for the country’s celebration.
In Argentina, the saying “Will the last one to leave
please turn off the light” may perhaps be conveyed by
the Secretariat to the Secretary-General. We very much
appreciate his briefing and wish him a happy birthday
on 13 June. May he have a pleasant trip inaugurating
the World Cup in the sisterly Federative Republic of
Brazil.
I would also request the Jordanian delegation to
transmit to our dear colleague, Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid
Al-Hussein, that the opening ideas of his statement were,
as usual, very good but that, when rituals are repeated,
they frequently become myths. And myths, at a certain
point, wind up more real than reality. Although we have
myths about peacekeeping operations, I will address
some of the realities mentioned by my colleague.
I would first like to acknowledge the stimulating
concept note submitted by the Russian Presidency on
new trends in peacekeeping operations (S/2014/384,
annex), which runs along the same lines as what we
have been discussing, both with respect to the various

S/PV.7196

draft resolutions on peacekeeping operations and to the
Council’s Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations,
as well as in the broader realm of the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations of the General Assembly
(C-34).
With respect to the recent shift in the mandates of
several African missions, in particular the creation of
an intervention brigade within the framework of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
which was authorized in order to implement
certain peacekeeping tasks, while the principles of
peacekeeping are clearly defined and well known, my
country is concerned, as are other Member States, that
recent practice seems to contradict those principles.
To put it in more colloquial terms, we cannot use
the United Nations to wage war through other means.
Our responsibility is to maintain international peace
and security. Let us recall the recent recognition of
the growing need for peacekeeping missions to be
endowed with effective mandates that enable them
to act in operations involving increased risk and
unconventional threats. Nonetheless, we understand
that the peacekeeping system was not conceived to
impose peace, nor is it prepared to do so. We therefore
encourage this Organization and all its bodies to debate
and clearly define what we mean by “robust mandates”.
In that regard, while we view as positive the trend
for the Organization to oversee the command, control
and financing of missions that require, in exceptional
cases, that peace be imposed, we believe that the
characteristics of an appropriate and effective tool
for such exceptional tasks should be derived from a
broad, overdue debate involving all Member States on
peacekeeping and the use of force by this Organization
and should not be the result of a fait accompli.
We believe that we should not disregard the
principles of the peacekeeping system that we have
worked so hard to build and that we should not put at
risk the safety of United Nations personnel deployed in
our missions on the ground, to whom, as have others,
I offer the homage and recognition of my country,
Argentina.
In that regard, after listening to other statements, the
point is that those of us from countries that contribute
troops and police should not be afraid that our citizens
from the military and police, whether male or female,
might suffer harm. No. They have been trained as

14-4266423/64

S/PV.7196

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

effective and solid professionals to act in exceptional
situations in which violence is very much part of the
environment. So let us be clear. These are not physical
education or kindergarten teachers. They are military
and police professionals. But our Organization cannot
deal with and increasing number of situations of risk
and violence without taking care to be effective in
designing its mandates, its rules of engagement and the
security contexts in which the men and women of the
countries that provide troops and police are being asked
to exercise their profession as soldiers and police. In
other words, let us not add further risks to the inherent
risk. That, I believe, is the message that the countries
that contribute troops and police have been saying all
along.
With respect to unmanned drones and the use of
new technologies in peacekeeping missions, we believe
that these new technologies can bring important
capabilities to peacekeeping operations, so long as they
are evaluated, on a case by case basis, with a view to their
use in observation under the control of the Organization
with strict respect for the norms that guide us. In that
context, I would like to reiterate the demand that was
made in the framework of the C-34. We want and hope
to receive further information from the Secretariat
with regard to the use of such technologies, including
lessons learned in the confidential treatment of the
information obtained, as well as on improvements in
the safety of deployed personnel, the understanding of
the operational situation and the protection of civilians.
New technologies cannot be developed out of thin
air. They cannot be allowed to proliferate without
regulation. If in this Organization we managed to adopt
a non-proliferation treaty as an international legal
framework -- still not quite universal -- how could we
not work out a regulatory agreement that obligates all
States to agree on the ethical and legal bases that will
enable the reliable, efficient use of new technologies?
We believe that inter-mission cooperation, to which
the Presidency’s brilliant concept note also refers, should
not be a substitute for the appropriate implementation
and planning of a peacekeeping mission. We should
ensure that such cooperation does not affect the
fulfilment of the sending mission’s mandate, and that
it should be appropriately integrated by the receiving
mission. That includes the challenge of maintaining
sufficient budgetary discipline, which is necessary in
such cases, with particular regard for the principle that
no loans between active missions are allowed, as well

24/64

11/06/2014

as the rule that stipulates that the costs of inter-mission
cooperation should be borne by the receiving mission.
Such considerations lead us, in conclusion, to
the issue of financing for peacekeeping missions. We
have observed a negative tendency to broaden the
complexity of mandates without providing them with
the financial resources necessary for their appropriate
implementation. We insist that the matter of financial
allocations to peacekeeping missions constitutes a
political issue and not a simple budgetary question,
since it affects the effectiveness and the credibility of
the whole Organization.
Argentina believes that the future of peacekeeping
operations depends on their having clear and
adequately financed mandates. For that to be the case,
we need to continue to be able to count on the necessary
consensus in the General Assembly, so that the efforts
of the troop-contributing countries are met by an
analogous commitment on the part of those countries
with greater financial responsibilities. The successful
implementation of the various tasks specified in the
peacekeeping mandates shines a spotlight on the
effectiveness of those expenditures, in particular if we
compare the lean budget of around $8 thousand million
available for all peacekeeping operations with the
enormous cost of global military expenditures.
Finally, the growing tendency to include aspects
of peacebuilding in the mandates of our peacekeeping
missions has transformed our peacekeepers into early
peace builders. We consider that to be one of the most
significant developments in peacekeeping operations
in recent years. It is in fact essential in order to
prevent countries from falling back into conflict and
to enable peacekeeping operations to function with a
platform that allows for the protection of human rights,
development, gender equality, and the consolidation of
democracy and the rule of law.
I cannot conclude my remarks without making
an observation about the fact that we put ever more
responsibility on specific sectors within the mandates
of peacekeeping operations. Argentina agrees that
they should cover the areas of human rights, the
humanitarian efforts, the equality of women and the
protection of children. But what often happens when
we are on the ground is that we come to see that we
should look strategically at how to conduct operations.
Instead of piling more responsibilities onto a particular
area, we should think about how we can coordinate and
articulate them so that they dovetail with the various
14-42664

11/06/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

agencies in the United Nations system and with the
capacities we have in regional, subregional and national
organizations. Because what happens? Superimposition
and disconnectedness do not help promote peace, and
what helps even less is competition between entities
and organizations — competition for resources and
a feudalization of their agendas. We should all work
together cooperatively, not with the logic of the market
but with a culture of peacekeeping.
The President (spoke in Russian): I would now like
to make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Russian Federation.
Today, various regions of the world are
undergoing large-scale and sometimes unpredictable
transformations. The international community is
obliged to respond to such processes, including by
adapting United Nations peacekeeping, one of our
principal tools for maintaining international peace and
security. United Nations peacekeeping operations are
deployed in complex and dangerous conditions, and
increasingly often in situations of domestic political
crisis complicated by difficult humanitarian and
socioeconomic circumstances. Challenges such as the
spread of weapons, organized crime, terrorism and drug
trafficking across borders have become more acute.
These factors are affecting not only individual
aspects of United Nations peacekeeping but in a
number of cases also its principles. This requires
thorough discussion and understanding on the part of
Member States and the Secretariat in order to formulate
consistent and balanced approaches, overcome
the fragmented nature of the political and legal
foundations, develop appropriate doctrines and prepare
timely regulatory documents based on analysis of the
experience gained, analysis that should continue to be
guided by the unshakeable positions of the Charter of
the United Nations and the basic principles of United
Nations peacekeeping. The most important factor is
a genuine partnership in joint peacekeeping efforts
between the members of the international community.
One growing trend is the so-called strengthening
of peacekeeping mandates, including by authorizing
their use of preventive force. Such mandates include
that of the Force Intervention Brigade within the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali has similar tasks. This experience has
raised a number of unresolved legal, technical, staff and

S/PV.7196

logistical issues for the Organization with the potential
for adverse effects on the missions’ effectiveness, the
image of the United Nations and, most importantly, the
peacekeepers’ security.
We are certain that these issues should be addressed
in an intergovernmental format within the specialized
United Nations entities and with the active involvement
of the troop-contributing countries (TCCs). This is
essential in order to ensure that when the Security
Council establishes individual mandates it relies on
approaches that are agreed on system-wide. At the
same time, when considering emerging challenges in
this context, however complex, it is impossible to avoid
discussing whether robust United Nations peacekeeping
is the only way to improve the effectiveness of the
maintenance of international peace and security and
whether stronger mandates can be a substitute for the
painstaking search for political solutions. It is clear
that peacebuilding’s chief task is still, as it has always
been, creating the conditions for political dialogue,
eradicating the root causes of conflicts and crises
and achieving national reconciliation — which means
achieving lasting peace.
Robust mandates cannot become business as usual
and should be carefully calibrated according to the
specific situation. Expanding such practices, which
essentially imply the peacekeepers’ support for one
side of the conflict, as well as the possible loss of their
protected status under international humanitarian law,
will inevitably increase the political costs to the image
of the United Nations and the security risks not only
for the Blue Helmets but for other civilian personnel on
the ground. Humanitarian and country team staff could
become targets as well. This raises the question of how
the United Nations will handle such consequences.
We have recently encountered such new phenomena
as the presence of several different peacekeeping forces
in one country, which creates additional challenges.
While not disputing the potential positive contributions
of national and regional forces, we believe that in order
to do what must be done, there must be appropriate
coordination between them, ideally through a single
peacekeeping mission under United Nations auspices.
An equally important aspect of modern
peacekeeping is the use of advanced technical
equipment, particularly experimental use unarmed,
unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs). There is no question
that United Nations peacekeeping must keep up with the
times, and technology can help implement mandates and

14-4266425/64

S/PV.7196

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

improve security for Blue Helmets. On the other hand, it
is not an end in itself, but simply a tool that by virtue of
its novelty requires the establishment of a political and
legal framework for its use, emphasizing its operational
and financial performance by comparison with already
proven equipment such as traditional aircraft and the
UNOSAT satellite data processing system.
The multifunctional nature of UAVs naturally
raises the question of the modalities for controlling
the information received and of preserving its
confidentiality. We consider it important to ensure
transparency for such processes. In that regard, since
the start of UAV use in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo Russia has urged that the experience
be carefully studied. It is no secret that there have
been problems as well as positive indications in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We believe that
those aspects and the lessons learned will be reflected
in an annex to the Secretary-General’s annual report
on the implementation of the recommendations
of the General Assembly’s Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations. In that context, we welcome
the Secretariat’s establishment of an Expert Panel on
the use of new technologies. We hope to see impartial
and technically sound results from its work that take
into account the views of Member States, including
TCCs.
The relevance of inter-mission cooperation has
been proven in situations in neighbouring peacekeeping
operations have deteriorated due to a lack of troops and
air assets. However, recent proposals by the SecretaryGeneral, including for the creation of a rapid reaction
force in Côte d’Ivoire, suggest an attempt to make such
methods a regular practice. We are not convinced of
the advisability of handing decision-making control
over the cross-border activity of this contingent to the
Secretariat even in a situation where, as we understand
it, the troop-contributing country has consented.
The Security Council should also be responsible
for evaluating problems arising on the ground and
justifying such redeployment.
Mandates encompassing multiple components
have become a reality, and they include large-scale
peacebuilding tasks. However, it has taken several
years for all the aspects of this approach to emerge. In
analysing the results of a number of missions, we will
have to rethink the algorithm for establishing priorities
and their relationship to assistance. We are convinced
that the chief efforts of peacekeeping operations should

26/64

11/06/2014

be focused on halting violence and reducing the risk
of its renewal to a minimum. From the beginning,
peacekeeping operation mandates have included longterm social, humanitarian and human-rights tasks that
are often not adapted to a particular country’s context
and are frequently unjustified. Moreover, specialized
United Nations entities exist to accomplish such
directives, and they should be used.
The General Assembly’s Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations plays a central role in
formulating common approaches to peacebuilding for
Member States and corresponding directives for the
Secretariat. Logistical, budget and staffing issues should
be discussed in the Fifth Committee. We see clear added
value in drawing upon the capability of the experts of the
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations. Effective
discussions within such bodies are important to ensure
that the Council takes informed decisions in developing
individual mandates for peacekeeping missions, taking
the views of TCCs and the situation on the ground into
account. We are convinced that cooperation between
the General Assembly and the Security Council will
strengthen the strategic partnership in peacekeeping of
the United Nations, which has a key advantage as the sole
universal and legitimate body.
I now resume my function as President of the Council.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate the texts in writing and to deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.
I wish to inform all concerned that we will continue
this open debate through the lunch hour, as we have a
large number of speakers.
I now give the floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Mukerji (India): We take it as a sign of the
awareness that all is not well in the world of United
Nations peacekeeping when the Russian Federation,
which is a permanent member of the Security Council
and its current President, decides, in our view with
good reason, to hold this open debate on new trends
in United Nations peacekeeping operations. The
debate could not have come at a more opportune time
for reasons that we will enumerate today, especially
when many of the 106 United Nations peacekeepers
who lost their lives in 2013, including those from
India, died amid uncertainties faced by United Nations
14-42664

11/06/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

peacekeeping operations, including while using force
to protect civilians.
At the outset, we express the hope that other
permanent members of the Security Council will
continue to organize such open debates on United
Nations peacekeeping during their presidencies of the
Council so that Member States that contribute troops
to United Nations peacekeeping operations, such
as India, can see a glimmer of hope for the eventual
implementation of Article 44 of the Charter of the
United Nations. As you are aware, Mr. President,
Article 44 clearly calls on the Security Council to invite
Member States not represented on the Council
“to participate in the decisions of the Security
Council concerning the employment of contingents
of that Member’s armed forces”.
However, that hardly ever happens in practice. The
Council’s views and expectations of troop-contributing
countries (TCCs) that have been expressed this morning
would call for holding such meetings with TCCs in the
Chamber under Article 44.
We thank the Russian Federation for the concept
note circulated to assist our debate today (S/2014/384,
annex). We will focus on a few points in the concept
note on the basis of our experience as a major United
Nations troop-contributing country, having sent more
than 170,000 Indian troops to 43 of the 68 peacekeeping
operations mandated so far.
First, the concept note underscores the impact on
United Nations peacekeeping operations of the increase
in the number of crises that are armed conflicts of a
non-international character, also referred to as internal
or intra-State conflicts. In our view, that is an important
issue. By mandating United Nations peacekeeping
operations to deal with such internal conflicts, the
Council is effectively impinging on the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, in which the principles
for peacekeeping operations are firmly rooted. As my
colleague from China mentioned this morning, those
principles include the consent of the parties to the
operations, impartiality and the non-use of force except
in self-defence.
Our apprehension is exacerbated by the emerging
proclivity of the Council subsequently to mix the
traditional original mandate of United Nations
peacekeeping operations with a new interventionist
mandate for a small portion of the troops in the same
peacekeeping operation. We have already experienced

S/PV.7196

that with regard to the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) under resolution
2098 (2013) of March 2013. The Council is well aware
that India contributes more than 4,000 troops to
MONUSCO.
In our view, such a mixing of mandates directly
affects the operational effectiveness of the peacekeeping
operation, exposing traditional peacekeepers to
unnecessary threats from armed internal conflicts not
instigated by the United Nations itself. Furthermore,
by being asked to be party to an internal armed
conflict, all United Nations peacekeepers, not only
those of the interventionist peace enforcement brigade,
become liable to be treated as enemy combatants under
international law and, as such, effectively forgo both
their impartiality and their immunity from prosecution.
Most significant, by resorting to the use of United
Nations peacekeepers to tackle what are essentially
internal political conflicts, we feel that the Council is
effectively endorsing a short-sighted and unsustainable
approach to the maintenance of international peace
and security. That approach will lead to unprovoked
and unnecessary casualties among United Nations
peacekeepers and will ultimately erode the credibility
and effectiveness of the Council itself.
The second important point highlighted by
the concept note is the presence of elevated risks
to United Nations peacekeeping oerations from
non-governmental armed groups. We completely
agree with that point. Earlier this year, in the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping we substantiated with
facts and figures our views on such a threat, as faced
by us in the peacekeeping operations of MONUSCO,
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan and the
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force, where
our troops are deployed. It is a matter of concern that
the Security Council has failed to take any effective
action to address such risks.
Thirdly, the concept note points to the increasing
trend of United Nations peacekeeping operations having
to operate alongside other foreign military forces in
the same theatre but with separate mandates that may
differ from those approved by the Security Council. We
assume that that point relates to the so-called hybrid
United Nations peacekeeping operations, which have
emerged out of the attempt to synergize the provisions
of Chapter VIII and Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations.

14-4266427/64

S/PV.7196

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

In that context, we would note that, before acting
under the provisions of Article 53, paragraph 1, of
the Charter to mandate peacekeeping operations, the
Security Council is required by the Charter to satisfy
itself that all attempts at the pacific settlement of
disputes set out in Article 52 have been exhausted by
the Member States belonging to regional arrangements
or regional agencies.
A fourth point made in the concept note relates
to the resource implications for the new mandates
of United Nations peacekeeping operations and the
emergence of multidimensional mandates. That is
a very important issue. On the one hand, the new
mandates of United Nations peacekeeping operations
are ambitiously drafted, running to many pages, as
good governance templates. On the other hand, the
very same penholders that are drafting those new
mandates cavil at having to pay more money for the
peacekeepers tasked to implement such mandates. The
irony is that some members of the Council appear to
expect to continue to pay 1992 prices for the services
of peacekeepers required to serve in more complex
multilayered mandates in the year 2014. That is
tantamount to turning economic theory, not to mention
morality, on its head.
The concept note ends with the tantalizing
suggestion that there could be an outcome document
as a result of this open debate. We strongly support
that idea so that the valuable contributions made by all
Member States in the Council today will be known and
acted upon. My delegation is ready to contribute in any
manner deemed fit to the creation of such a document.
With that objective in mind, we offer the following
specific proposals for the Council to consider including
in such an outcome document.
First, we call on the Council to reconsider the use of
intervention mandates for United Nations peacekeeping
operations until all Member States that are contributing
troops have been given the opportunity, under Article
44 of the Charter, to participate in the Council’s
decisions on such operations in the Chamber.
Secondly, we call on the Council to ensure the
mandatory inclusion in all mandates for United
Nations peacekeeping operations of legally binding
provisions for prosecuting, penalizing and neutralizing
any non-governmental armed groups and armed
militias causing or threatening to cause harm to those
operations.

28/64

11/06/2014

Thirdly, we call on the Council to conduct a
transparent and rigorous assessment in an open debate
of whether or not the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations favouring the pacific settlement of
disputes have been fully and sincerely complied with
by the regional arrangements or regional agencies
before the Council acts under Article 53, paragraph 1,
to mandate United Nations peacekeeping operations,
using the powers under Article 42 of the Charter. In
our view, that must be an essential prerequisite for
the deployment of United Nations peacekeepers in the
so-called hybrid peacekeeping operations.
Fourthly, we call on the Council to take the initiative
to unanimously agree to increase the reimbursements
to United Nations peacekeepers on the basis of the
rates proposed in the survey commissioned under
the mandate of the General Assembly. That will send
a strong signal from the Council to the international
community that it is fully prepared to pay for the new
mandates of United Nations peacekeeping operations
that it has approved.
Fifthly, we call on the Council to engage with
troop-contributing countries under Article 44 of the
Charter when drafting new multidimensional mandates
of United Nations peacekeeping operations. We believe
that we can play a role in assisting the Council, under
the provisions of Article 44, in determining the kind and
number of troops required for the proposed mandate, the
nature of equipment required and the costs of operating
in the specific terrain of the theatre of operations.
Finally, we call on the Council to consider the role of
other United Nations entities, such as the Peacebuilding
Commission, the United Nations Development Fund,
UN-Women, the World Health Organization and the
Food and Agriculture Organization, which can play
an implementing role in the civilian components of
the multidimensional mandates being approved for
United Nations peacekeeping operations. On that basis,
different components of those mandates should be
clearly earmarked to the appropriate United Nations
entity.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): Mr. President, I would
like to begin by expressing my appreciation for the
initiative and leadership you have shown in convening
today’s open debate on the important issue of United
Nations peacekeeping operations. I will be very brief.

14-42664

11/06/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

From their inception, United Nations peacekeeping
operations have been evolving. Contemporary
peacekeeping has become multidimensional, with
broader roles and responsibilities. Fifteen years after
the Brahimi report (S/2000/809), resolution 2086 (2013)
renewed our consideration of trends in peacekeeping.
Recent peacekeeping also has delivered several
innovations including the Force Intervention Brigade,
unmanned unarmed aerial vehicles and inter-mission
cooperation, inter alia. The most important fact is that
peacekeeping continues to be a flagship initiative of
the United Nations for international peace and security.
We should maintain and improve that important tool.
In that regard, a key question is how to make United
Nations peacekeeping operations sustainable in both
financial and human resources terms.
Let me first touch upon the financial challenge.
The United Nations peacekeeping budget for 20142015 will probably greatly exceed its historical high
of $8 billion. While we fully recognize the important
role of peacekeeping operations in the maintenance of
international peace and security, the fiscal environment
of Member States, including Japan, does not allow
unlimited resources for peacekeeping. Very strong
efficiency measures are called for.
Right-sizing is a promising approach to meeting
such financial challenges. When an idea to establish
a new mission emerges, full consideration should be
given to whether it is cost-effective or not. The mission’s
mandate has to be elaborated based on the reality on
the ground and should be responsive to the changing
situation in the field. To that end, the Secretary-General
should keep a close eye on developments on the ground
and make timely and realistic recommendations to the
Security Council. The Security Council should review
the mandate of each mission in a timely manner and
ensure the effectiveness of the mission’s activities.
Automatic renewal of mission mandates should be
avoided and mandates of prolonged missions should be
thoroughly reviewed.
Let me move on to the challenge posed by limited
human resources. It is clear that a large number of
qualified peacekeepers is essential for peacekeeping
activities. However, we very often struggle to find
all the personnel we need. Due to today’s surge in the
demand for peacekeeping missions, human resources
are overstretched. It is a pressing task to increase the
number of qualified peacekeepers and create a strong

S/PV.7196

pool of them. In that regard, I would like to highlight
two points.
First, broadening troop contributors is a way
to cope with the challenge. It is true that current
peacekeeping missions depend on a limited number of
troop-contributing countries. In order to overcome such
limitations, we should continue to assist prospective
troop-contributing countries.
Secondly, we need more training, which is a
very effective way to create qualified peacekeepers.
Upholding standards of discipline for peacekeepers,
including preventing sexual exploitation and abuse, is
essential to ensuring a mission’s credibility. In addition,
peacekeepers are now required to be competent in
complex tasks. Therefore, we should provide fullspectrum training to create qualified peacekeepers.
Japan has participated in peacekeeping operations
for more than 20 years. We have dispatched more
than 10,000 personnel to 12 peacekeeping operation
missions. I will skip the details now because of time
limitations; they can be found in the written text
that I will circulate in the Chamber. However, let
me emphasize that Japan wishes to contribute to
peacekeeping operations by broadening its involvement
under the banner of “Proactive Contribution to Peace”.
In closing, I would like to express my heartfelt
appreciation to all peacekeepers. I also express
our deepest condolences to the survivors of those
peacekeepers who made the ultimate sacrifice in the
line of duty.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the observer of the European Union.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (European Union) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to congratulate you personally,
Mr. President, as well as the Russian Federation, on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council this
month.
(spoke in English)
I would also like to thank our Korean friends and
colleagues for their presidency last month.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union (EU) and its member States. The candidate
countries Turkey, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia; the countries of
the Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina; as

14-4266429/64

S/PV.7196

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

11/06/2014

well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia,
align themselves with this statement.

and on making sure that those capabilities can perform
in an optimal way.

In the interests of time, I will give a shortened
version of the written text that was prepared for today’s
meeting; the full version of that text will be circulated
in the Chamber.

The European Union and its member States support
those modernization efforts. Specifically, we commend
the Secretariat’s efforts towards the wider use of
modern technologies in peacekeeping operations.
We have learned that the use of such technology in
MONUSCO has already supported a better delivery
of its protection mandate and increased the situational
awareness of troops on the ground. We encourage the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations to further
explore opportunities to use modern technology in
peacekeeping missions.

Let me begin by saying that we are grateful for the
work done by the Secretariat to innovate and strengthen
the capabilities of United Nations peacekeeping
operations. Peacekeeping remains the flagship activity
of the United Nations and a crucial tool paving the
way for longer-term stability and development of
countries emerging from a crisis. The important work
of all actors in partnership with the United Nations is
a tremendous effort that may not always be given due
recognition. A few days ago, on 29 May, we celebrated
International Day of United Nations Peacekeepers. We
would like to once again pay tribute to and express our
deep appreciation and respect for those who have lost
their lives in the service of the United Nations.
We share the view that the peacekeeping agenda
requires regular exchanges among all stakeholders,
from troop- and police-contributing countries, the
Secretariat, the Security Council, to the broader
membership of the General Assembly. In that regard,
we underline the relevance of resolution 1353 (2001).
Important discussions have also taken place earlier in
the year in the context of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations.
The direct involvement of peacekeepers is
required in increasingly volatile situations, and they
are facing higher risks than ever before. Ensuring that
peacekeepers are well trained and equipped with the
most up to date tools is of essence if mandates are to
be delivered with due regard to the safety and security
of men and women on the ground. We should ensure
that troops benefit from the certified training they need
before their deployment to the field.
A more robust mandate and the use of new
capabilities, such as the Force Intervention Brigade in
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
have demonstrated that peace enforcement where
necessary and under defined conditions can support the
success and legitimacy of a United Nations operation.
At the same time, we also need to focus on using
existing capabilities in the most effective way possible

30/64

Secondly, we strongly believe in the central
importance of the protection of all civilians, particularly
women and children, in armed conflict. That is often
decisive for the success and legitimacy of a United
Nations peacekeeping operation.
We also encourage ongoing efforts to fully
implement the resolutions on women and peace and
security, including in engaging women in conflict
prevention, peacemaking and peacebuilding processes,
and its resolutions on children and armed conflict.
Integrating a gender and child protection perspective
in the training of military, police and civilian staff
in peacekeeping operations is equally important. We
welcome the United Nations resolve in preventing and
combating sexual exploitation and abuse and emphasize
the key role senior mission leadership plays in ensuring
accountability.
The presidential statement (S/PRST/2014/3) adopted
on the occasion of the debate on the protection of
civilians (see S/PV.7109) earlier in the year gives further
guidance for the consideration of issues pertaining
to the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
Nonetheless, more needs to be done in order to translate
the normative process into concrete improvements on
the ground.
Peacekeeping missions play an important role
in peacebuilding and the continued work on the
peacekeeping/peacebuilding nexus remains important.
We recognize the close links between peace, security,
development and gender equality. In that context, we
welcome the work on the United Nations policy on
transitions, which demonstrates the close links between
those different activities, with the aim of producing a
positive outcome to post-crisis situations.

14-42664

11/06/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

We appreciate the increased attention given to
the role of regional organizations in peacekeeping.
In that context, the European Union obviously also
welcomed the adoption by the Council of the first-ever
presidential statement in which it encouraged both
organizations — the United Nations and the European
Union — to further strengthen their institutional
relations and strategic partnership (S/PRST/2014/4).
High Representative Ashton has briefed the Council
on numerous occasions, and Under-Secretary-General
Ladsous regularly attends informal EU Defence
Ministers’ meetings.
On the ground, there are also many concrete
examples that show the close partnership the European
Union has with the United Nations. For instance, the
European Union military mission to contribute to
the training of the Malian Armed Forces is working
alongside the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali to deliver
on our shared aims. The European Union has also
developed a strong partnership with the African Union
in Somalia, through the African Union Mission in
Somalia. The European Union has played and continues
to play an important role in the cases of Mali and the
Central African Republic by financially supporting
African-led missions that precede and pave the way
for United Nations peacekeeping operations. Last but
not least, the European Union and its member States
deploy many efforts to support African countries in
developing their own military capabilities with a view
to helping them contribute to the United Nations peace
and security agenda.
The EU and its member States make an important
contribution to the guidance of United Nations
peacekeeping and have a great interest in making United
Nations peacekeeping more efficient. We therefore look
forward to constructive exchanges with all partners on
issues raised in all the appropriate forums.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sweden.
Mr. Grunditz (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Nordic countries Denmark, Finland,
Iceland, Norway and my own country, Sweden.
We thank the Secretary-General for his important
statement and welcome this opportunity to discuss
new trends and challenges to peacekeeping. Forwardleaning action at the political, strategic and operational
levels will be needed to make modern United Nations
peacekeeping fit for purpose. Peacekeeping activities

S/PV.7196

should be designed not only to keep the peace, but also
to facilitate post-conflict peacebuilding, help prevent
relapses into conflict and assist in progress towards
sustainable peace and development.
At the outset, allow me to pay tribute to all troopand police-contributing countries that, through their
commitment to international peace and security, readily
put their personnel in harm’s way, often in hostile
environments in countries suffering from conflict. In
so doing, they form the backbone of United Nations
peacekeeping, and we should all be grateful for their
commitment and sacrifice.
I would like to acknowledge the important progress
made by African States within the framework of the
African Peace and Security Architecture. The Nordic
countries stand ready to continue to support a further
enhanced African ability to deal with peace and security
challenges on African soil.
The Nordic countries have a long-standing tradition
of participating and cooperating in United Nations
peacekeeping. That engagement continues and is being
strengthened. Several Nordic countries are participating
in the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). Sweden
will soon make a substantial contribution consisting of
an intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance unit,
which will support the All Sources Information Fusion
Unit of MINUSMA.
The conditions facing peacekeeping today pose
new challenges to the security of peacekeepers and the
protection of civilians, which is one of the key tasks
of United Nations peacekeeping missions. We believe
that new technology, in addition to providing enhanced
force protection, will strengthen the ability to protect
civilians. It also has the potential of improving the
operational effect — and thus efficiency — of missions
in carrying out their mandates. We look forward
to contributing to the development of a conceptual
approach for the use of information and analysis units
and unarmed unmanned aerial vehicles within United
Nations missions.
New operational methods and technologies also
require new working methods. At the operational level,
it is essential that appropriate systems be developed
for a relevant level of information security and the use
of secure communications. At the strategic level, the
increased use of new technologies needs to be reflected
in United Nations policy and regulatory documents.

14-4266431/64

S/PV.7196

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

That is vital, not only for the sake of efficiency, but also
for the legitimacy of United Nations peacekeeping.
The further development of the use of inter-mission
cooperation, including through the use of military
reserve forces, could be another way to enhance the
efficiency of peacekeeping operations. Mobile reaction
forces within missions or in regional arrangements
involving more than one mission would offer a higher
degree of flexibility and sustainability for missions
than we see today.
A more complex reality for United Nations
peacekeeping also requires more efforts to provide
appropriate training to police and military personnel
operating in United Nations missions. Priority should
be given to developing standards within the rule
of law context, with an emphasis on the role of the
police in peacekeeping. Furthermore, the capacity
of peacekeepers to create an enabling environment
for peacebuilding activities in critical areas such as
security sector reform, rule of law and human rights
should be strengthened. In the context of training, we
continue to emphasize the importance of ensuring that
the provisions of resolution 1325 (2000) on women and
peace and security are reflected in all activities relating
to peacekeeping.
The Nordic countries also welcome the ongoing
trend of the systematic integration of human rights
components into peacekeeping operations. It is our
long-standing position that respect for human rights
is a central aspect of all peace operations. Preventing
impunity is a key element in creating sustainable
peace. While prevention is crucial in trying to avoid
conflict, lasting peace requires a sustainable presence
by the international community throughout the whole
conflict cycle. It is necessary to support peacebuilding
in order to prevent relapses into conflict. The transition
of responsibility from full-fledged peacekeeping
operations to political missions, United Nations country
teams, host country authorities and national actors
requires careful stewardship.
The cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations and
actors needs to be strengthened to reinforce such
efforts. We acknowledge resolution 2086 (2013) on
multidimensional peacekeeping, which highlights
the importance of coherence between peacemaking,
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and development. The
2015 review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture, which should be comprehensive in scope,
32/64

11/06/2014

may help us improve our ability to provide coordinated
support — a United Nations delivering as one — to
countries emerging from conflict by linking security
with development more closely and ensuring seamless
transitions between missions and United Nations
country teams.
Finally, United Nations peacekeeping missions
also need to minimize the environmental impact of
their presence, in order to not adversely affect local
communities and their livelihoods. We need to “green
the Blue”. The Nordic countries stand ready to engage
in a discussion on how to best address that issue in a
broader peacekeeping context.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Mr.
Khan
(Pakistan):
We
thank
you,
Ambassador Churkin, for convening this important
debate and for consulting with the troop-contributing
countries during its preparation. Thanks also for giving
us a substantive concept note (S/2014/384, annex) and
for your leadership on peacekeeping.
Peacekeeping is the mainstay of the United Nations
in its continuing effort to maintain international peace
and security. Contemporary conflicts have become
much more complex, chronic and lethal. It is our
collective responsibility to forge common ground as
peacekeeping policy and practice evolve. That requires
a genuine partnership between the Security Council,
the troop-contributing countries and the Secretariat.
Resolution 2086 (2013) of January 2013 took important
decisions to consolidate the work on multidimensional
peacekeeping.
Pakistan is one of the top troop-contributing
countries, having contributed over 150,000 personnel
to 41 United Nations peacekeeping operations,
including traditional and complex missions, since
1960. Our men and women have served with distinction
and professionalism in some of the most difficult and
demanding environments. We have been associated
with peacekeeping throughout its journey of evolution.
It is with that experience and record that we contribute
to this debate.
The concept of a robust mandate has been invoked
and applied in the recent past to deal with what
looked like an usually complex conflict situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The decision
to do so was taken with two caveats — it should not
constitute a precedent and it should be without prejudice
14-42664

11/06/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

to the basic principles of peacekeeping. We believe that
robust peacekeeping and peace enforcement should
not be conflated conceptually or operationally. The
United Nations peacekeeping missions have used
robust peacekeeping successfully in the past whenever
the need arose. In that sense, it is not a new trend.
Authorizations for such operations have conformed to
the basic principles of peacekeeping: impartiality, the
consent of the parties and the non-use of force except in
self-defence or in defence of the authorized mandates.
That must continue.
The United Nations keeps the peace. It does not
seek military solutions. That is why measures agreed
on an exceptional basis should not be replicated. United
Nations peacekeeping missions should not be caught up
in asymmetric warfare, become combatants, be seen as
partisan, become an arm of the national defence forces
or take actions that would be subject to condemnation
under international humanitarian law.
The use of new technology is a new trend. Missions
are using sensors, radars, global positioning systems,
night-vision devices and high-tech avionics to enhance
their operational effectiveness. Recently, an unarmed
unmanned aerial system was introduced in the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo on a trial basis
to provide early warning and improve situational
awareness, which will assist the Mission in protecting
and increasing the safety and security of peacekeepers.
That technology is now becoming a growth industry.
We believe that its deployment should not be industrydriven, but demand-driven. In deploying that
technology, we need to be selective and fully sensitive
to the concerns of the host country and neighbouring
States. The use of technology should be tailored to
specific environments and structures and be consistent
with the basic peacekeeping principles.
Inter-mission cooperation is an interim stopgap
arrangement in the regional context. Sudden and large
movements of troops from one theatre to another are
neither feasible nor desirable. The consent of the host
Government and the troop-contributing countries
is important in that context. There is also a need
to devise standard operating procedures, including
built-in provisions for the optimal utilization of the
International Medical Corps. It is now time to discard
the current thinking about reserves. We should go for
uncommitted, dedicated reserves in the mission area.
That will be a critical investment.

S/PV.7196

We should also continue to strengthen regional
cooperation, which brings complementarity to United
Nations peacekeeping efforts and enhances regional
ownership. We need a more holistic approach to
peacekeeping that integrates the political and security
aspects with national reconciliation, transitional
criminal justice, capacity-building and economic
and development enablers, which are critical for
peacebuilding and the prevention of relapse. Where
required, such multi-pronged efforts will need to
assume a broader regional dimension, such as in the
United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel and
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.
For effective implementation, mandates need to be
matched with adequate resources. Priority should be
given to the core function of peacekeeping, which is
the provision of a safe and secure environment. That is
why sufficient military and police capacities, meeting
United Nations standards, remain so crucial in mission
configurations and must not be compromised solely for
the purposes of cost-cutting.
Effective implementation of complex mandates
also entails close coordination and engagement with
troop- and police-contributing countries. Decisions on
the design and modification of mandates, as well as on
the renewal, transition and drawdown of missions, must
be made with prior and substantive consultations with
the troop-contributing countries.
While tackling new trends, we must also earnestly
address one of the long outstanding issues confronting
peacekeeping — the revision of troop costs.
Considerable investment has gone into that exercise,
including recently by the Senior Advisory Group on
rates of reimbursement to troop-contributing countries
and related issues, which has now recommended an
empirically established figure for cost reimbursement.
The stage is set to take the next logical step for the
upward revision of troop costs and a permanent
mechanism for its periodic review. An ad hoc, interim
or phased increase would not address the problem. It
is a question of political will, which we hope Member
States will be able to muster in the interest of peace and
peacekeeping.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): Let me first thank you, Sir, and
your delegation for convening this crucial meeting

14-4266433/64

S/PV.7196

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

today to discuss one of the key challenges that this
Organization is now facing. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General for his remarks at the beginning
of the meeting.
Italy aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union, but I would like to
add a few remarks in my national capacity.
The maintenance of international peace and security
is the core business of the United Nations. Peace is the
first and most valuable objective that an organization
of States should pursue. Nevertheless, the world has
changed since the end of the Second World War. First,
the contexts within which our peacekeeping operations
are conducted have radically changed. As underlined
in the concept note (S/2014/384, annex) submitted by
the Council presidency, and I quote, “the vast majority
of crises in which United Nations peacekeeping
operations are deployed or their mandates extended
are non-international armed conflicts, often referred
to as internal or intra-State conflicts”. Secondly,
United Nations peacekeeping efforts have now reached
numbers, in terms of troops as well as financial
resources engaged, that cannot be compared to what
they were, let’s say, only 10 years ago. And thirdly, but
no less importantly, conflicts today are no longer just a
matter of sending troops to the front line, but they call
for cutting-edge military and civilian capacities, such
as technology and skilled soldiers.
Italy is the first troop contributor in the
Western European and other States Group and the
seventh financial contributor to the United Nations
peacekeeping operations. An Italian general is leading
the operation of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon. Through that engagement in the field,
we, together with the rest of the membership, learn
lessons every day that help us make our commitment
to the service of peace more effective. Troops cannot
operate without proper equipment and skills in conflict
situations where most of the parties involved have
at least the basic technological tools. As the UnderSecretary-General for Field Support, Ms. Haq, said at
the opening meeting of the recent session of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations,
“providing for the safety and security of deployed
personnel in volatile environments is an absolute
necessity... Applying new technologies needs to
become a more standard feature of our modus
operandi”.

34/64

11/06/2014

That was in reference to the security of the United
Nations Blue Helmets. Nevertheless, we also noticed
with satisfaction that, this year, the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations agreed to mention such
technological tools in its report in the context of
military capacity, encouraging
“the Secretariat to support the agreed use of
modern technology consistent with the basic
principles of peacekeeping, to enhance, among
others, situational awareness and force protection”
(A/68/19, para. 80).
Italy agrees with the Special Committee and is
pleased that the main policy body on United Nations
peacekeeping tackled that issue successfully. My
delegation chose to engage proactively in co-facilitating
the negotiation process that led to that result.
Most of today’s peacekeeping operations have
a mandate to protect civilians. That is an important
development. As an example, since the eruption of the
South Sudan conflict at the end of last year, over 70,000
people have been rescued and hosted in peacekeeping
camps. That demonstrates humanitarian aid in action,
for which peacekeeping gains credibility and praise.
It is only normal that vulnerable civilians suffering
hardship would look to the Blue Helmets for protection
and refuge.
Owing to the reality of today’s conflicts, the
disparity between the expectations imposed on the
United Nations and its capacity to respond has grown
starker. In these times of budgetary hardship and
constraints, the only possible solution is to reduce that
disparity through innovation. As Under-SecretaryGeneral Ladsous said in his statement to the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations at the
opening meeting of this year’s session, “flexibility and
innovation at Headquarters and within our missions are
no longer an option, but an acute necessity”.
The United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
for example, also provides a relevant case study for
the topic. The need to provide for civilian protection
has brought about the creation of new tools, such as
the unarmed, unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) and
the Force Intervention Brigade. Both have delivered
so far and met the highest expectations, make their
contribution not only in the direct framework of the
peacekeeping operation, but also by saving civilian
lives, as was the case recently when a UAV spotted a

14-42664

11/06/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

sinking boat in a river, leading to a rescue operation
that saved human lives.
Italy understands and shares some of the concerns
of Member States — especially those from the
continent that sees the highest number of operations,
Africa — about the new trends in United Nations
peacekeeping, as highlighted in this meeting’s concept
paper. It is not by chance that Italy actively participates
in and promotes discussions and negotiations on
this sensitive matter in the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations and other venues. In the
recent panel we organized outside the United Nations,
information was presented on how missions could
benefit from satellite imaging to locate water, to dig
wells, as well as to determine appropriate sites for solar
and other renewable energy systems. We also learned
how information communications technology is crucial
to providing mission staff with up-to-the-minute data;
how biometric handheld devices can be used to gather
basic health and identifying information of refugees;
and how water generators can pull moisture from the
air to provide up to 4,000 litres of drinking water a day.
Here, I would also like to mention the project funded by
Italy and the United Nations Institute for Training and
Research that uses satellite images to verify compliance
with resolution 2139 (2014) concerning humanitarian
access in Syria.
In closing, we should never forget that, at the end
of the day, peacekeeping is a moral imperative. It is a
duty that rests on the shoulders of all Member States.
All of the aforementioned concerns — from the use
of data collected by recognition devices to the effects
of inter-mission cooperation, the level of budgetary
discipline, issues that must be discussed with troopcontributing countries and the training of peacekeepers,
which must be enhanced — are more than legitimate.
Nevertheless, we feel that, if the new trends in
peacekeeping can help, as they have shown that they
can, to do a better job in the service of peace, we
should continue to explore state-of-the-art solutions to
meet those concerns. United Nations peacekeeping has
entered the twenty-first century. Let us work together
with that objective in mind.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to begin by congratulating the Russian
Federation on organizing this open debate and by

S/PV.7196

thanking you, Mr. President, for the concept note prepared
on this important topic (S/2014/384, annex). We also
thank the Secretary-General for his observations. As a
former member of the Council and a troop-contributing
country, we consider it essential to hold a discussion on
the recent trends in peacekeeping operations under the
United Nations flag.
My delegation offers the following observations.
First, in general we support complex multidimensional
mandates, including those contemplating a wide range
of tasks designed to stabilize countries in conflict.
However, the increase in the number of tasks that
lack clear prioritization could potentially fragment or
overburden the work of troops on the ground, thereby
limiting and even diverting their attention from the main
goal of their presence. Therefore, we have insisted that
all peacekeeping operations have clear, achievable and
verifiable mandates adapted to each specific situation.
Secondly, we remain seriously apprehensive about
the implications and scope of the so-called robust
peacekeeping operations, as noted in our explanation
of vote when the Council considered resolution 2098
(2013) on the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in March 2013 (see S/PV.6943). The deployment of
peace-enforcement forces raises various questions, in
particular, how to reconcile their functions with the
basic principles of peacekeeping.
Thirdly, although we recognize the added value
of the use of modern technologies, such as unmanned
aerial vehicles, as part of the efforts to protect civilians
in peacekeeping operations, we also recognize the
risks involved, especially in the application of the basic
norms of international humanitarian law in the context
of maintaining the distinction between combatants and
non-combatants, and the distinction between using those
technologies for the maintenance of peace in contrast
to peace enforcement. It is therefore essential that the
use of modern technologies adhere to the principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.
Fourthly, regarding inter-mission cooperation,
while we recognize its relevance, we also believe
that it is necessary to consider issues of timing, the
requirements that must be met, the impact on the
missions affected and their effective implementation.
In that context, we believe that the Council should be
careful, when using that tool, to respect the mandates
of each of the missions, as well as the memorandums of

14-4266435/64

S/PV.7196

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

understanding that troop-contributing countries signed
previously with the United Nations in relation to each
operation.
Finally, my delegation considers it necessary to
carry out a cost-benefit analysis of the implementation
of each one of those issues. The analysis should devote
particular attention to the lessons learned, as well as to
the legal, operational and financial policy implications
imposed on troop-contributing countries.
In conclusion, I reiterate the central role of United
Nations peacekeeping operations for the maintenance
of international peace and security, as well as the
importance that we attach to strengthening their
operational capacity and organizational structure.
We stress the importance of maintaining the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations as the only
forum for discussing the Secretariat’s policies on
matters relating to peacekeeping operations. We call
for improved coordination and consultation among
the Security Council, the Secretariat and the troopcontributing countries in the decision-making process,
and we affirm that we will continue to provide
personnel meeting the highest standards of efficiency,
competence, discipline and integrity for peacekeeping
operations.
The President (spoke in Russian): Before giving the
floor to the next speaker, I would like to draw attention
to the fact that no one has come close to speaking under
the time limit that we have asked speakers, other than
members of the Security Council, to respect. I request
speakers to do their best to limit the length of the text
being read out in our meeting today.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Thailand.
Mr. Sinhaseni (Thailand): Mr. President, let
me begin by expressing my delegation’s sincere
appreciation to the Russian delegation for its presidency
of the Council this month and to you, Ambassador
Churkin, for organizing this open debate and the welldrafted concept note (S/2014/384, annex). I also thank
the Secretary-General for his substantive briefing on
the issue.
Thailand has always attached great importance
to United Nations peacekeeping as one of the most
effective tools in assisting conflict-ridden countries
to return to the path of peace and security. We have
participated in over 20 United Nations peacekeeping
operations. United Nations peacekeeping operations
36/64

11/06/2014

have evolved over the years. It is therefore most timely
and appropriate that the Council take stock of the
emerging trends, assess their implications and prepare
itself to meet the challenges ahead. As we learned from
the Secretary-General’s briefing and from the concept
note, a number of discernible trends in modernday peacekeeping operations can be identified. My
delegation wishes to highlight two points.
First, the success of United Nations peacekeeping
operations is anchored in the basic principles of United
Nations peacekeeping, namely, the consent of the
parties, impartiality and the non-use of force except in
self-defence and in defence of the mandate. However,
recent developments towards more robust and proactive
peacekeeping may not be strictly consistent with such
principles.
The majority of current United Nations peacekeeping
missions operate in a situation of protracted intra-State
conflict. In that context, what does “consent of the
parties to the conflict” entail? There is the consent of
the host country. However, it is not the practice of the
United Nations to seek the consent of non-State actors,
since engagement with non-State actors has political
implications and must proceed with caution. That
means, therefore, that peacekeepers are often deployed
in politically sensitive environments or in the absence
of a commitment to a political solution on the part of all
of the key parties to the conflict.
Regarding the principle of impartiality, a case
in point is resolution 2098 (2013), which created
the Force Intervention Brigade and authorized it to
neutralize armed groups in support of the authorities
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. That raises
the question of impartiality. Do United Nations
peacekeepers become a party to the conflict on the
side of the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo? An affirmative answer to that question has
serious legal implications for the protected status of the
peacekeepers as well as for their safety and security.
Let me now turn to the protection-of-civilians
mandate in relation to the principle of the non-use of
force. While there is no argument regarding the need
to safeguard civilian lives, to do so effectively may
require peacekeepers to use force against those who
pose threats to civilians. It is indeed legitimate to use
force in defence of the mission’s mandate. However,
when a mandate clearly necessitates the use of force,
such as the authorization given to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
14-42664

11/06/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

in Mali to use “all necessary means” to deter threats
and to take active steps to prevent the return of armed
elements to key population centres, that creates a strain
on the principle of the non-use of force.
Secondly, it is not possible to achieve durable peace
if women are not included or are left on the margins.
We observe that, since the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), there have been greater efforts to mainstream a
gender perspective and increase women’s contribution
to United Nations peacekeeping. Women, peace and
security is now a mandate component of 12 United
Nations peacekeeping operations, including the newly
created United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic.
Thailand warmly welcomes the recent appointment by
the Secretary-General of the first female peacekeeping
force commander, Major General Kristin Lund of
Norway, as the Force Commander of the United Nations
Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus.
Despite the progress made, the proportion of female
peacekeepers remains very low. Women represent
approximately 10 per cent of the United Nations police
personnel and less than 3 per cent of the total United
Nations military personnel. We therefore still have a
long way to go before the full potential of women’s
contribution to peace and security is realized. We
are of the view that the gender-mainstreaming effort
must continue to be prioritized in United Nations
peacekeeping. It may be necessary to revisit the issue,
in particular by working on how to translate the vision
of women, peace and security into reality on the ground.
United Nations peacekeeping is now a collective
enterprise with multidimensional aspects, each of which
merits careful consideration. I have touched upon two
emerging trends and their implications. To meet the
challenges ahead, we wish to reiterate that important
policy discussions and decisions pertaining to United
Nations peacekeeping should be conducted and taken
in a consensual manner. The Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations — whose members includes
troop-contributing
countries,
police-contributing
countries, host countries, Council members and other
interested countries — is the appropriate forum for
such an exercise. In addition, effective and regular
consultations among the Council, the Secretariat and
troop-contributing countries should be held regularly,
and such discussions should form the basis for decisions
authorizing United Nations peacekeeping missions and
their mandates.

S/PV.7196

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belarus.
Mr. Ambrazevich (Belarus) (spoke in Russian):
I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on Russia’s
accession to the presidency of the Security Council
this month and on tomorrow’s national holiday in the
Russian Federation.
This is an appropriate time to hold an open debate
in the Security Council on such an urgent concern as
United Nations peacekeeping operations. Allow me
to express our conviction that all nations should take
the lead in reduc ing the need for such operations.
Since it was founded, the international community has
worked to improve the shape and operating methods of
the United Nations, so that the Organization can be in
a position to best respond in a timely manner to the
challenges and threats facing humankind.
Within the whole range of United Nations activities,
we note the particular importance of United Nations
peacekeeping operations. United Nations peacekeeping
operations today remain one of the key stabilizing
factors in areas of tension, and it is clear that the
nature of conflicts today has changed significantly. On
many occasions, non-State armed groups and terrorist
organizations have used cutting-edge technology to
achieve their criminal goals, and conflicts have been
assuming a cross-border nature.
New challenges and threats require the United
Nations to be flexible and respond appropriately,
including in accordance with the appropriate mandates
for conducting operations and in terms of training
and equipping peacekeepers with up-to-date materiel,
resources, weaponry and technology. In that regard,
we note the work being undertaken within the United
Nations to adapt the format of peacekeeping operations
to new realities, including through further cooperation
with regional organizations and the use of specialized
divisions and new technology. We are convinced,
however, that United Nations peacekeeping operations
must be conducted with strict respect for their mandates.
Above all, that requires respect for such principles as
sovereignty and non-interference in the internal affairs
of the host State.
Belarus has pursued a consistently responsible
policy with respect to the maintenance of peace and
security. A clear instance of that arose in 1993, when
Belarus became the first country of the former Soviet
Union to relinquish position of nuclear weapons.

14-4266437/64

S/PV.7196

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

In recognition of the importance of participation in
United Nations peacekeeping operations, Belarus is
contributing thereto to the best of its ability. It has
deployed representatives in the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon.
The issue of sending its troops overseas is of great
sensitivity to Belarus. We lost approximately one-third
of our population in the Second World War, and incurred
further significant losses in the Soviet operation
in Afghanistan. Drawing lessons from history, the
potential broadening of Belarusian participation in
United Nations peacekeeping will therefore require the
full support and understanding of public opinion in our
country. We are carefully studying at the State level
the possible expansion of our participation in United
Nations peacekeeping operations.
The President (spoke in Russian): I give the floor
to the representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan) (spoke in
Russian): I thank you, Sir, for convening this important
meeting to assess the conduct of United Nations
peacekeeping operations. We believe that it is most
timely to consider this cornerstone of the maintenance
of international peace and security in the context of
constantly evolving and changing trends.
(spoke in English)
Peacekeeping operations are now compelled to
be much more multidimensional and multifunctional,
with an unprecedented number of tasks, which means
that mandates must be strong, clearly stated and agreed
upon by all participants, with phased, sequential
benchmarks for operations to become achievable.
Peacekeeping operations today are also multinational
and multicultural, with personnel from over 100
countries.
Thus, with the new trends, the coordination,
streamlining and high standards of training for hybrid
peacekeeping operations have become key factors of
success, which will have to be reviewed by the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, the United
Nations system as a whole, Member States and all other
partners. Likewise, field personnel will require greater
skill in liaising and cooperating with host nations
and internal and external parties, including regional
organiszations and non-governmental organizations,
which are often the first responders. High priority
should also be accorded to gender, humanitarian law
and strict codes of conduct.
38/64

11/06/2014

Peacekeepers today are deployed in most hostile
situations where there is no peace to keep, in the classical
sense. War zones always face a higher incidence of
accidents and illness, but the number of malicious
acts in these hybrid peacekeeping operations lead to a
higher increase in fatalities. Thus, a systematized plan
of greater security to reduce the higher risks is crucial.
The deployment of new technologies, such as
unmanned aerial vehicles — used solely for surveillance
purposes, situational awareness and saving the lives
of United Nations personnel and local populations
alike — have shown beneficial results. At the same
time, it would be helpful to have a special task force
and platform in the Security Council to discuss future
potential advances and modernization, deployment and
the ethical dilemmas involved.
Peacekeepers come in many guises and with
varying areas of expertise, from military personnel
to economists, legal experts, electoral observers,
human rights monitors, and specialists in civil affairs,
governance and communications, to mention but a few.
Once again, thorough training and the development
of on-call lists of qualified personnel to fill numerous
positions rapidly in operations worldwide will, we
hope, meet that challenge.
The annual costs of United Nations peacekeeping
today exceed all other areas of United Nations activity
combined, which necessitates improved logistics and
administrative practices, the strengthening of human
capacity and infrastructure to make peacekeeping
operations cost-effective, and valuable investment
in saving lives. Member States are therefore urged to
contribute more, with all actors helping one another by
building partnerships.
My country, Kazakhstan, stands ready to help
United Nations peacekeeping operations to be effective
and efficient in fulfilling their tasks. We commend the
selfless service of all peacekeepers and honour those
who have lost their lives for the cause of peace.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Spain.
Mr. De Benito (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation would like first to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his briefing this morning on the current
situation and new trends in peacekeeping operations.
We also thank the Russian presidency for its initiative
in convening this debate and for the priority it has

14-42664

11/06/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

attached to this issue in the Council’s programme of
work.
Spain fully aligns itself with the statement made by
the observer of the European Union and wishes to offer
the following contribution in its national capacity.
Spain believes that peacekeeping operations are
a key component of the comprehensive strategy in
favour of international security, which has shown itself
capable of responding effectively and flexibly to the
challenges posed by the new typology of conflicts in
difficult and changing environments. We value the
multidimensional nature of peacekeeping operations as
a formula to establish sustainable peace, equipped with
clear and feasible mandates and adequate resources
allowing us to respond to security challenges and to the
needs of host countries and of the civilian population.
We highlight the role of regional and subregional
organizations in peacekeeping. We firmly support
all efforts aimed at continuing to strengthen this
collaboration in the conviction that it provides
effectiveness and coherence to the actions undertaken,
thereby avoiding duplication and taking advantage of
the complementary nature of their respective efforts.
At times, collaboration with regional organizations is
also crucial for strengthening the invaluable regional
ownership of the solution of conflicts.
We value very positively the high level of
cooperation between the United Nations and the
European Union, both with regards to institutional
dialogue and at the operational level. Cooperation on
the ground in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
along the border between Chad and the Central African
Republic, and more recently in Mali and the Central
African Republic provides a model to follow and to
deepen in the coming years.
International peace and security is not an abstract
concept; as reality reminds us every day, conflict
affects millions of men and women directly and with
immediacy, and it is to them we owe our efforts. We
therefore welcome the Security Council’s interest in
the fundamental issue of the protection of civilians,
as expressed in its debate in February (see S/PV.7109).
The inclusion of protection of civilians in peacekeeping
operations mandates is a fundamental step. In that
regard, we consider it vital that child protection also
be incorporated from the beginning into all United
Nations activities relating to the defence of international
peace and security through the inclusion of the issue in

S/PV.7196

mandates. I would like to reiterate once again Spain’s
full support for the Secretary-General’s Children, Not
Soldiers campaign.
We firmly support the efforts to implement fully the
resolutions relating to women and peace and security.
Spain commends the British initiative to hold the Global
Summit to End Sexual Violence in Conflict and is fully
confident that an international protocol for investigating
and documenting sexual violence in conflict will be a
valuable instrument for the appropriate protection of
victims and response from our contingents.
This year, Spain is celebrating the twenty-fifth
anniversary of its participation in peacekeeping
operations. My country has contributed to more than
50 missions and crisis management operations and has
deployed more than 137,000 troops in such complex
theatres as Lebanon, Afghanistan, the coast of Somalia,
Mali and the Central African Republic, exemplifying
Spain’s commitment to the primacy of international law
and to a more stable world.
I would like to express our sincere appreciation
to the other troop-contributing countries for the
commitment they have shown to peace and the United
Nations and for their valuable work in this area. Spain
believes in improving the channels of communication
between troop-contributing countries and the Security
Council, and in better links between those countries
and the work of the Council, in keeping with articles 43
and 44 of the Charter of the United Nations. Given the
continuing responsibilities we are dealing with, Spain
will work to that end.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): Thank you for convening
this very important meeting, Mr. President.
Ukraine aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union. I would also like
to make a few specific points in my national capacity.
I would like to take note of the briefing on military
helicopters in support of peacekeeping operations given
by the Secretariat in February, which my delegation
considered extremely important. We acknowledged the
progress we achieved last year, especially in increasing
the rate of utilization of combat helicopters to 70 per
cent. We are working with the Secretariat on reaching
our common goal, which is to close the current gap.
In that regard, we fully support the ideas of regularly

14-4266439/64

S/PV.7196

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

reviewing force requirements through mission
capability studies, improving letter-of-assist incentives
and continued synergies through inter-mission
cooperation.
Last year, at the Secretariat’s request, we doubled
our military aviation unit in the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Having recognized the added
value of inter-mission cooperation in terms of military
advantages, cost-effectiveness and promoting regional
approaches to regional issues, Ukraine has been a
pioneer of this innovative form of peacekeeping. In
particular, my country has been a major contributor for
a number of years to this kind of cooperation between
the United Nations Mission in Liberia and the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire.
The
latest
example
of
inter-mission
cooperation — aimed at filling critical gaps in the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan — has been a
good demonstration of the benefits and challenges of
such inter-mission deployment, which in general are
similar for both police and military components. We
believe that both the Secretariat and Member States
have drawn appropriate lessons from that example and
that appropriate measures have been undertaken for
improving future arrangements. At a time when threats
in regions of conflict are growing and United Nations
mission budgets are being downsized, we believe
that inter-mission cooperation, especially in military
aviation, can be one of the most effective instruments
for fast, appropriate responses by the United Nations to
new challenges at the lowest possible cost.
Turning to the issue of triangular cooperation,
a cornerstone of my delegation’s position remains
the need for closer, more transparent and effective
cooperation in peacekeeping between all stakeholders.
We can only welcome the fact that United Nations
peacekeeping continues to figure prominently on the
Security Council’s agenda, as both a general and a
country-specific issue. We have also taken positive note
of some fresh practical elements, but there is still much
room for improvement. In particular, we would like to
encourage the Council to make the practice and timing
of the adoption of peacekeeping mandates, including
the renewal of inter-mission support mechanisms,
more
friendly
for
troop-contributing-countries
(TCCs). Whenever feasible, taking relevant decisions
well in advance of target dates would give TCCs and
police-contributing countries enough breathing space

40/64

11/06/2014

to bring new or extended Security Council mandates in
line with their national legislation, thus facilitating the
timely deployment of their national units.
The growing contribution of and demand for
United Nations police assistance in post-conflict
environments is clear. The complexity of current and
anticipated future missions points to an immediate
need for enhanced strategic thinking and wider
political support for United Nations police activity. In
particular, my delegation notes positively the ongoing
development of a strategic guidance framework aimed
at promoting standardization within the United Nations
police and welcomes the preparation of the new vision
and multi-year strategy of the Police Division.
In line with the subject of today’s debate, we would
like to stress the need for a more systematic response
on the part of United Nations police to the evolving
threats to international peace and security represented
by transnational organized crime, terrorism and
integrated border management. The Police Division has
already taken critical steps forward with its West Africa
Coast Initiative, which provides basic and specialized
training, technical and operational support, but further
strengthening of the police components’ efforts in
this area is crucial. More intensive utilization of the
expertise of the standing police capacity in addressing
these challenges could be considered as an addition to
overall efforts in this area.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Philippines.
Mr. Cabactulan (Philippines): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this timely
and relevant meeting. I should also like to thank
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive and
detailed briefing, which provides a context for this
important discussion of new trends in United Nations
peacekeeping operations.
This open debate comes at a crucial juncture for
our Organization. Since 1948, when the United Nations
pioneered its peacekeeping operations, the world has
witnessed transformative events and massive changes
in the global geopolitical landscape. Traditional
threats continue, but of course there are now new and
developing ones, including non-State actors with real
capabilities for asymmetrical offences. The operational
area has likewise evolved considerably, presenting
a political milieu that is increasingly complex and
complicated. Given these and many other challenges,

14-42664

11/06/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

our United Nations peacekeeping operations continue
to face increasing constraints, particularly with regard
to resources.
These realities should not deter us from the great
task and duty of this Organization, which is to maintain
international peace and security. The Philippines has
ably demonstrated its commitment to contributing to
that task. What we have done so far is very modest,
but our determination is certainly much bigger. With
real and present danger to the safety and security of
Filipino peacekeepers, my Government has continued
to honour its international peacekeeping commitment
in a testament to the unwavering resolve of my nation
and people to hold the line of peace where it matters.
It is certainly incumbent on us all to act with
responsibility and to do our part to ensure the success
of peacekeeping missions. While the challenges
confronting those missions may change, several elements
must remain constant and must be enhanced — for
instance, the setting of clear and achievable mandates;
the provision of human resources and logistical support;
a commitment to the safety and security of peacekeepers;
the demonstration by stakeholders of the political will
necessary for respect for the mandates, commitments
and deals of peacekeeping missions and of all others
relating to peacekeepers’ freedom of movement; and
responsive and timely policy recommendations from
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations.
That said, we must be forward-looking and
strategically oriented to ensure that peacekeeping
missions remain steady and able to anticipate and to
respond to new and emerging challenges and identifiable
trends. The concept note (S/2014/384, annex) raises
interesting points for the Philippines, and we would
like to provide the following comments.
Our first remark is that the Philippines notes
the observation made that mandates for robust
peacekeeping operations point to the need to assess
their effectiveness and impact on the image of the
Organization. Likewise, it is important to seriously
consider the impact of such kinds of mandates on United
Nations personnel, including the humanitarian and
civilian staff working on the ground in peacekeeping
operations. The Philippines belongs to the top three
nations with international civilian staff in United
Nations peacekeeping and political missions.
The Philippines expresses its concern over the
observation that there may be a possible increase in

S/PV.7196

the casualty rate of troops as a result of their direct
participation in hostilities in situations where threats
arise from non-governmental armed groups. That
underscores the need to build the self-defence capability
of peacekeepers, consistent with the recommendations
contained in the report of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations (A/68/19). The Philippines
looks forward to the report of the Secretary-General on
the implementation of that report.
Secondly, the Philippines maintains that the use
of modern technology must uphold the principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations,
namely, respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Member States, and must comply with
the fundamental principles of peacekeeping. The use
of modern technology for the situational awareness of
peacekeeping missions is recognized. However, it must
be stressed that the control and confidentiality of the
information collected are issues that must be addressed.
On the need for peacekeeping missions to have
the necessary resources, the model of the temporary
transfer of personnel and equipment between missions
in case of gaps is duly noted. While its effectiveness has
been demonstrated in several cases, missions must be
provided with the wherewithal to address very serious
security challenges. In the same manner, it must also
be stressed that the practice of temporarily transferring
personnel and equipment within a mission in the event
of gaps must be minimized. Philippine peacekeepers
have had to deal with that scenario in the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force for an extended period.
Our third point is that it must also be stressed that
partnership and coordination among troop-contributing
countries (TCCs), police-contributing countries
(PCCs), the Council and the Secretariat, as well as
the relevant stakeholders, are vital to ensuring the
successful implementation of peacekeeping mandates.
However, while it is welcome and extremely useful that
such new ideas exist to bring us closer to what we truly
want to achieve in peacekeeping operations, there are
currently issues facing us that must be addressed and
for which durable and timely solutions must be found.
Otherwise, there is the danger that those new ideas will
come to nothing.
First, pandemics and diseases constitute emerging
threats. Additional studies to enhance the ability
of peacekeeping missions to address them would
be most welcome. Secondly, care must be taken to
ensure that missions, through effective standard

14-4266441/64

S/PV.7196

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

operating procedures, do not leave behind a footprint
that negatively affects the environment and the local
population. Thirdly, commitments and agreements
must lead to concrete provision. We now have the
results of the survey conducted pursuant to General
Assembly resolution 67/261 on the deficit between the
current United Nations reimbursement rate to TCCs
and PCCs and the high financial costs incurred by those
countries. A decision that increases the standard rate of
reimbursement to TCCs and PCCs must soon be adopted
to ensure the success of peacekeeping missions.
Finally, we would also like to express our alignment
with the statement on this topic to be delivered by the
representative of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Peru.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I commend your initiative, Mr. President,
to convene an open debate on developments in United
Nations peacekeeping operations. We also thank the
Secretary-General for his presentation.
A founding principle of the Organization’s
establishment was the maintenance of international
peace and security. Peacekeeping operations are
therefore are a crucial part of United Nations activities.
Aware of that, Peru has actively participated in such
operations since 1958, the year in which we deployed a
contingent to the United Nations Observation Group in
Lebanon. Since that date, my country has contributed
more than 6,700 uniformed personnel, three of whom
have made the ultimate sacrifice in the defence of
international peace and security.
The nature and characteristics of the conflicts that
the Organization has had to face in recent decades have
substantially changed. Likewise, in recent years we
have witnessed a necessary change in the scope of the
mandates of peacekeeping operations. Currently, such
operations are therefore multidimensional in nature,
since their mandates include various interrelated factors,
such as peace and security, development, post-conflict
capacity-building and State institution-building, among
other elements.
The establishment of operations with multidimensional
mandates implies a greater complexity not only on
the ground but also in terms of the planning and
implementation of those operations. Therefore, when

42/64

11/06/2014

establishing such operations, strict attention must be
paid not only to the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations but also to the guiding
principles of such operations, namely, the consent of
the parties, impartiality and the non-use of force except
in legitimate self-defence or in defence of the mandate.
In that regard, we reiterate that the perception of
the impartiality of peacekeeping missions is essential
to their legitimacy in the field, the safety of their staff
and their long-term effectiveness. In that connection,
while we recognize the achievements of the Force
Intervention Brigade of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in protecting civilians, my delegation believes
that, in accordance with resolution 2098 (2013), the
offensive activities of that Brigade should in no way be
a precedent to justify similar mandates in the future.
In that regard, the future scope of the activities of such
operations must be discussed in the competent body of
the Organization, namely, the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations of the General Assembly.
The increasing complexity of the mandates of
peacekeeping operations requires greater coordination
among the Security Council, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and troop-contributing
countries so as to ensure that their perspectives and
views with regard to the development, implementation
and renewal of mandates are properly heard, given
that their troops will be responsible for effectively
implementing the mandate on the ground. In that
context, uniformed personnel should have access to
better training and policy-awareness facilities and to
new technologies. Such operations must also enjoy
adequate financial resources. It is therefore essential
to review the scale of the cost of contingents, given
that there is currently a large gap between the real
cost of the troops in the field and the sums received
by States. That jeopardizes the proper functioning of
peacekeeping operations.
Peru believes that peace is not limited to the absence
of conflict. That is why we support peacekeeping
operations undertaking not only law enforcement
activities but also comprehensive actions that
contribute to building national structures and processes
to bring about a lasting and sustainable peace. It is
therefore essential to reaffirm the principle of national
ownership in the understanding that peacebuilding
should be an inherently national process, in which
peacekeeping operations are limited to supporting the

14-42664

11/06/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

national authorities in coordinating their peacebuilding
and development priorities.
Finally, my country would like to underscore the
important role of women in the prevention and resolution
of conflicts. That highlights the need to promote their
full participation in maintaining and promoting peace
and security. Peru has therefore been increasing the
participation of female staff, who currently account
for 8 per cent of our personnel deployed in eight
peacekeeping operations.
I wish to reiterate Peru’s steadfast commitment
to peacekeeping operations, which is reflected,
inter alia, in our ongoing participation in the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti for a decade.
We are ready to maintain that commitment until the
mission completes its task of Haiti’s stabilization and
reconstruction.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Uruguay.
Mr. Koncke (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, let me thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this open debate of the Security Council to address
the issue of peacekeeping operations, with a focus on
new trends. I would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his statement and his participation in this
very relevant discussion.
I would like to begin my statement by stressing
that the main objective of Uruguay’s participation in
peacekeeping operations is neither international prestige
nor improvement in the quality or training of its troops
and equipment, but the ethical and moral categorical
imperative and solidarity with our Latin American
colleagues and with countries in serious situations
of conflict and instability, as well as to contribute to
the fulfilment of the primary value reflected in the
United Nations Charter, namely, the maintenance of
international peace and security.
In that regard, I note that Uruguay, a country which
has battalions deployed in some of the more complex
scenarios, attaches greater importance to dialogue,
consultation and interaction with all those that directly
or indirectly influence the work of our Blue Helmets,
For that reason, when we talk about new trends in the
maintenance of peace, we must take into account the
importance of the participation of troop-contributing
countries (TCCs) in the formulation of policy and
in the decision-making process in order to achieve
a true partnership and strengthen the link between

S/PV.7196

policy formulation and its implementation in the field,
highlighting the need for real triangular cooperation
among the TCCs, the Secretariat and the Security
Council. Consultation with the TCCs is therefore
recommended in all cases, but especially in the cases of
robust mandates because of their scope and the possible
implications that I will now discuss.
It is well known that my country, one of the main
contributors of troops to the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, believes that it is outside the appropriate
conceptual framework to have established, through
resolution 2098 (2013), a Force Intervention Brigade
that exceeds the traditional definition of peacekeeping
operations. Accordingly, my Government believes that
peacekeeping operations should restrict their use of
force to cases of legitimate self-defence and defence
of the mandate. We are concerned about the impact of
the Brigade’s actions in relation to the protection of
civilians. It also shares the concern of other TCCs with
respect to the possible impact that the Brigade could
have on the safety of peacekeepers deployed and on the
principle of impartiality.
Beyond that issue of substance, my country would
also point out that, in that instance, there was no prior
consultation with the TCCs at the time that the new
peacekeeping capacity was being developed. Moreover,
the establishment of more robust mandates, such as
the aforementioned mandate and others, makes it all
the more relevant for troops to have more training,
more capacity and more material resources, including
financial resources, in order to guarantee effective
implementation of those mandates.
Despite recognition of the fact that one of the
greatest challenges facing Member States in the current
global financial climate is the scarcity of resources. It is
obvious that the standard reimbursement rates require
adjustments to reflect the rising costs for TCCs in
the light of the results of the recent survey that was
conducted and where my country was selected to
be one of the samples. As a result, after many years
of stalemate, it is crucial to take advantage of this
opportunity to create a better financial incentive
structure for the troop-contributing countries. In that
regard, Uruguay reaffirms the need for a dynamic,
open and constructive dialogue in order to reach a fair
and reasonable agreement in this area and in other
closely related areas of sustainability and efficiency in
peacekeeping operations.

14-4266443/64

S/PV.7196

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

Along the same line of reasoning, we think
it clear that while peacekeeping operations need
financial resources, they also need to guarantee that
the temporary assignment of human resources and
necessary equipment to one peacekeeping operation
does not take place to the detriment of another
peacekeeping operation. Therefore, while we share
the view that inter-mission cooperation might serve to
overcome certain specific, contingent circumstances,
inter-mission cooperation should be designed in such
a way as to have no negative impact on the safety of
the Blue Helmets, on their effectiveness and/or on
their ability to fulfil the mandate of one mission to the
benefit of another.
The Uruguayan Government notes with interest
the development of modern technology and how it can
enhance the effectiveness and safety of peacekeeping
operations. The use of new technologies such as
unmanned aerial vehicles can, on the one hand, provide
an effective resource for peacekeeper safety and with
regard to early warning, and be a very valuable source
of inside information. On the other hand, it also raises
the question of the lack of an agreed policy on their use
and on the issue of the various aspects related to the
management, use and confidentiality of information
obtained through that tool. Nevertheless, we trust that,
in a reinvigorated dialogue, Member States will be able
to reach an agreement that sets forth transparent and
clearly defined rules on the subject.
Uruguay sees the peacekeeping agenda from a
systemic perspective and favours the inclusion of a
sound component of early peacebuilding and mission
development. It also has extensive experience as a
troop-contributing country and thus has demonstrated
commitment to the system, out of the conviction that it
is the best bet for the defence of international peace and
security and for respect for the principles enshrined in
the United Nations Charter and international law. For
all of these reasons, I can assure the Council that we
will very closely follow the development of new trends
in peacekeeping and seek to contribute to the dialogue
with what we have learned from our long experience
on the ground, as well as with ongoing political
commitment from my Government to the peace and
security agenda.

11/06/2014

organizing today’s open debate on the important topic
of new trends in peacekeeping under the agenda item
entitled “United Nations Peacekeeping Operations”.
We also thank you, Mr. President, for the concept note
(S/2014/384, annex), which is extremely useful and raises
most of the pertinent issues in connection with new
trends in peacekeeping. The concern expressed and the
reference made in the concept paper to the fragmented
nature of the approach towards the new developments
that United Nations peacekeeping is called upon to
respond to, appear to us to be very valid and pertinent.
The fact that such concerns call for a serious look into
the whole concept of peacekeeping, including doctrine
and principles, is becoming undeniable. I also wish to
express my appreciation to the Secretary-General for
his statement earlier and to commend his leadership.
It is obvious that, at the intergovernmental level,
the task of formulating the concepts and strategies of
peacekeeping in the new period we seem to be in belongs
to the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations.
Undoubtedly, the Special Committee would have to be
up to the task, for the task is indeed very critical. The
contribution of the Secretary-General is also going to
be indispensable in that exercise.
In what follows, I want to highlight how urgent this
new thinking about peacekeeping is becoming. Failure
to adopt this new thinking might eventually discredit
the entire idea of United Nations peacekeeping
operations. That would be a tragedy indeed, as United
Nations peacekeeping continues to be a vital means
for promoting peace, security and stability. However,
the work of finding and developing universally agreed
concepts, doctrine and strategies for new practices in
peacekeeping must be speeded up.

The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ethiopia.

Current peacekeeping practices are displaying
certain anomalies that do not help to enhance the
credibility of United Nations peacekeeping. In some
instances, the deployment of Blue Helmets is considered
to inappropriate because, the argument goes, there is no
peace to keep. However, increasingly, as experiences
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Mali
have shown, developments on the ground have made it
imperative to use force beyond what is required for selfdefence. The experience in Côte d’Ivoire highlights the
same trend in a more graphic manner. Those are indeed
ad hoc arrangements that lack the underpinnings of
well thought-out and agreed principles and doctrine.

Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): Permit me to begin by
expressing appreciation to the Russian Federation for

That is why it is difficult, for now, to think of
abandoning the principles that have been the basis for

44/64

14-42664

11/06/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

classical peacekeeping. However, we cannot pretend
that there are no problems with respect to the way in
which those principles are interpreted and applied. That
also requires some serious thinking, if we are to rectify
the situation. Thailand has already mentioned some of
the points I would like to raise in that regard.
The principle of impartiality, no doubt, needs to be
upheld, but that must not lead to a search for middle
ground between a claim that is manifestly unjust and
unfair, on one hand, and one with demands that are
limited to the protection of universally recognized
rights. It is also possible that the principle of the consent
of the parties could be interpreted in such a way as to
cause it to lose meaning. There are groups that are so
far beyond the pale that asking for their consent might
be both unwise and impractical. We have indeed begun
to encounter more of such instances lately. We should
also not overlook the fact that there might be situations,
as the Secretary-General indicated earlier, in which
it is difficult to identify the parties. The idea of the
non-use of force except in self-defence might lead to
peacekeepers focusing more on their own safety, even
in the face of potential mass atrocities and civilians
facing mortal danger.
All of this requires serious debate, as do the new
trends in the use of high-tech equipment and advanced
technologies and the related political, ethical and other
issues that can legitimately be raised. But again, all
of that is also the result of changes on the ground and
the evolution of the challenges that United Nations
peacekeeping is called upon to address. It is impossible
to deny that there are changes taking place. That is the
beginning of wisdom and progress in this area.
The other point that this debate should take into
account is the increasing role of regional mechanisms
in the area of peacekeeping. In that regard, we wish
to emphasize the need for further strengthening of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations such as the African Union in the areas
of policy formulation, capacity-building and burden
sharing.
Unfortunately, Africa continues to host over
70 per cent of United Nations peacekeeping forces,
indicating the level of the peace and security deficit in
the continent. It would therefore be no exaggeration to
say that the success of peacekeeping efforts in Africa
will significantly determine the overall effectiveness of
that endeavour. To address this monumental challenge,
Africa, for its part, is building the African Peace and

S/PV.7196

Security Architecture, including the African Standby
Force. Here also, there is a need to flexible in the way
the collaboration is carried out.
We are of the view that supporting the African
Union and its institutional capacity to effectively plan,
deploy and manage peace support missions should be
considered a critical aspect of the overall objective of
the maintenance of international peace and security.
No doubt that will require greater partnership,
inclusiveness and purposeful leadership. We commend
the Secretariat and the African Union for the efforts
exerted thus far.
Finally, Ethiopia applauds the many achievements
of United Nations peacekeeping over more than 60
years and feels honoured to have been associated with
that noble endeavour since its inception. We honour the
sacrifices of the men and women who have served under
the blue United Nations flag — military, police, and
civilians — in the furtherance of peace. We remember
in particular and with deepest gratitude those who have
lost their lives in the service of world peace.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Malaysia.
Ms. Adnin (Malaysia): At the outset, I would like
to congratulate you, Mr. President, and the Russian
Federation on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for this month. I would like to
also express my delegation’s appreciation to you for
convening this important open debate and for the
well-written and thought-provoking concept note
(S/2014/384, annex) prepared for this event.
My delegation believes that this debate provides
an excellent opportunity to exchange views and raise
awareness on new developments affecting United
Nations peacekeepers in the field today. Indeed, our
discussion today is timely in the light of the recent
commemoration of the memorial International Day
of United Nations Peacekeepers on 29 May 2014. As
a regular contributor to United Nations peacekeeping
operations, Malaysia has committed a total of 932
personnel serving in 7 missions. Since 1960, Malaysia
has participated in 30 such missions, with a total
commitment of 29,000 personnel to date.
United Nations peacekeeping has seen an
exponential growth in both size and scope since
the 1990s. At present, the Council has authorized
16 peacekeeping operations across the globe, with
around 116,000 personnel from more than 120 countries,

14-4266445/64

S/PV.7196

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

who are often deployed at great personal risk. The sheer
number of peacekeeping missions and the number of
personnel deployed demonstrates the international
community’s continued reliance on the United Nations
as the central pillar for maintaining international
peace and security. As such, it may be concluded that
peacekeeping operations are a significant and critical
component of the international community’s efforts
in confronting crisis and bringing peace, stability and
reconciliation to war-torn countries around the world.
Over the years, the scope of activities undertaken
by United Nations peacekeepers has also evolved,
from traditional peacekeeping work to more robust
and multidimensional operations involving a broad
spectrum of activities. As the scope of peacekeeping
activities becomes more complex and multidimensional,
our blue helmets are confronted with new threats and
challenges. Among others, such challenges include
ambushes and attacks on peacekeeping convoys and the
hostage-taking of Blue Helmets in some conflict zones.
As a troop-contributing country, Malaysia is
concerned by such developments. In particular, we are
concerned by the seeming regularity of such incidents,
which appear to have become a new modus operandi for
certain armed groups in several conflict zones. Against
such disturbing developments, my delegation notes
the Security Council’s decision to deploy the Force
Intervention Brigade in the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. In our view, that deployment could represent
one possible solution to the dilemma increasingly face
by United Nations peacekeeping missions. We further
note that the Council’s authorization for the Brigade to
use all necessary measures to avoid violent attacks is
an important evolution of the peacekeeping mandate,
which could help to ensure the safety and security of
Blue Helmets.
Those measures, however, need to be carried out
with clear mandates and proper training. On that note,
Malaysia wishes to reaffirm its support for resolution
2086 (2013), which in our view provides a comprehensive
blueprint and guidance for a multidimensional approach
to peacekeeping operations. My delegation notes that
the resolution covers a large spectrum of means to
address multiple challenges and tasks, which not only
aims to enhance the effectiveness of peacekeeping
efforts, but also peacebuilding and other conflict
prevention efforts. In that connection, Malaysia shares
the view that all peacekeepers should be provided with

46/64

11/06/2014

proper equipment, security perimeters and vehicles that
would allow them to operate safely.
My delegation also believes that, as and when
the need arises, inter-mission cooperation could be
considered in order to temporarily fill critical gaps, so
as to effectively respond to unforeseen events in certain
peacekeeping operations. For instance, a small-scale
temporary deployment of personnel and equipment
from the closest or neighbouring missions to an existing
mission faced with an unexpected demand for such
resources could yield positive results.
Malaysia also shares the view that the emergence
of new military technologies should continue to benefit
peacekeeping operations. For example, the use of
modern technology, such as unmanned aerial vehicles,
could significantly improve the situational awareness
of peacekeepers, which in turn would enhance their
safety and security. In addition, the use of other modern
technology and devices, such as geographic imaging
systems, satellite imagery and ground surveillance
radar could be utilized in peacekeeping operations
to strengthen monitoring and surveillance capacities
and their abilities to implement the mandates of their
respective missions. We are of the view, however,
that the use of technology in peacekeeping operations
should also take into account the principles enshrined
in the United Nations Charter.
The issue of financing peacekeeping operations
has become one of the major challenges at the United
Nations. Not all troop-contributing countries are in a
position to be equipped with modern technologies and
devices. In addition, most modern equipment has to
be procured from private companies. Such a practice
could lead to a double-edged sword as there is potential
that some confidential information could be leaked to a
third party. In that regard, Malaysia believes that there
is a need to study how best to address that issue. We
are of the view that the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations could consider establishing a mechanism
to verify and ensure that all confidential data and
information is restricted to relevant United Nations
bodies and agencies.
At the same time, my delegation also holds the view
that the Department of Peacekeeping Operations should
adopt a more comprehensive and effective approach
to generate resources to meet the demands of the new
multidimensional mandates. In view of the increasing
need for such mandates, the United Nations requires
an adequate and optimum level of forces, as well as
14-42664

11/06/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

equipment in order to operate effectively and efficiently.
As a Member State that strongly supports the United
Nations peacekeeping role, Malaysia supports all
efforts for transparent triangular cooperation between
the Security Council, the Secretariat and troop- and
police-contributing countries.
In conclusion, my delegation wishes to reaffirm
its commitment to continue working together with all
partners and stakeholders in our collective effort to
advance the cause of international peace and security
through the United Nations peacekeeping agenda.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Patriota (Brazil): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this open debate on a topic of paramount
importance to the United Nations in general, and
the Security Council, in particular. United Nations
Members need to be fully aware of the constant
evolution of peacekeeping operations in practical and
conceptual terms, and it is appropriate, in that sense,
that Security Council members maintain a regular
exchange of views with the broader membership on a
matter of such strategic importance. I also thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.
Brazil renews its strong commitment to United
Nations peacekeeping operations and its readiness
to work with a view to their improvement. In Haiti,
Lebanon, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
in many other locations, Brazilian military and police
uphold the noble principles that continue to preside
over United Nations peacekeeping operations.
War between States continues to be the most
dangerous and potentially destructive form of conflict,
as we can observe from the widespread resurgence of
geopolitical tensions in sensitive regions of the world.
This new “old” trend is all the more worrisome when
we consider that many countries continue to stockpile
weapons of mass destruction.
Civilians are the main victims of conflicts today.
They are victims not only of the collapse of State
structures and the ensuing violence, but also of the
unauthorized use of force or the provision of weapons
by third parties. As a result, we bear witness to the
proliferation of cases of humanitarian emergencies
with a corresponding increase in the demand for the
institutional building of capacities, which in the absence
of other capable institutions, must be provided by

S/PV.7196

peacekeeping missions — particularly in the domains
of security and justice.
Peacekeeping is destined to remain one of the main
tools at the disposal of the international community
to address international threats to peace and security.
United Nations peacekeeping has become more
complex and dangerous. Nowadays, there is more to
peacekeeping than military patrols along a ceasefire
line or the observation of the parties to ensure separation
and compliance with agreements. United Nations
peacekeeping operations have recently been deployed
in areas where no peace agreements are in place and
where Government authority is weak or non-existent.
The implications of being a troop- or
police-contributing country, therefore, have been
changing quickly. The evolution of peacekeeping
missions entailed the renewed commitment of troopcontributing countries in deploying their citizens in
riskier and more demanding operations. Enhanced
efforts in predeployment training, high standards for
equipment and the contribution of a large array of
specialized units are nowadays common features.
In keeping with those developments, the
strengthened peacekeeping partnership will be
possible only if we adopt a fair reimbursement rate.
As discussions on that issue take place in the Fifth
Committee of the General Assembly, we expect all
partners to adopt a responsible position regarding that
matter. There can be no question that United Nations
peacekeeping efforts are cost-effective and that, despite
constraints, the United Nations does a lot with very
little. For evidence, one need look no further than to the
stark contrast between the United Nations peacekeeping
budget of around $8 billion a year and the nuclear
Powers’ defence expenditure in 2013, which totalled
$991 billion, according to the Stockholm International
Peace Research Institute.
In spite of that, regrettably the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations has been grappling with
the contradictory dynamics of ever-more complex
mandates, on the one hand, and increasing pressure
for budget reductions, on the other. Whereas there is
no contradiction in trying to ensure that all resources
in any given mission are spent in the most effective
manner, efforts to impose artificial caps to overall
expenditures in peacekeeping operations will turn out
to be detrimental to our collective efforts to fulfil our
responsibilities under the Charter.

14-4266447/64

S/PV.7196

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

At the same time, special political missions are
increasingly acquiring characteristics similar to
multidimensional peacekeeping operations, even
though they are funded by the regular budget of the
Organization. It is a classic case of taxation without
representation, considering that the Security Council
determines the establishment of a special political
mission, but the costs are spread as if it were a decision
of the General Assembly. Let us not forget that more
than 20 per cent of the United Nations regular budget
is currently destined to the maintenance of special
political missions, negatively impacting the capacity of
the United Nations to adequately carry out mandates
in other areas, in particular as regards development
assistance.
If resources are scarce when it comes to
peacekeeping
operations,
they
are
blatantly
insufficient to assure development assistance and postconflict peacebuilding. In certain parts of the world,
international challenges to peace and security find their
root causes in poverty, social exclusion, discrimination
and impunity before the law. Without addressing those
root causes, there can be little hope that a stable and
peaceful situation will ensue.
The integration of peacekeeping and peacebuilding
initiatives is therefore crucial for the long-standing
stabilization of States emerging from conflict. It would
be a serious setback if new peacekeeping operation
trends in an environment of resource constraints lead
to the prevalence of military solutions, in detriment
to multidimensional mandates that include parallel,
effective peacebuilding efforts.
Whenever it is requested to deal with a situation,
the Security Council should, from the earliest possible
stages of the peacekeeping mandate-drafting, look
beyond the immediate horizon of events into the root
causes of conflicts, and develop long-lasting strategies
for peace. Improved interaction between the Security
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission is of the
essence in that regard.
Let me touch upon recent trends in peacekeeping
operations. The first is the growing use of inter-mission
cooperation. Brazil recognizes the potential benefits
of inter-mission cooperation, especially as a tool for
quickly responding to crises. However, it cannot be
envisaged as a cost-reduction instrument. Operational,
administrative and financial arrangements related to
inter-mission cooperation cannot result in actions that
fill a gap while opening another.
48/64

11/06/2014

The second aspect is the deployment of modern
technological resources. Brazil views the incorporation
of technology into peacekeeping operations as an
inevitable development. However, technical means
such as unmanned, unarmed aerial systems may have
their potential usefulness negated if their use results in
a smaller number of well-equipped and trained soldiers
on the ground. The investment in new technologies
will be effective only if paralleled by investment in the
necessary human resources.
Another aspect worth examining is the collaboration
between the Council and regional organizations. This
is most visible with regard to the commendable role
assumed by the African Union in peacekeeping efforts
in Africa. Surely, regional appropriation of regional
issues is a development we must applaud, on the
understanding that applicable provisions of the Charter
of the United Nations are being strictly observed.
At the same time, one should not overlook the
need for international assistance in support of those
initiatives. It is unfair to assume that the African
Union will be able to provide, alone, the resources
indispensable to the adequate fulfillment of missions
whose mandates are ever-more complex and ambitious.
As a rule, neither regional organizations nor the
United Nations should outsource their respective
responsibilities in the provision of international peace
and security.
Peacekeeping operations concern all Member
States and need to be thoroughly and democratically
discussed. A reformed Security Council that is more
representative of the contemporary world would have
the increased legitimacy needed to craft demanding
peacekeeping operation mandates that are attuned
to the aspirations of the wider membership and can
therefore enlist the support of a greater number of
troop-contributing countries towards the achievement
of common goals.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
your initiative in convening this debate under the theme
“United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends”. It
confirms Russia’s role as a great country that is faithful
and committed to peace and international security. I
also thank the Russian delegation for the concept note
submitted to the Council (S/2014/384, annex). It is

14-42664

11/06/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

comprehensive and raises important questions that are
relevant to today’s debate.
While I align myself with the statement made by the
representative of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement, my delegation wishes to emphasize the
following aspects, which we consider essential and
useful in addressing United Nations peacekeeping
issues.
Dynamic in nature, peacekeeping operations have
gradually evolved from missions with limited mandates
to monitor ceasefires, mainly involving inter-State
conflicts, into complex multidimensional operations,
including military, police, civilian and humanitarian
components and often operating in situations of internal
conflict. These new challenges require extensive
discussion on ways to strengthen peacekeeping
operations and make them more effective and efficient.
In that spirit, Morocco — as an African troopcontributing country that since 1960 has deployed
Moroccan troops in many operations around the
world, as evidenced by the participation of more than
60,000 of our personnel in 13 peacekeeping operations
deployed in four continents — wishes to contribute
to establishing an ambitious goal that can narrow the
gap between New York and the reality on the ground.
This objective can be achieved only through dialogue,
interaction and collective analysis.
Beyond the basic requirements, any successful
peacekeeping operation, whatever its nature, is linked
to interrelated factors such as realistic mandates
established by the Council; triangular cooperation
among the Secretariat, troop-contributing countries
and the administrative body dealing with the planning
and implementation of the mandates; and proper
exit strategies accompanied by measures to ensure
sustainable development.
All these activities and strategies must continue to
respect the basic principles governing United Nations
peacekeeping, including the consent of the parties,
impartiality, the non-use of force except in legitimate
self-defence, respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the countries concerned, non-interference in
their internal, and the consideration of the specificities
of each situation. Furthermore, and in order to ensure
that peacekeeping operations enjoy every possible
chance of success, it is essential that the Council’s
mandates be fully respected by all of the affected
parties when they are implemented on the ground.

S/PV.7196

Turning now to inter-mission cooperation, my
delegation is convinced of the growing relevance of that
approach. It led us to organize, during the Moroccan
presidency of the Council in December 2012, a debate
devoted specifically with the topic (see S/PV.6886). The
debate highlighted the full potential of such cooperation
and identified the challenges to be overcome. We
concluded that this tool had many advantages in terms
of optimizing the use of resources and filling logistics
gaps in crisis, but that it should not be considered a
long-term solution to the numerous structural problems
that hinder effective peacekeeping.
Regarding the use of new technologies in
peacekeeping operations and stressing the importance
of the potential contributions of such technologies to
peacekeeping operations, we note that this issue requires
further consideration, given that new technologies are
not always operational. Further consideration of the
use of new technologies is therefore important, as is
consensus on the issue in order to clarify all aspects of
using such technology.
In conclusion, I take this opportunity to offer a strong
tribute, on behalf of my country, to the peacekeeping
personnel and operations on the ground, who carry
out a noble mission in often difficult circumstances. I
pay particular tribute to those who risk their lives to
save those others. While hoping that today’s debate
will inspire useful ideas leading to specific measures
to improve and enhance peacekeeping operations, I
stress that my country’s commitment to peacekeeping
is ongoing and has remained so since its independence.
It reflects an ongoing resolve to enshrine the concept
of international peace and collective security that
underlies the existence of our Organization.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of the United Republic of
Tanzania.
Mr. Ibuge (United Republic of Tanzania): The
United Republic of Tanzania welcomes this open debate
on the theme “United Nations peacekeeping operations:
new trends”. We especially thank the Russian presidency
for organizing the debate and for its incisive concept
note on the subject (S/2014/384, annex). We also thank
the Secretary-General for his remarkable introductory
statement this morning.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
to be made by the representative of the Republic of

14-4266449/64

S/PV.7196

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

Malawi on behalf of the Southern African Development
Community.
The fact that United Nations peacekeeping
operations have reached an important juncture in the
Organization’s history may sound like a cliché, but
I should like to indulge in it nevertheless. When the
United Nations peacekeeping enterprise began more
than 60 years ago, none of its founders, who defined
that noble undertaking, could have foreseen that
contemporary peacekeeping operations would have
to navigate through the waters they must sail through
today. The multidimensional reality of United Nations
peacekeeping operations means that they must now
include ever more complex mandates at the tactical,
operational and strategic levels. Such characteristics
have developed from necessity.
The reality is that the nature of the conflicts that
peacekeeping operations must confront today, in
particular the settling of intra-State conflicts, neither
justifies nor warrants us to lose sight of what those
operations are intended to be and must continue to be.
In that regard, I will identify but a few salient points.
First, United Nations peacekeeping operations
must invariably adhere to the agreed basic principles
of peacekeeping, namely, the consent of the parties
to the conflict, impartiality, and the non-use of force
except in self-defence and in defence of their mandates.
Indeed, those are time-tested principles essential to
the maintenance of the credibility and legitimacy
of the flagship activity of the United Nations that is
peacekeeping.
Secondly, we need to ensure that we remain cleareyed about the challenges faced by contemporary
United Nations peacekeeping operations and those
whom we deploy to implement the mandates. Almost
everywhere an active peacekeeping operation exists,
including current deployments, the intra-State nature
of most conflicts is a phenomenon that we cannot
wish away. Today, the focus of most United Nations
peacekeeping operations with Chapter VII mandates is
to ensure the protection of civilians. Undoubtedly, the
overall implementation of that primary responsibility
must remain that of the host-country Government,
however weak it may appear, so long as it maintains
legitimacy with the majority of its population. In that
regard, United Nations peacekeeping operations must
work closely and in tandem with the host Government.
The mission must offer support to the host country in
its attempt to achieve the priorities its polity deems
50/64

11/06/2014

necessary to enable it to restore sustainable peace
and attain the sociopolitical harmony and economic
development its population deserves.
Thirdly, when a Government’s capacity to exercise
authority within part of its territory is manifestly weak,
the commission of atrocities and impunity for such
crimes are likely to reign. That reality may become even
graver when the intentions of some armed belligerents
may be purely criminal or terroristic. They are likely to
be uninterested in any semblance of political dialogue,
whether through mediation, conciliation or negotiations.
At the same time, the danger they pose to the population
and to peacekeepers has increased dramatically year
after year. When such groups appear to focus solely on
the personal aggrandizement and profiteering on the
part of the individuals who control them, it is unlikely
that there will be any motivation to achieve peace
unless the United Nations mission is able to present a
viable deterrence posture. Indeed, the activities of such
rebel forces, which respect no national or international
humanitarian law, keeps peacekeepers at great risk of
their lives. The current toll of peacekeepers who have
lost their lives — 106 in 2013 alone — reminds us of the
perils that need to be addressed, including the impunity
of those who attack peacekeepers.
Fourthly, as peacekeeping continues to move
towards more Chapter VII mandates, there is a
stark contradiction in the fact that United Nations
peacekeeping operations have not been allocated
adequate resources to implement them. The debate on
the current global economic crunch, while pertinent,
must not be one-sided. As cost-cutting, downsizing or
right-sizing continues, the alternative narrative is that
troop- and police-contributing countries end up bearing
the brunt of the burden of peacekeeping. That is neither
acceptable nor sustainable.
The Council must ensure that the mandates it sets
not only are realistic but that they are commensurate to
the resources allocated to the missions. In doing so, the
Council will immensely benefit from the experience of
troop- and police-contributing countries. Their active
participation in all stages of a mission must therefore be
the centre point of the triangular cooperation among the
Council, the troop-and police-contributing countries,
and the Secretariat.
Collectively addressing the question of new
technologies in United Nations peacekeeping operations
must be a goal of ongoing triangular engagement.
Innovations that enable effective United Nations
14-42664

11/06/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

peacekeeping operations must be clearly assessed in
the light of their tactical and operational value, as well
as their political and legal implications. This debate
will ultimately require balancing views from across
the United Nations membership, for peacekeeping
operations have indeed been and must remain based
on the collective and individual goodwill of the nations
that participate in them.
In closing, we pay tribute to the men and women who
have laid down their lives in the pursuit of peace under
the United Nations flag. We honour their memories well,
not by breaking the ranks of our international unity
and will, but by appropriately ensuring the conditions
necessary to enable them to confront the challenges in
maintaining international peace and security that we
collectively continue to face. That is why we remain
these United Nations.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Senegal.
Mr. Diallo (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the
outset, Mr. President, allow me to extend our heartfelt
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council. I also welcome this opportunity to
participate in this open debate, given its timeliness, on
issues related to new trends in peacekeeping operations.
The evolving nature of conflicts, which have
become increasingly complex and destabilizing, has
led the Council in recent years to adapt peacekeeping
operations with a view to improving efficiency in
the implementation of operations to make or restore
peace. That new orientation has resulted in granting
more robust mandates to peacekeeping operations
that have become multidimensional, and in the use
of new surveillance technologies and inter-mission
cooperation. Such new trends are the result of deepseated changes that have arisen to grapple with the
appearance of multiple threats to international peace
and security.
Indeed, resurgent drug trafficking, human
trafficking, terrorism and piracy at sea constitute factors
for instability in many regions of the world. Moreover,
conventional wars between States have largely given
way to internal conflicts based on asymmetrical attacks
that have a considerable impact on civilian populations.
Operations have therefore shifted their focus from
interposition towards intervention and the protection of
civilians. This situation has led to an ongoing evolution
in peacekeeping operations in a context where the ideals

S/PV.7196

on which the United Nations was founded — peace,
security, human rights and development — are more
relevant than ever.
It is, however, the responsibility of the Council to
carefully monitor the intended impact of peacekeeping
practices and the results obtained over the course of
their evolution. Considered in the light of mandates
that are increasingly multidimensional and/or robust,
peacekeeping operations seem to be more in line with
the reality of the theatres of operation. The links among
security, human rights, international humanitarian law
and the political process of peacebuilding all demand
the deployment of missions that are broadly prepared
to prevent the resurgence of violence that often arises
in pre- or post-electoral situations, in the aftermath of
judicial procedures related to the settling of accounts,
or from failed efforts at national reconciliation.
Moreover, priorities need to be ordered based on a
long-term approach, along with a system of coordination
capable of ensuring the established goals. Although
that departs from the principle of neutrality that was
considered important during the Cold War, granting
a robust mandate can contribute fundamentally to the
protection of civilian populations and to the restoration
of the territorial integrity of States. Such mandates,
however, are not without risk because they give United
Nations forces a stakeholder role, which requires
enhanced measures to ensure their safety.
The complexity of threats to peace and security
has also led to the use of new technologies such as
unarmed drones. Such reconnaissance and surveillance
devices help to identify armed groups, prevent threats
and facilitate a rapid response. In that regard, unarmed
aerial vehicles are indispensable. However, it is
important to preserve their exclusively military role
through rigorous management of their acquisition and
use and the information they generate. It is therefore
necessary, within the framework of cooperation between
the United Nations and subregional organizations, to
ensure the transfer of technology capable of improving
their ability to intervene.
Inter-mission cooperation is also a crucial question
insofar as it touches on the overall effectiveness of
contemporary peacekeeping operations. Indeed, it has
the advantage of contributing to the strengthening of
the operational skills of troops involved in establishing
new missions, and of compensating for deficits in
contingents that have already been deployed. In the
same vein, I take this opportunity to call on Member

14-4266451/64

S/PV.7196

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

States to ensure payment of their assessed contributions
on time and without preconditions, and for regular
reimbursement for material and troops in order to
improve the effectiveness of peacekeeping operations.
Peacekeeping operations raise the hopes of entire
populations, reassure host Governments, facilitate the
mission of humanitarian workers and contribute to the
recovery of countries affected by conflict. It is therefore
clear that respect for the sovereignty of States must
prevail more than ever and be constantly reaffirmed.
As we said during the open debate on security sector
reform (see S/PV.7161), States affected by crises must be
at the heart of the process of conceptualizing, preparing
and deploying peacekeeping operations. Their very
legitimacy and effectiveness depend on it.
To conclude, I would like to reaffirm the need
to pursue the development of rapid and effective
intervention capabilities. Senegal therefore calls for
enhanced cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union in order to implement the significant
recommendation of the Brahimi report (S/2000/809)
concerning the use of standby forces and the capabilities
of the United Nations.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Viet Nam.
Mr. Le Hoai Trung (Viet Nam): First of all, I would
like to thank the Russian presidency for convening this
open debate on the theme “United Nations peacekeeping
operations: new trends”.
My delegation thanks the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive briefing and the Secretariat,
under his leadership, in particular the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field
Support, for their important support for United Nations
peacekeeping operations.
Allow me at the outset to pay tribute to the more
than 118,000 men and women from 120 member
States who are currently serving in 16 United Nations
peacekeeping operations around the world. I have the
honour to inform the Council and the United Nations
membership that, starting from the end of this month,
officers from the People’s Army of Viet Nam will stand
together with the men and women of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan. That is further testimony of
Viet Nam’s support for and commitment to United
Nations peacekeeping operations, its unwavering
willingness to contribute to the maintenance of

52/64

11/06/2014

international peace and security, and its continued
engagement and cooperation with the United Nations
and the international community. My country has also
established the Viet Nam Peacekeeping Centre as a hub
for training our future peacekeepers to ensure their
professionalism, dynamism and high standards.
United Nations peacekeeping operations have
indeed made significant contributions to reducing the
threat of renewed conflicts and facilitating progress
towards durable peace and sustainable development.
In the face of the evolving nature of conflicts, United
Nations peacekeeping operations have constantly
expanded in size, mandates and complexity. Their
multidimensional mandates today extend far beyond
the traditional keeping of peace after conflict to cover
the protection of civilians and the establishment of the
necessary foundations for successful peacebuilding.
As we have learned from past experience, the
success of United Nations peacekeeping operations
requires strict adherence to the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and universally
recognized guidelines, namely, the consent of the
parties, the non-use of force except in self-defence,
total impartiality, respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States, and non-interference in
their internal affairs. At the same time, recent attacks
targeting United Nations peacekeepers, which Viet
Nam strongly condemns, compel us to ensure the
highest possible standards of security and safety for
peacekeepers. It is vital that peacekeeping missions
be provided with sufficient resources to protect their
peacekeepers in any situation.
As part of a comprehensive approach to conflicts,
we believe that it is crucial to address the root causes of
conflicts by engaging all parties involved on the basis
of dialogue and the peaceful settlement of disputes;
by finding long-term, comprehensive solutions to
the political, security, economic and humanitarian
dimensions of conflicts; and by strengthening efforts
in preventive diplomacy, conflict prevention and the
settlement of disputes by peaceful means, in accordance
with international law.
As a troop-contributing country, Viet Nam remains
committed to working with other troop-contributing
countries, the United Nations and other partners in
the joint endeavour to ensure strong, effective United
Nations peacekeeping operations that can maintain
their contribution to durable peace around the world.

14-42664

11/06/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the countries of the Non-Aligned
Movement. I would like to begin by congratulating
the Russian Federation on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for June and for organizing this
open debate on a very important and timely topic. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
important statement today.
As the concept paper (S/2014/384, annex) states,
there is indeed a dire need for a thorough discussion
among the relevant United Nations intergovernmental
bodies if we are to develop a balanced United Nations
approach, including through those bodies’ regulatory
documents, to address the new trends relating to
peacekeeping missions, which in many ways differ
drastically from the usual missions of past decades.
The Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) stresses that
the development of concepts, policies and strategies
should be done at the intergovernmental level,
particularly the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations, and should run parallel to similar efforts to
improve development, planning and oversight capacities.
NAM also emphasizes that policy development in
peacekeeping must be coupled with the provision of the
resources needed to ensure effective implementation of
peacekeeping mandates. Accordingly, the Movement
re-emphasizes its commitment to supporting all efforts
to make peacekeeping operations more effective, and
reiterates the following points.
First, we stress the importance of reaching
consensus among Member States on policy development
and ensuring that only ideas and approaches they
have collectively agreed on are implemented. We call
on the Secretariat to refrain from working on policy
directions that have not been agreed on through an
intergovernmental process. The Special Committee is
and remains the sole body in charge of policymaking
in peacekeeping.
Second, it is vital that all necessary support,
including in the areas of financing and human resources
as well as military and civilian capabilities, be provided
to peacekeeping missions if they are to be able to fulfil
their tasks within a framework of full respect for
host countries and their laws and regulations. In that
context, NAM particularly underscores the importance
of drawing on the experience and expertise of troop-

S/PV.7196

contributing countries (TCCs) when the Security
Council implements, extends or adjusts United Nations
peacekeeping mandates. In that regard, we emphasize
the necessity for prior consultations with TCCs, which
are best placed to contribute to an objective assessment
of the situation on the ground.
Third, the results of the survey conducted
pursuant to General Assembly resolution 67/261
clearly demonstrate the deficit between the current
United Nations reimbursement rate to troop- and
police-contributing countries and the high financial
costs that those countries actually incur. It is important
that the Assembly take a decision before the end
of this month on increasing the standard rate of
reimbursement in line with the survey results. As the
resolution requested, all the information necessary
for an informed decision has been collected. Now
that this complex process has been completed, it is up
to Member States to deal with increasing the rate of
reimbursement in light of the results of the survey. The
full implementation of the resolution’s provisions will
be guaranteed only when we agree on a new rate. NAM
will not accept an interim or ad hoc solution to this
issue again.
Fourth, we need a strong and clear commitment on
the part of the Security Council to drafting clear and
achievable mandates, based on an objective assessment,
and without any rush to adopt mandates that lack a
political basis or sufficient resources, or that are not
practically achievable. Developing integrated planning
and consistent approaches to achieving a link between
policy formulation and implementation on the ground is
crucial to success in this area.
Fifth, we stress the importance of troopcontributing countries’ full participation in policy- and
decision-making in order to achieve the partnership
and effectiveness that United Nations peacekeeping
missions require. NAM underlines the need for effective
triangular cooperation among troop-contributing
countries, the Secretariat and the Security Council.
Sixth, we emphasize that the establishment of any
peacekeeping operation and the extension of existing
operation mandates should strictly observe the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
of the basic principles that have evolved to govern such
operations — that is, the consent of the parties, the
non-use of force except in self-defence, and impartiality.
NAM believes that these basic principles, which have

14-4266453/64

S/PV.7196

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

guided United Nations peacekeeping operations for the
past five decades without controversy, remain relevant
and should be preserved.
Seventh, NAM stresses that the use in peacekeeping
operations of technology designed to enhance situational
awareness, including unmanned aerial vehicles, should
be conducted on a case-by-case basis and must uphold
the principles enshrined in the Charter. We underscore
the importance of considering the legal, operational,
technical and financial implications of the use of
such assets in the field in the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations without further delay.
Eighth, we must enhance the integration of
peacekeeping with peacebuilding, so that peacekeeping
work is accompanied by economic recovery and
capacity-building efforts on a basis of national
ownership. The Peacebuilding Commission and the
Peacebuilding Fund have a significant role to play in that
regard. The objective should not be to cut peacekeeping
costs but to enhance the potential of States so as to
avoid their relapse into conflict.
Lastly, the Movement strongly believes that primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security rests with the United Nations, and that
the role of regional arrangements should be organized
in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter. We
call for intensified support on the part of the United
Nations for the African Union’s operations, by ensuring
predictable and sustainable funding for those missions.
NAM, as the one group that includes most if not
all of the top troop- and police-contributing countries,
continues to support peacekeeping operations. Its
member States have continued to increase their
contributions to military and police components, as well
as to civilian expertise, in United Nations peacekeeping
missions, clear evidence of our commitment to
maintaining international peace and security.
I would like to conclude by paying tribute to
the men and women of the United Nations who are
working to implement peacekeeping activities, as well
as to those peacekeepers who have lost their lives in
the field defending the flag of the United Nations and
contributing to upholding the positive and noble image
of the Organization and its peacekeeping operations.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.

54/64

11/06/2014

Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this important and
timely open debate on new trends in United Nations
peacekeeping operations, and we appreciate your
well-rounded and realistic concept paper (S/2014/384,
annex). We also thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing.
Indonesia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Egypt on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
Over the years, United Nations peacekeeping
has indeed evolved to meet the changing and
multidimensional demands of various conflicts.
Indonesia concurs with the observation of the concept
note that this evolution poses significant and higher
security threats to Blue Helmets and civilian staff
required to undertake a wide variety of complex tasks.
It is therefore crucial that the increased demands on
United Nations peacekeeping be met by adequate
capabilities and resources, and that those demands be
fully consistent with the agreed principles, guidelines
and terminology governing peacekeeping.
As peacekeeping operations continue to evolve
both conceptually and operationally, my delegation
emphasizes that the three basic peacekeeping
principles of the United Nations are indispensable.
While innovation and flexibility within reasonable
and safe parameters are required if we are to cope with
the operations’ multidimensional tasks, adherence to
the basic principles will maintain the legitimacy and
credibility of United Nations peacekeeping missions
and support for them, ultimately paving the way for
their success. Nothing must be done to damage that
precious legitimacy and credibility, which has been
hard-earned over many decades.
It is in that context that we see the need for making
a clear distinction between peacekeeping and peace
enforcement, as two completely different things. The
Security Council’s establishment of peacekeeping
operations should not be used to enable interventions
in other countries or to impose the interests of some
countries on them. The expansion of a mission’s
mandate and its scope with regard to the use of force
in the absence of a carefully laid-out and adequately
supported comprehensive plan, constituting a credible
political process, consultation and coordination, will
jeopardize the mission’s impartiality, along with its
peacekeepers’ safety and security.

14-42664

11/06/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

In that regard, there is a need to outline an
unambiguous and transparent description of robust
United Nations peacekeeping operations. The
development of concepts, policies and strategies
should be an intergovernmental process. We must be
mindful of the central role of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations to comprehensively review
the various aspects of United Nations peacekeeping
and to give its recommendations thereon. The
Secretariat should therefore refrain from developing
policies or guidelines on peacekeeping without their
intergovernmental discussion.
While the peacekeeping secretariat needs clear and
timely guidance from Member States, too, it should
enhance its very valuable work to improve the capacities,
planning, oversight and backstopping of missions. We
believe that the Secretariat can also play a greater role
in enabling more meaningful interaction among troopand police-contributing countries, host countries,
the Security Council and itself. That is especially
important in the early stages of formulating mission
mandates or when they are modified subsequently. We
call on the Security Council to engage more frequently
and substantively with all peacekeeping stakeholders
throughout all phases of a peacekeeping mission and
to reflect the different concerns and expectations
appropriately so that missions are more effective.
The use of modern technology as part of the
new trends also needs to be discussed openly and
transparently. While new technology can improve
situational awareness and help to enhance peacekeepers’
safety and security, we should be mindful that its
implementation, including the use of unmanned aerial
vehicles (UAVs), should be considered on a case-by-case
basis and should be in keeping with the basic principles
of the Charter of the United Nations, as well as United
Nations peacekeeping. Moreover, the legal, technical
and financial aspects of the use of and information
gathering by UAVs should be examined and approved
by all relevant actors.

S/PV.7196

equipment on the basis of the actual expenses and
investment of troop- and police-contributing countries.
Finally, with its current participation in eight
United Nations peacekeeping missions, Indonesia
will continue to strongly support and to contribute
to United Nations efforts to lay the foundations for
stable international peace. We again underscore
the significance of a holistic, properly supported,
consultative and coordinated approach to fostering
peace and stability. For sustainable outcomes, the
interlinkage among peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
development should be seamless, nationally owned and
fully supported by all relevant actors.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Malawi.
Mr. Msosa (Malawi): 1 have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) during this open
debate of the Security Council on the topic of new
trends in United Nations peacekeeping operations.
At the outset, let me express my appreciation
to the Russian presidency for selecting the topic at
hand. Indeed, this debate is not only timely but also of
critical importance, especially given the very complex,
multidimensional and dynamic nature of peacekeeping
operations today. In order to genuinely engage in the
debate on new trends facing the conduct of United
Nations peacekeeping today, it is imperative that we
establish the correct legal standing. The fact that the
Security Council is the body mandated by the Charter
of the United Nations to ensure the maintenance of
international peace and security is an obligation that
collectively binds us as a global membership, which we,
as SADC, support.

Meanwhile, in the context of deploying the Force
Intervention Brigade within the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, we should also carefully guide
the discussion without creating a precedent, as it was
agreed as an exceptional consideration.

At the same time, we should not lose sight of the
fact that most current conflicts are intra-State, pitting
legitimately elected Governments against armed groups,
some of which may have clearly stated political goals,
while others have none, with some of their declared
leaders not able even to seek or recognize international
mediation efforts. However, what often remains
abundantly clear are the impunity of violence and the
untold deaths, suffering and general socioeconomic
deprivation that the majority of the innocent civilian
population continue to face under such circumstances.

We would like to support the call for the increase
in the reimbursement rates for troop costs, daily
allowances, mission factors and contingent-owned

To that end, it remains the Security Council’s
responsibility to heed the plight of the innocent victims
and to assist the legitimate sovereign authority of the

14-4266455/64

S/PV.7196

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

country concerned in restoring peace, while, at the
same time, reaching out to and enabling the parties
to the conflict to resolve their disagreements through
negotiation. In addition, it must be ensured that such
efforts take place within the context of the need not only
for a lasting peace, but also for one that is sufficiently
comprehensive to enable the rebuilding of institutions
of governance, as well as the necessary resumption of
the socioeconomic development process.
All the points that I have mentioned are what we, the
United Nations membership, have proudly undertaken
for more than 60 years of the peacekeeping effort
and continue to do so. That is why peacekeeping has
justifiably become the flagship activity of the United
Nations. However, the Council, in cooperation with
the entire United Nations membership, needs to put
that same role into a clear perspective. In undertaking
the task, a number of issues require the serious
consideration of the Council and of the entire United
Nations membership. For timekeeping reasons, I will
mention only three of those issues.
First, if peacekeeping operations are to remain truly
relevant, the mandates given to peacekeeping missions
must be crystal clear with regard to both what they
are envisaged to achieve and the resources available
to implement them. In that vein, it remains imperative
that the allotted resources be commensurate with the
mandated tasks. That is critical in order to avoid the
fallacy of overexpectation of what a peacekeeping
mission can achieve and the local population’s view of
the same. It is also a question of ensuring that United
Nations missions continue to have the cooperation and
support of the population whom they are deployed to
assist.
Secondly, given the extent of impunity for crimes
usually perpetrated against an innocent civilian
population by a multitude of increasingly criminal and
even terrorist-oriented armed groups, SADC believes
that it is not only logical but also imperative to keep
in mind the operational and strategic consideration
that troop- and police-contributing countries deploying
troops to missions should be necessarily versatile,
capable and sufficiently politically determined in both
posture and mindset to deter impunity, including by
using force where necessary when it is so mandated.
In the medium to long terms, such active positive
engagement will make would-be criminal elements
think twice before targeting peacekeepers and the
civilians whom the peacekeepers are deployed to protect

56/64

11/06/2014

and will enhance, rather than diminish, the safety and
security of our peacekeepers.
Thirdly, to ensure the eventual resolution of
conflict dynamics, it is important for troop- and
police-contributing nations to bring their political
capital to bear on the situation in tandem with their
troop and police contingents. By the same token, out
of practicality and a meaningful unity of effort, it is
necessary that the United Nations strive to harness
both the political will and the joint cooperation of the
regional bloc to which the country in conflict belongs
and those of all neighbouring nations bordering the
country in conflict.
In observance of the above considerations, working
in tandem and in close cooperation with the Security
Council, SADC agreed to deploy the Force Intervention
Brigade to the Democratic Republic of Congo under the
aegis of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO), as authorized by resolution 2098 (2013).
The Brigade’s robust posture contributed not only to the
routing of the Mouvement du 23 mars, an illegal armed
group that had reached an intolerable level of impunity
by capturing a whole city within MONUSCO’s area
of responsibility, but also to the restoration of the
population’s confidence in MONUSCO.
We are proud of our continued active participation
in that regard, as a participating regional body, as
individual country signatories and as actors in the effort
to achieve lasting peace in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo through the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework. We believe that it is a role that will continue
to be invaluable, given our new collective membership’s
experience, in efforts to peacefully resolve conflicts
occurring in the region. SADC’s collective conviction
is therefore that eventual resolution of the conflict in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo will only come
about through a political settlement.
In closing, let me reiterate that SADC is committed
to a continued partnership with the United Nations to
enable the realization of sustainable peace and security
in our region. In that connection, SADC would like
to pay tribute to all of the men and women who have
served and those who are serving today in various field
missions under extremely difficult situations, sometimes
in a hostile environment, for their dedication, courage
and selfless sacrifice. In particular, we remember with
sadness but gratitude those colleagues and friends who

14-42664

11/06/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

have made the ultimate sacrifice through their efforts
to contribute to the maintenance of peace and security.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): In honour of the
Russian Federation’s presidency of the Security Council
this month, I will try to say the following in Russian:
(spoke in Russian)
Thank you very much, Mr. President.
(spoke in English)
I thank you, Sir, for organizing this timely and
important debate. The Netherlands aligns itself with the
statement made by the observer of the European Union.
We pay homage to those fallen in peacekeeping
operations. We welcome the renewed attention to the
commemoration of fallen peacekeepers on 29 May, and
we express the hope that further enhancements to the
commemoration ceremony will be agreed upon in the
coming year. Our common aim is to improve mission
effectiveness, protect civilians and mission personnel,
and facilitate transition after the end of conflict. To
realize those aims, four dimensions are, in our view,
fundamental: innovation, integration, instruction and
information.
With respect to innovation, the circumstances in
which peacekeeping operations are taking place have
changed fundamentally in recent years. Nowadays,
non-State actors, rapidly changing environments,
various challenges that are at the same time military,
political and socioeconomic, and new threats call
for innovation in our peacekeeping missions. Key
elements in our view of innovation are the use of new
technical possibilities, enhanced robustness and the
need for guaranteed escalation dominance. As our
contribution to the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
the Netherlands has therefore deployed cutting-edge
equipment and technology. The more effective we can
make peacekeeping operations, the sooner transition to
the post-conflict phase can take place.
Secondly, on integration, the new challenges also
call for better integration of our efforts. Peacekeeping
operations cannot function in isolation. In conflict
situations, peace, justice and development issues are
closely interlinked. Peacekeeping operations must
therefore integrate diplomacy, defence and development,

S/PV.7196

which we call the 3-D approach. Civil-military
cooperation and coordination at the country level are
also fundamental to effective mandate implementation.
In order to improve integrated mission planning and
execution, we encourage the strengthening of the
planning capabilities at the United Nations Secretariat
and at the mission management level.
Thirdly, on instruction, when addressing the new
challenges, we should further improve the instruction
and training of peacekeepers. The most valuable asset
of the United Nations is naturally its personnel. Our men
and women serve in dangerous locations where they
can find themselves in harm’s way while upholding the
ideals of the Charter and the international community’s
responsibility to protect. Solid instruction and training
for military and police personnel are thus of key
importance. It prepares them for their difficult task and
directly contributes to the effectiveness of the mission.
Predeployment training for peacekeepers is therefore
crucial, and in that training, special attention should be
given to gender and child protection, as well as to the
role of women in conflict prevention, peacemaking and
peacebuilding processes.
We should reinforce the capacity of regional
organizations to conduct the training and instruction of
peacekeepers. I am proud to say that the Netherlands, in
partnership with various countries, is actively engaged
in regional training programmes aimed at enhancing
the capabilities of peacekeepers.
Finally, information and information gathering,
collating and sharing are crucial for peacekeeping
operations. In order to make balanced decisions, aroundthe-clock situational awareness is fundamental. We, the
Netherlands, have deployed an all-sources information
fusion unit to MINUSMA in Mali to contribute to such
awareness. Such units also contribute to the Rights up
Front initiative through early warning with respect to
human rights violations and the protection of civilians.
We encourage the introduction of similar units into
other missions in need of better situational awareness.
In conclusion, in applying innovation, integration
and instruction and in improving information
processes, peacekeeping missions will be more
effective in realizing the mandates given to them by
the Security Council. As said before, it is the ambition
of the Kingdom of the Netherlands to be a partner for
peace, justice and development. We will continue to
be a partner with other Member States and the United

14-4266457/64

S/PV.7196

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

Nations system as whole in cooperatively making
peacekeeping missions more effective.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Eler (Turkey): At the outset, I would like to
thank the Russian Federation presidency for organizing
today’s open debate. I would also like to express my
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his briefing
and for the work he is carrying out through the
Secretariat to strengthen the peacekeeping capabilities
of the United Nations.
Peacekeeping operations play a critical role in
supporting a country’s efforts to provide a better
future for its inhabitants. Peacekeeping is the flagship
activity of the United Nations. For populations in need,
peacekeepers are the face of the United Nations. The
conditions under which today’s peacekeepers operate
have changed dramatically. The number of conflicts
is, unfortunately, on the rise, and they are increasingly
of an intra-State nature. Asymmetric threats involving
armed non-State actors or terrorists with links to global
organized crime are emerging.
Those changing conditions undoubtedly require
that the concept of United Nations peacekeeping evolve.
First, it is clear that the challenging circumstances and
expectations with regard to protecting civilians require
a change in the posture of peacekeeping operations,
including through robust mandates. However, when
robust peacekeeping is in question, we must do our
utmost not to compromise a key asset of the United
Nations, namely, impartiality. All efforts must be
made to prevent any collateral damage and to win the
hearts and minds of the people in order to mitigate the
risks of local resentment, reaction and opposition to
peacekeeping missions, all of which jeopardize success
in the fulfilment of mandates.
Secondly, the safety and security of personnel
must be given priority, given the increasing number
of attacks on United Nations personnel. We would like
take this opportunity to pay homage to the women
and men serving as Blue Helmets and express our
condolences to the survivors of the peacekeepers who
have sacrificed their lives in the line of duty. In that
context, the assets that modern technology offers, such
as unarmed unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), must be
utilized, as appropriate, to provide safety and security
to mission personnel, so that they can fulfil their
mission mandates. The use of UAVs for reconnaissance

58/64

11/06/2014

and surveillance increases situational awareness and
thus saves lives. However, they must be used in strict
conformity with international law, the Charter of the
United Nations and the principle of transparency.
On the other hand, proper personnel training and
equipment must also be provided, keeping in mind
the increasing professionalization of peacekeeping.
However, such military measures alone are not
the answer for better protecting our peacekeepers.
Addressing the security and political situation in the
country and winning the hearts and minds of the people
will also be vital.
Thirdly, sharing assets between missions can
provide increased efficiency and cost effectiveness.
However, the most recent discussions on the issue
demonstrate that there are a number of challenges that
need to be addressed in order to make better use of that
practice.
Fourthly, today’s peacekeeping missions have
increasingly comprehensive mandates. Security is
a precondition for development, and development
generates more security. Therefore, supporting national
peacebuilding and peacemaking efforts should lie at
the heart of peacekeeping operations. We thus welcome
the development of the concept of multidimensional
peacekeeping and the growing number of discussions
on that subject, as highlighted in resolution 2086 (2013),
which was adopted during Pakistan’s presidency. For
such multidimensional mandates to be successful, they
must be realistic and flexible, and the missions must
be provided with the necessary skills and capabilities
from within the United Nations system or outside when
necessary.
The changing nature of threats and actors has led
to the need to intensify efforts against terrorism and
organized crime at the United Nations, at both the
mission and the Headquarters levels. Additionally,
there is a clear need to strengthen cooperation
and partnership with international, regional and
subregional organizations. On the other hand, we have
to redouble our efforts towards the peaceful resolution
and prevention of conflicts, which saves lives, costs
a fraction of peacekeeping efforts and eliminates the
need to deploy new operations. In that context, we
see mediation as an important tool, as it is consentbased and pertains to all stages of the conflict cycle,
from prevention to resolution and implementation. We
believe that reinforcing the capacities of the United
Nations, regional and subregional organizations
14-42664

11/06/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

and their member States in conflict resolution and
prevention will help us to better manage the conflicts
at hand and focus our efforts for a better world.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ireland.
Mr. Mawe (Ireland): Adapting to meet radically
new and different environments and challenges, United
Nations peacekeeping is in the process of undergoing
significant change. We warmly welcome Russia’s
scheduling of today’s debate, which provides a timely
opportunity to consider the new trends in United
Nations peacekeeping operations.
Ireland aligns itself with the statement made on
behalf of the European Union and its member States.
Ireland has a strong and distinguished record in
peacekeeping, with unbroken service in United Nations
missions since our first deployment in 1958, including
the appointment of an Irish national as head of a United
Nations mission on 12 occasions. We see peacekeeping
as a crucial instrument in maintaining and ensuring
peace, preventing conflict and giving the necessary
space and support to countries emerging from conflict
to enable them to develop and grow. We therefore
dearly wish to see a United Nations peacekeeping that
is smart, fit for purpose and well-resourced to meet the
high demands we place on it.
Those demands only continue to grow. The reality
is that, in recent years, peacekeeping has evolved to
such an extent that the term itself scarcely describes the
range and nature of activities undertaken in its name.
Today’s debate is well informed by the concept note
(S/2014/384, annex), which, above all else, calls for a
more systematic and joined-up approach to justifying
and elaborating the new trends in peacekeeping. Two
of those developments stand out: more robust peace
enforcement, undertaken in certain circumstances,
and a more comprehensive and ambitious approach to
institution- and State-building.
In 2000, Lakhdar Brahimi wrote that there can
be no peacekeeping unless there is a peace to keep.
Changes in the nature of conflict, however, mean that
United Nations forces increasingly operate in less
secure environments. In a small number of specific
situations — for example, in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo — the United Nations has sought
to be more proactive in how it protects the civilian
population by supporting targeted offensive operations
against armed groups.

S/PV.7196

Such robust operations do not, in our view, have
any impact on the impartiality of United Nations
peacekeeping. Impartiality does not mean having
to adopt a neutral equidistance between two or
more parties — in this case, Government forces and
non-Government armed groups. Rather, impartiality
is about implementing a mandate in a fair-minded
and unbiased manner. It is a fundamental misreading
of the nature of United Nations peacekeeping to see
more proactive and robust targeting of armed groups
aimed at protecting vulnerable civilians as in any way
incompatible with the United Nations mission.
However, there is no doubt that more robust peace
operations can work only if undertaken so as to deliver
clear political goals and as part of a broader stabilization
strategy. Higher-intensity peace enforcement also
brings sharply into focus the imperative of having
United Nations command-and-control arrangements
that are fit for purpose, with decisive leadership, wellresourced planning and the reduction and elimination
of national caveats and restrictions. Ireland is pleased
to be organizing a panel discussion on 3 July at United
Nations Headquarters to continue this important
conversation and to consider the significant progress
made to date and the challenges outstanding on
command and control.
A second point resulting from operating in less secure
environments concerns the safety of peacekeepers. We
owe it to our service personnel, who are deploying into
increasingly dangerous environments, to have them as
well equipped as possible. It is sobering to remember
that, to date this year, 37 persons serving in United
Nations peacekeeping missions have been killed. We
are convinced of the clear benefits offered by modern
technology and high-tech equipment, notably the
sharply increased situational awareness offered by
unarmed unmanned aerial vehicles. Such tools and
other technologies act simultaneously to strengthen the
mission in delivering its mandate and to increase force
protection.
Nationally, with over 130 members of our
defence forces currently serving on the Golan with
the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
(UNDOF), Ireland is acutely aware of the imperative of
strengthening force protection. An Irish and UNDOF
force fully equipped with equipment to counter
improvised explosive devices would be better able to
protect itself and the civilian Syrian population from
the threat posed by such devices.

14-4266459/64

S/PV.7196

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

The second, most striking change in United Nations
peacekeeping is the dramatically increasing range of
responsibilities and tasks with which United Nations
missions are charged. Mission mandates have grown
longer and more complex, particularly in terms of
institution- and State-building. Meanwhile, resources
have not increased in line with the increasing demand.
There are a variety of ways to try to square that circle,
including by increasing flexibility and innovation in
relation to resources for missions, improving common
standards and building strategic partnerships. Ireland
is pleased to support the development of common
standards relating to military police and special forces,
but, realistically, some hard choices need to be made on
just what can be expected of United Nations missions.
The Security Council should replace vague,
aspirational mission mandates with mandates with a
clear purpose tempered by achievable and realistic
ambition. The recent work to refocus the mandate of
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan and to
reallocate to it resources from other United Nations
missions in the region is a welcome step in the right
direction. Given the scarcity of resources, there is also
a clear case for moving to downsize or close some longstanding missions. It is important that that conversation
on adjusting multidimensional mission mandates
involve representatives of development agencies from
the broader United Nations family.
We look forward to contributing further to this
important reflection on the nature of United Nations
peacekeeping and to seeing how these policy areas can
be strengthened and developed.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): Let me join earlier
speakers in congratulating the Russian Federation on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of June and on organizing this open debate
on the very relevant and timely topic of new trends in
peacekeeping operations. I also take this opportunity
to thank Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations Hervé Ladsous for his comprehensive
briefing today.
Since its inception, United Nations peacekeeping
has been constantly evolving. The current period is no
exception. Peacekeeping continues to face challenges
and a huge range of demands. United Nations missions
are assisting countries in making the difficult transition

60/64

11/06/2014

from conflict to peace and from chaos to State-building
by supporting political processes aimed at establishing
inclusive and legitimate Governments, providing
security and catalysing peacebuilding processes. The
current mandates of peacekeeping operations are more
challenging and complex, necessitating long-term
preparation and training for peacekeepers. In addition,
a greater sense of commitment and dedication on the
part of troop- and police-contributing countries is also
essential. Troop- and police-contributing countries
also face challenges in terms of fulfilling the robust
mandates. In that context, the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS), the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) are worth mentioning.
To meet the increasing demand, there is a need to
improve the rapid deployment and force generation
process in the start-up of missions, not only for enablers
but for all uniformed capacities. The challenges must
be met through a variety of means, including joint
and individual contributions. Various United Nations
missions lack the appropriate capabilities for meeting
the multifaceted challenges and demands associated
with fulfilling mandates, assigned tasks and desired
outcomes. Despite the utmost efforts of all partners,
the United Nations is still finding it difficult to reach
the capability level needed in terms of appropriate
force generation, suitable mission support, in particular
logistics, and other technical support.
United Nations peacekeepers have inherent
operational limitations in terms of real-time intelligence
gathering. Those limitations must be understood before
they can be credibly deployed in complex conflict
situations. Today, technology supports a wide range
of tasks in United Nations peacekeeping operations
beyond those undertaken by military and police
forces, encompassing information and communication
units, medical support, and analysis and reporting
functions. The use of unmanned aerial surveillance
systems is helping to improve situational awareness,
early warning capacity, and the safety and security of
peacekeeping personnel. We therefore fully support
the appropriate use of modern technology to enhance
the reach of the peacekeepers and increase operational
capabilities in complex environments. However, we
feel that technological means should be used prudently,
sensitively and realistically, not to replace needed welltrained, capable peacekeepers on the ground who are
14-42664

11/06/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

able to fulfil their assigned mandates with greater
understanding.
In demanding situations and in order to
fulfil robust mandates, there is a tendency to use
peacekeepers in a combatant role. We must be able to
differentiate between robust peacekeeping and the use
of peacekeepers as combatants. We believe that any
attempt to use peacekeepers as combatants will hamper
their credibility and universal acceptability. Over the
years, peacekeepers have built a good reputation in
bringing long lasting peace to conflict-riven countries
with professionalism and impartiality. We therefore
must also create enabling conditions that protect
peacekeepers so they can perform their traditional
peacekeeping role.
It is important to realize that in the volatile
situations or complex political and social environments
where most peacekeeping missions are currently
operating, there remain risks that peacekeepers will
appear to favour one group or organization or other in
a conflict, thereby clashing with the foreign policy of
many Member States. For example, Bangladesh follows
a policy of “friendship to all and malice to none”. We
would not like to see our peacekeepers siding with any
warring factions and contradicting our national policy
of friendship to all and malice to none. On that point, I
fully support the statement made by Mr. Asoke Kumar
Mukerji, Permanent Representative of India.
While the primary responsibility for the safety and
security of peacekeepers and assets rests with the host
country, the lead for United Nations security policy
and procedure rests with the Department of Safety
and Security. With every passing day, peacekeepers
are being subjected to increasing threats. Weapons
proliferation, sectarian violence and non-State actors
are some of the factors that are making peacekeepers
more vulnerable to multifaceted threats than ever
before. Longer preparation on the part of troop- and
police-contributing countries, developing realistic
and achievable mandates and well-coordinated efforts
from all the stakeholders can ensure better safety and a
secure environment for peacekeepers. In our efforts to
maintain global peace and security under Blue Helmets,
we have lost more than 112 valiant men and women.
Protecting civilians under imminent threat of
physical violence is now a key area of focus for nine
peacekeeping operations that represent about 95 per
cent of deployed peacekeeping personnel. Implementing
the protection of civilian mandates in a coordinated

S/PV.7196

and expedient manner requires dedicated coordination
and the input of all concerned parties, which adds to
the challenges that mission leadership in general and
peacekeepers in particular face in complex and fluid
situations. In addition, at times, the credibility of the
United Nations is questioned due to its inability to
intervene and protect the civilians in time, as was seen
in the cases of UNMISS and MINUSCA. Clearly, there
is scope to deliver a lot more in that regard.
With respect to reimbursement for peacekeepers,
I strongly echo the statement of the Permanent
Representative of India and call on the Council to
increase reimbursement on the basis of the rates
proposed in the survey commissioned by the General
Assembly. In addition, we do not support the mixing
of mandates in a single mission — a point that was
also emphasized by my Indian colleague. I would also
highlight the importance of providing appropriate
logistical support to peacekeepers so that they can
deliver their best on the ground. Our police personnel
and aviation unit in South Sudan had extremely tough
days as a result of the lack of even minimum mission
support. I am sure they deserve much more than what
they have received.
Finally, I would like to stress the importance of
strengthening the partnership and coordination among
the Security Council, troop- and police-contributing
countries and the Secretariat — also known as
triangular cooperation. It needs to grow further and
stronger through improved information exchange and
increased strategic planning and consultations and
by promoting cohesiveness and ownership among the
various stakeholders, including parties to conflict.
As one of the leading troop- and police-contributing
countries, we would like to assure the Security Council
of our continued support in efforts to strengthen the
partnership. We urge the Council to allow the troopand police-contributing countries to join in dialogue
and discussion under article 44 of the Charter prior to
making decisions on and mandates for United Nations
peacekeeping operations. We believe that increased
partnership, collaboration, political commitment and
dialogue can work together to help us to achieve our
goals of attaining global peace, security and stability
more effectively and more efficiently.
Mrs. Malenga (Democratic Republic of the Congo)
(spoke in French): Mr. President, I would first like to
express my great satisfaction at seeing you preside
over the Security Council in this month of June, and

14-4266461/64

S/PV.7196

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

our honour at having the Russian Federation guide the
deliberations of the Council today.
I cannot fail to mention the remarkable stewardship
of your predecessor, the Permanent Representative
of the Republic of Korea, at the helm of the Security
Council last month .
My delegation associates itself with the statement
made earlier by the representative of Malawi on behalf
of the Southern African Development Community. We
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for giving us
the opportunity to speak before the Security Council at
today’s public debate on new trends in peacekeeping,
under the agenda item entitled “United Nations
peacekeeping operations”.
The topic chosen is all the more significant for being
at the very heart of the activities of the United Nations
since its inception. We recall that the peacekeeping
operations are not just about maintaining international
peace and security; they are also called upon to help
countries torn by conflict to create the conditions for
returning to a lasting peace. Peacekeeping operations
must in particular facilitate the political process,
protect civilians, assist in disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of former combatants, support the
organization of free elections, protect and promote
human rights and restore State authority in conflicttorn areas.
In my delegation’s view, the success of
peacekeeping operations depends on their ability to
adapt to the dynamics of new challenges and current
political realities. As to new trends in this area, I
would like to mention the example of the practices
followed by the Security Council in my own country,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. As we all know,
the Security Council recently adopted resolution 2147
(2014), renewing the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and that of the Force Intervention
Brigade. We have all witnessed the effective and
commendable role played by the Intervention Brigade
alongside the Forces armées de la République
démocratique du Congo in support of the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the restoration of the authority of the
State over the entirety of its territory.
That is why the second mandate of the Intervention
Brigade will, in fact, be the culmination of efforts
already undertaken to consolidate and preserve lasting

62/64

11/06/2014

peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
throughout the Great Lakes region. Meanwhile, the
Government is now shouldering the task of creating
the rapid reaction force that is to take over for the
Intervention Brigade at the designated time.
The conclusion and implementation of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region, which was
concluded in Addis Ababa on 24 February 2013, and the
adoption of resolution 2098 (2013), which strengthened
the Framework, represent major innovations in both the
understanding of the crisis in the Great Lakes region
since the late 1990s and the traditional United Nations
doctrine of peacekeeping.
The very first use of surveillance drones in a
United Nations peacekeeping operation occurred in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and sets a precedent,
sounding the death knell for the traditional concept of
peacekeeping operations and paving the way for the use
of modern technology aimed at making peacekeeping
operations effective and efficient. For the longsuffering populations of the countries in the region,
the Framework and the aforementioned resolution
are seen as compelling evidence of the international
community’s determination to help find a definitive
solution to the unstable situation, which has lasted too
long and for which my country has paid such a heavy
toll.
We must recall the sad and often overlooked reality
that my country has lost over 6 million people to our
chronic conflict. That is a tragedy of a scale without
equal in the history of humankind, and humankind
cannot remain indifferent before it, if it does not wish
to lose its soul. Our meeting today therefore reflects
our shared desire to reaffirm our humanity, assess
together and in an uncompromising manner the concept
of peacekeeping and identify the challenges that remain
so that, once lasting peace is restored, the State can
devote its energy and faculties to the key issues of
fighting poverty and improving the living conditions
of its people.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of New Zealand.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): Thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this very important debate.

At the outset, New Zealand recognizes those brave
military, civilian and police personnel who risk their
lives in United Nations peacekeeping operations, and
14-42664

11/06/2014

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

we pay particular tribute to those who have been killed
in those operations.
United Nations peacekeeping is a global partnership,
and New Zealand regards peacekeeping as one of the
greatest achievements of the United Nations. The
blue beret is a powerful symbol of the international
community’s commitment to peace and security.
However, right now, that same United Nations
peacekeeping is under very serious stress due to
unprecedented demand, the complexity of new security
threats, undiagnosed root causes, lack of effective early
warning from the field, insufficient inclusion of troopcontributing countries and other major stakeholders
and, not least, the risks of premature transitions
out of peacekeeping mode. All of that suggests that
the Security Council, as the legal decision maker on
peacekeeping, must do a lot better.
However, responsibility for the stress runs wider,
as does responsibility for the solutions. The Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations of the General
Assembly has too often been locked in an unproductive
struggle, and that has been a lost opportunity for
delivering the policy support that peacekeeping needs.
In addition, the Fifth Committee must find an equitable
and fair solution to the issue of troop reimbursements
for troop-contributing countries.
Peacekeeping must continue to evolve to meet
changing circumstances and new challenges. New
Zealand supports the evolution, over recent years, of
multidimensional mandates. When designed sensibly,
with good oversight, quick impact projects, adequate
resources and a strategy for progressive transition to
peacebuilding, such operations can be a very positive
United Nations contribution to restoring international
peace and security.
New Zealand fully understands the concerns
expressed about the difficulties inherent in the robust
mandates that have recently been approved by the
Council. However, the solution is not to simply retreat
to the peacekeeping of the past. Neutral observer
missions still have their rightful and important place.
Many others in this debate have already pointed out that
the Brahimi Report reminded us that there are times
when the United Nations cannot stand aside. There are
times when it must act, and we should never forget that
the Charter recognizes that collective action is a central
role of the United Nations. It is not correct to suggest
that the recent robust mandates in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Mali and the Central African

S/PV.7196

Republic are entirely new. Indeed, for over a decade,
robust civilian protection mandates have been a reality
for most peacekeeping missions.
Fortunately, force rarely needs to be used, but
the capacity and the authority to act are important
deterrents. We saw limited robust United Nations action
in Côte d’Ivoire in 2011 and, much more recently, we
have seen how robust United Nations capacity can save
lives in South Sudan. Those new peacekeeping trends
also mean that the Council must do better in recognizing
the role and competence of regional and subregional
organizations. New Zealand has seen and learned the
value of regional involvement in peacekeeping from
within its own region.
Supporting and working more effectively with
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
Economic Community of West African States, the
Economic Community of Central African States and
the African Union is an important challenge that must
be addressed.
New Zealand acknowledges, and is sensitive to, the
concerns of troop- and police-contributing countries
in respect of the recent peacekeeping developments.
Significant changes in peacekeeping, whether they be
broad trends on the enhanced use of technology, robust
mandates or significant changes in mission mandates,
must only be made with consultations with troopand police-contributing countries. There are already
general undertakings from the Council regarding
that engagement with troop- and police-contributing
countries, and the future challenge for Council members
is to implement those undertakings in a consistent and
satisfactory manner.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cyprus.
Mr. Emiliou (Cyprus): Cyprus aligns itself with
the statement made on behalf of the European Union.
I would like to thank the Russian Federation for
organizing such an important and timely debate.
Cyprus would like to pay tribute to all the men
and women who have served and continue to serve
in peacekeeping missions around the world. Their
contribution to the maintenance of international peace
and security is invaluable.
The year 2014 marks the fiftieth anniversary of
the establishment of the United Nations Peacekeeping
Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP). I take this opportunity

14-4266463/64

S/PV.7196

United Nations peacekeeping operations: new trends

to extend our deep appreciation and gratitude to the
United Nations and its Member States, in particular
all those Member States who have contributed troops
to UNFICYP throughout the years. Cyprus can attest,
from its own experience, that the maintenance of
international peace and security would be precarious
without United Nations peacekeeping in many parts of
the world.
Peacekeeping remains one of the primary tools
through which the United Nations fulfils its principal
mandate — the maintenance of international peace
and security. Peacekeeping has gone through various
phases and is now more multidimensional than ever
before. That is largely due to the ever-changing nature
of conflicts, which have become more internalized and
thus more challenging and complex and with more farreaching effects on regional and international peace
and security.
The emergence of new challenges requires the
collective and organized response of the international
community. They underline the need for this debate, as
well as for our quest for efficiency and modernization
to be ongoing. Increased challenges also underline the
need for the cost-effective use of resources and the
most efficient resource allocation. Those, however,
should be in line, and not to the detriment of, the ability
of peacekeeping missions to adequately and effectively
fulfil their mandate.
It is necessary that modern peacekeeping
adapt to new needs and challenges, for example by
adequately equipping peacekeepers and civilian
personnel. Up-to-date technology is a sine qua non
for the execution of the mandate of all United Nations
peacekeeping operations. Cyprus commends the
efforts made so far in that direction and would like to
encourage the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
to keep looking into possibilities for the expanded use
of modern technology.
In line with that, we would like to stress the
importance of the security of the Blue Helmets and
civilian personnel, which is closely associated with
the use of upgraded equipment and modern tools.
Safeguarding the welfare of peacekeepers and providing

11/06/2014

an upgraded working and living environment should
also form part of our priorities. In that regard, we are in
favour of the idea of extending peacekeeping mandates,
when necessary, so that the safety and security of
peacekeepers is guaranteed. We also consider that
the recommendations of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations provide a comprehensive
context of specific ideas that correspond to evolving
needs.
In discussing modern peacekeeping, the need
for a broader introduction of a gender perspective in
peacekeeping operations and the full implementation
of Security Council resolutions on women, peace
and security come to the fore. Cyprus attaches great
importance to the pivotal role of women in conflict
management and resolution with the aim of achieving
sustainable peace, and we would very much welcome
increased participation of women in peace processes
and peacekeeping operations, including in senior roles.
In that regard we feel privileged to have two women
at the top of the United Nations mission in Cyprus.
In addition to the current Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of UNFICYP,
Ms. Lisa Buttenheim, we will soon have the pleasure of
welcoming to Cyprus Major General Kristin Lund, the
next UNFICYP Force Commander and the first ever
woman to lead a United Nations peacekeeping force.
We are certain that their insight will prove decisive in
our effort.
In this volatile international environment, it is of
utmost importance to adhere to the principles of the
Charter, specifically to the principle of respect for State
sovereignty, when deploying peacekeeping operations.
It is essential that our efforts address the root causes
of international conflicts and that we undertake solid
and tangible steps that will enhance the United Nations
collectiveness and reaffirm our joint commitment to
upholding and strengthening the principles and values
of the Organization.
The President (spoke in Russian): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 3.40 p.m.

64/64

14-42664
