S/PV.7797

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7797

th meeting
Monday, 31 October 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Churkin. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Bessho
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Seck
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Power
Mr. Rosselli
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-35116 (E)
*1635116*

S/PV.7797

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

Committee (DCC) — were among the victims of the
attack.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Yemen to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Ismail Ould
Cheikh Ahmed, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Yemen; Mr. Stephen O’Brien, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator; and Mr. Muhannad Hadi, Regional
Director for the Middle East and North Africa, World
Food Programme.
Mr. O’Brien is joining us via audio-teleconference
from Bahrain.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed.
Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed: I thank you, Sir, for
this opportunity to update the Council on the latest
developments in Yemen and challenges facing efforts
to ensure the country’s return to peace and stability.
Recent developments in Yemen run counter to
the commitments to peace made by the parties to the
United Nations and the international community.
The security situation is dire, and the humanitarian
situation continues to deteriorate despite the efforts of
the humanitarian agencies.
With regard to security, on 8 October the Grand
Hall in Sana’a was subject to a tragic and painful
attack, where nearly 1,000 Yemenis were gathered to
pay their condolences at a funeral, killing more than
140 and injuring 550. I visited the site of the attack
several days ago, together with family members of
the victims, and saw for myself the shocking scale
of destruction. The Mayor of Sana’a, Abdel Kader
Hilal — a seasoned politician known for his bravery
and commitment to peace until his very last day, and
two members of the De-escalation and Coordination
2/28

31/10/2016

The bombing of a funeral is contrary to all Yemeni
norms and traditions, as well as to international
humanitarian law, and the perpetrators must be held
accountable. I extend once again my deepest condolences
to the families of the victims and wish a speedy recovery
to those who were wounded in this attack. I commend
the statements issued by the families of the victims,
calling for restraint and a thorough investigation of the
incident. This is a clear demonstration of their sense of
nationalism and commitment to peace.
The Arab coalition has taken responsibility for
the attack and its joint incidents assessment team
conducted a rapid preliminary investigation, which
recommended action against those involved and a
revision of the coalition’s rules of engagement. It will
be very important to complete the investigations and to
ensure the accountability of those involved.
Sadly, the 8 October attack was not the only incident
in which civilians and civilian infrastructure were
targeted in the past weeks. On 3 October, the shelling
of the Bir Basha district of Taiz from areas controlled
by forces of the Houthi and General People’s Congress
(GPC), resulted in nine civilian deaths, including three
children. Taiz has been subject to the indiscriminate
and lethal shelling of its residential areas that has
caused great damage to the city and its population and
must stop. These incidents are a horrific reminder of
the consequences of a war that has blighted the country
during the past 18 months of conflict.
The conduct of the parties on the ground is
contrary to their prior commitments to engage fully
and constructively in the United Nations-mediated
peace process. I called on the parties to recommit to
the 10 April terms and conditions for the cessation
of hostilities. Although I would have preferred an
open-ended cessation of hostilities, I was able to gain
agreement on a 72-hour pause, which entered into force
on 19 October.
I regret to report that both sides were involved
in significant violations of the cessation of hostilities
from its very first day. I am deeply concerned by
the escalation of hostilities, which has continued at
an alarming rate in the past few weeks. Fighting has
escalated in Taiz, Mareb, Al-Jawf and Hajjah and along
the border with Saudi Arabia, where ballistic missile
attacks have increased in frequency and range. The
16-35116

31/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.7797

targeting of the area of Mecca al-Mukarramah and
Jeddah was a dangerous development that may affect
the course of the war and the feelings of more than
1.5 billion Muslims worldwide.

the World Food Programme for the Middle East and
North African region, will provide the Council with
a more detailed briefing of the humanitarian situation
and the United Nations efforts to provide assistance.

I am also concerned that, according to reports,
international vessels travelling off the coast of Yemen
have come under fire from Houthi-controlled territories
in recent weeks. A United Arab Emirates vessel was
targeted in the Strait of Bab El-Mandab. United States
destroyers travelling through international waters
were reportedly targeted by direct missile attacks and
reportedly responsibilityonded by firing on Houthi
radar sites. These incidents risk causing a more acute
escalation of the conflict and threaten the security
of international maritime movement. I thank the
Council for its call on 4 October for such attacks to
cease immediately.

I should add that the deteriorating economic
situation threatens to create a far greater humanitarian
crisis in the coming months if urgent action is not
taken to save the day. Salary payments for most civil
servants — a primary source of income for much of
the population — have already ceased. Unless they
are resumed quickly, many more Yemenis will face
destitution and be forced to rely on humanitarian aid
to survive. All parties, including the Government
of Yemen, the Houthis and GPC, must commit to
cooperating to ensure the continued functioning of
the Central Bank and a rapid resumption of salaries
throughout the country.

In southern Yemen, Al-Qaida in the Arabian
Peninsula (AQAP) and the so-called Islamic State
continue to attack State institutions and civilian
targets. In Aden on 1 October, a suicide bomber killed
one civilian and injured three others, and on 29 and
30 September gunmen affiliated with the Islamic State
assassinated a retired intelligence officer and a security
officer. As part of their counter-terrorism efforts,
Yemeni security forces raided the house of a prominent
Islamic State leader and confiscated a variety of
weapons and explosives. In Abyan, counter-terrorism
forces killed three militants, including a high-ranking
AQAP affiliate, and arrested two others.

Despite the international community’s calls for the
Yemeni parties to fully commit to the peace process,
the parties have continued to take unilateral actions
that risk undermining the prospects for peace. On
2 October, the High Political Council established by the
Houthis and GPC asked the former Governor of Aden
to form a new Government. President Hadi Mansour’s
decision to replace the Governor of the Central Bank
and relocate the Bank to Aden has created further
economic uncertainty at a time when urgent measures
to save the economy are necessary. Prime Minister
Ahmed Bin-Dagher announced via social media plans to
convene a national body to ratify the draft constitution.
I again urge the parties to refrain from taking any
further measures, which will only complicate reaching
a negotiated settlement to put Yemen on the path to
peace.

The escalating military situation continues to
exacerbate a very dire humanitarian situation, which
requires far greater attention from the international
community. Local authorities in Yemen are unable to
provide basic social services for the population. This
is particularly true in the health sector, where only
45 per cent of facilities are functional. In addition to
the growing difficulty Yemenis are experiencing in
obtaining medical treatment at home, many Yemenis
are also unable to seek treatment abroad due to the
prohibition of commercial flights from Sana’a. In
that context, I call for the immediate resumption of
commercial flights to and from Sana’a. I also call on the
Houthis and GPC to ensure that access for humanitarian
agencies is free from bureaucratic impediments and
intimidation so that all who need assistance can receive
it. My colleagues Stephen O’Brien, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, and Mohannad Hadi, Regional Director of

I have conducted extensive consultations with
the Yemeni parties and members of the international
community over the past few weeks, and presented the
parties with a comprehensive and detailed road map
to end the conflict. The road map is consistent with
resolution 2216 (2015) and other relevant resolutions,
the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and its
Implementation Mechanism, and the outcomes of the
National Dialogue Conference. The road map contains a
set of sequenced political and security steps, conducted
in parallel, that would help Yemen return to peace and
orderly political transition.
The road map foresees the creation of military and
security committees that would supervise withdrawals

16-351163/28

S/PV.7797

The situation in the Middle East

and the hand-over of weapons in Sana’a, Al-Hudaydah
and Taiz. The committees would also be tasked with
ensuring the complete end of military violence and
the safety and security of the population and State
institutions. The road-map also lays out interim
political arrangements, including the appointment of a
new Vice-President and the formation of a Government
of national unity that would lead Yemen’s transition
process and oversee the resumption of political
dialogue, the completion of the constitutional process
and, ultimately, elections. I have been informed
unofficially that the parties have rejected the road
map. This demonstrates that the political elite in
Yemen remain unable to overcome their differences
and prioritize national, public interest over personal
interests. It is time for the parties to realize that there
can be no peace without concessions and no security
without agreement. They should base their positions on
the question of how to ensure security and stability for
the Yemeni people.
I will return to the region immediately following
this briefing to start consultations with the parties in
Sana’a and Riyadh with the aim of reaching a detailed
agreement based on the road map. It is now the
responsibility of the delegations to prioritize peace and
stability. The road map and the agreements discussed in
Kuwait should allow the peace process to move towards
a comprehensive settlement in the coming weeks if the
parties engage in good faith and demonstrate a sense of
political and national awareness.
I am grateful for the international community’s
continued support to my proposal for a comprehensive
agreement and calls for a cessation of hostilities. The
quadrilateral meetings of the Foreign Ministers of the
United States, the United Kingdom, Saudi Arabia and
the United Arab Emirates in Jeddah, New York and
London have supported these efforts, along with their
counterparts from the remaining members of the Gulf
Cooperation Council. I also thank the Foreign Ministers
of the Sultanate of Oman, France, Egypt, Kuwait, Qatar
and Bahrain and the Deputy Foreign Minister of the
Russian Federation, for their support. I am also grateful
to the Council members for their unwavering support
for the efforts to restore peace in Yemen.
After 18 months of horrific fighting, thousands
of deaths, injuries, unspeakable human suffering and
total economic collapse, we all need to ask how long
Yemenis will remain hostages to personal and reckless
political decisions. What are the parties waiting for to
4/28

31/10/2016

sign a political agreement? Have they not understood
that there are no winners in wars? The road map I
have proposed to the parties is widely supported by
the international community because it provides a
comprehensive solution and includes guarantees for the
political representation of all political groupings.
I would like to ask the Council for its full support
of the peace plan, an immediate cessation of hostilities
and the release of all prisoners and detainees. And to
the Yemenis I say that the dawn of peace could be near
if those responsible decide to prioritize the national
interest and start working on rebuilding a stable
State that guarantees the rights of all of its people
without discrimination.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank Mr. Ould
Cheikh Ahmed for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. O’Brien.
Mr. O’Brien: There can be no humanitarian
solution to the conflict in Yemen. There needs to be
a political solution, beginning with an immediate
cessation of hostilities. I echo the Special Envoy’s call.
All parties and all with influence over them must work
towards peace. Each day that this war continues, it is
civilians who suffer. Each day that the conflict drags
on, we are inexorably propelled ever closer to an entire
generation of Yemenis whose formative years will have
been spent in the chaos of combat.
This humanitarian catastrophe in Yemen is a manmade disaster, where conflict has exacerbated and
exponentially increased the suffering of the 50 per cent
of Yemeni population who were already in dire and
extreme poverty. Repeatedly over the past 19 months,
the people of Yemen have been robbed of their lives,
their hope and their right to live in dignity. Thousands
have been killed, tens of thousands have been injured,
more than 3 million have been forced to leave their
homes, and 7 million suffer the daily anxiety of not
knowing where their next meal might come from.
I have recently returned from Sana’a and
Al-Hudaydah, and in my previous visit I reached Aden
as well. I saw the desperation, fear and resignation in
the deep-sunken eyes of people I met who have lost all
hope — moved either to anger or powerless despair.
In short, since my last briefing to the Council, the
humanitarian situation has become worse and 80 per cent
of Yemenis — some 21.2 million people — are in need
of some form of humanitarian assistance. Humanitarian
16-35116

31/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East

actors are being asked to fill the void left by the political
power vacuum, but this is not a viable solution.
All the parties are reminded that adherence to
international humanitarian law is an obligation,
not an option. Perpetrators on all sides must be held
responsible for the legions of violations of international
humanitarian law. The Council and its members also
have responsibilities in this regard. I also stress the
need for effective, independent investigations into
allegations of war crimes and to prosecute suspects.
Since the collapse of the cessation of hostilities in
August, Yemenis across the country, in areas controlled
by various warring factions or none, have endured
near-daily attacks on civilians, civilian institutions and
public infrastructure. In August, the Saudi-led coalition
bombed a health facility supported by Médecins Sans
Frontières and a school in Sa’ada, and the attack on
the Grand Hall funeral gathering in Sana’a earlier this
month — for which the Saudi-led coalition has taken
responsibility — left at least 140 people dead and 550
injured. And although there is no equivalence between
those killing with air power, available only to one side
of the fight, and those on the other side killing with
land-based weaponry, the Houthi/Saleh forces have
indiscriminately shelled Taiz and other locations, as
well as towns and installations inside Saudi Arabia,
reportedly using ballistic missiles.
Humanitarian workers are also prevented from doing
their work. Armed Houthi and Saleh forces routinely
intimidate, delay and harass humanitarians, threatening
the Yemenis’ last lifeline with arrests and deportation,
or demanding the diversion of humanitarian assistance
to their fighters. These are all unacceptable breaches of
humanitarian law and humanitarian principles.
The drawn-out nature of Yemen’s conflict is having
a devastating effect on public institutions, which are
increasingly unable to provide basic social services. A
quarter of the population depends on those employed
on the public payroll. Yet paychecks are coming
with less regularity and the ability to withdraw cash
is disappearing amidst a liquidity crisis. This is a
foreshadowing of the impeding collapse of Yemen’s
economy, which is already desperately poor and
hollowed out by corruption. The Central Bank has been
unilaterally moved to Aden. Humanitarians do not have
the capacity or the resources to provide services to a
population of 26 million Yemenis. Our joint appeal is
less than half funded.

S/PV.7797

The complete, permanent collapse of public
institutions must be prevented. While the primary duty
lies with the Government of Yemen, the de facto Houthi
authorities and the previous Saleh regime, I call upon
anyone with any influence to heed this call, including
by ensuring that the salaries of doctors and nurses and
other critical civil servants are paid.
Where the failure of public services is felt perhaps
most acutely is the health sector. Fewer than half of the
rudimentary health facilities remain functional. Earlier
this month, as I said, I visited Al-Hudaydah, held by
Houthi/Saleh forces. Al-Hudaydah governorate is the
poorest in Yemen. I met with children and mothers, a
few fathers and the desperately overworked doctors,
nurses and carers at the paediatric centre at Al-Thawra
hospital, where the machines and lights frequently cut
out due to shortages of generator fuel, and the medicine
cabinets were empty. Easily treatable chronic illnesses
are becoming death sentences. Yemenis, old and
young, are dying every day because of the deprivation
of basic goods and services. Since March 2015,10,000
children under the age of five have perished from
preventable diseases as a result of the sharp decline
in the availability of immunizations and remedies for
diarrhoea and pneumonia. Also at risk are migrants
from the Horn of Africa and the more than 3 million
internally displaced, nearly half of whom are children.
They are particularly dependent on assistance, and on
supplies getting in by port or air — neither which is
getting in at the moment — and are vulnerable to the
spread of disease.
Yemen is one step away from famine. I met an
18-year-old woman with her 3-year-old baby, who
was bedridden with severe malnutrition, making it
difficult to eat; she is barely surviving on milk and tea.
I met 8-year-old children who looked like 2-year old
toddlers due to severe malnutrition and the resulting
health complications. We can only imagine how many
more children and teenagers are suffering and dying
of hunger and never make it to a hospital. As I learned
while in Yemen, over 14 million people food insecure;
7 million are severely food insecure and do not know
where their next meal is coming from, as I said earlier.
Over 2 million are malnourished nationwide, including
370,000 children who are severely malnourished.
On top of this already unthinkable suffering, cholera
is rearing its ugly head. There are now 61 confirmed
cases of cholera, with more than 1,700 more suspected
cases in 10 governorates. To date, the Ministry of

16-351165/28

S/PV.7797

The situation in the Middle East

Health has confirmed 4 cholera-related deaths and
42 deaths associated with acute watery diarrhoea. But
the caseload is almost certainly much higher owing to a
lack of testing kits. The United Nations and its partners
are establishing 21 cholera treatment centres, but that is
insufficient to stop the escalating spread.
As before the conflict, the vast majority of
the needs of the Yemeni people are met through
commercial deliveries. The United Nations Verification
and Inspection Mechanism (UNVIM) is a unique first
initiative in such arrangements pulled together by
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and now run by the United Nations Office for Project
Services. I take this opportunity to call for the renewal
of its mandate. Let us back something that is working.
UNVIM has cleared over 190 commercial vessels to
successfully offload over 3 million metric tons of food,
fuel and supplies at ports in Al-Hudaydah port, Ras Isa
and Al-Saleef since May.

31/10/2016

to permit that. Since Yemenia stopped flying into
Sana’a, thousands of Yemenis have found themselves
stranded, including students who need to pursue their
studies abroad and patients who need medical care not
available in Yemen today. Many lives could be saved if
only people could travel freely to obtain that medical
treatment. For instance, the United Nations worked
tirelessly to organize life-saving evacuations via air
of wounded civilians form the 8 October attack on the
Great Hall. The Iranians and, quickly thereafter, the
Kingdom of Saudia Arabia also offered to assist with
evacuations. Yet politics, bureaucratic impediments
and other obstacles prevented us from doing so.
Clearly, the people of Yemen cannot be asked to depend
upon such improvisations in order to receive essential
medical care. I take this opportunity to commend Oman
which was able to evacuate more than 100 people for
medical treatment, but a second evacuation could not
be arranged in time before the ceasefire ended.

However, there are currently approximately 40
vessels waiting to offload approximately 1.4 million
metric tons of cargo, including approximately 600,000
metric tons of food. Offloading cargo can take up
to 30 days on average, because of inefficient port
management, financial disputes between shippers and,
above all, slow offloading owing to limited capacity
at Al-Hudaydah port, which was severely damaged by
air strikes — albeit denied — in August 2015. Those
cranes need to be removed quickly to make way for
emergency mobile cranes.

Since I last briefed the Council, humanitarian
partners were reaching 3.5 million every month
between January and July. Now they are reaching
4.6 million per month, despite all challenges. There has
been a steady increase in deliveries to people in need
across the country, and an additional million people
are now being reached with food aid every month, with
more than 4 million Yemenis receiving food aid each
day. Partners have provided essential health services
through fixed and mobile teams, including both trauma
and secondary health care, and provided medicines and
supplies to health facilities that serve millions.

Profiteering from commercial imports in a
country where 90 per cent of food must be imported
is unacceptable in the face of a humanitarian disaster.
Since February 2016, fuel imports have averaged a
fifth of the pre-air-strikes levels. The coalition and
the local port authorities need to ensure rapid and safe
access for cleared vessels to reach the ports, especially
Al-Hudaydah port. I also call on donors to support the
rehabilitation of the damaged port infrastructure in
Al-Hudaydah, which is the lifeline of the country. The
United Nations is trying to accelerate the procurement
of mobile cranes to dramatically increase the port’s
capacity, but that is a short-term solution at best.

The United Nations, under the strong leadership
of the Humanitarian Coordinator, together with our
humanitarian partners, stands ready to do more, if only
the humanitarian access constraints could be eased
and we had more financial support. But that requires
coordination with the coalition, the myriad of local
actors at the central level in Sana’a and other parties to
the conflict. Bureaucratic impediments in Yemen were
already a problem before the current conflict began
and have since then grown more complex. The United
Nations continues to negotiate access with all relevant
actors, including the authorities in Sana’a.

In the same vein, I echo the calls for the coalition
and the Government of Yemen to immediately resume
commercial flights to and from Sana’a. Saudi Arabia
controls the airspace over Yemen, generally, and Sana’a,
in particular. It is within its power and is its choice
6/28

This man-made brutal humanitarian disaster is now
the catastrophe, which I had said was “looming” in my
first briefing (see S/PV.7494) to the Council 18 months
ago. The conflict has gone on for too long. It is high
time that the parties put the Yemeni people first and
reach a peaceful agreement in order to salvage what is
16-35116

31/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East

left of the infrastructure, the economy and the social
services of the country and, most importantly, address
the aspirations of the Yemeni people to live in a peaceful
society. If disregarded, the collapse of the country will
have menacing consequences not only for the Yemeni
people, but the entire region. The parties, their proxies
and those with influence over them — namely, the
Yemeni Government, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia,
the regional Gulf nations in the Gulf Cooperation
Council, the United States of America, the United
Kingdom and other Western partners of the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia — all have key roles and influence,
as do the Houthi authorities, former President Saleh
and his supporters and Iran. They can arrest this war
and this suffering. They can get behind the framework
agreement put forward by the Special Envoy and secure
peace in 30 days. It is a political decision which takes
courage and leadership, and we cannot wait.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. O’Brien for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Hadi.
Mr. Hadi: Yemen, one of the poorest countries
in the Arab world and has been devastated by a war
that has set the country back for decades. The state of
Yemen is broken. That is what the Yemenis themselves
told me last week. They feel as though they are dying
in silence and that they have been forgotten by the
world. Yemen has been plagued by years of instability
and widespread poverty. Before the conflict, Yemen
was already suffering. Many people were already
suffering from food insecurity. Simply put, the war has
aggravated that situation. Basic social services were
on the verge of collapse. Today, more than 20 million
people are in true need of some form of assistance. How
we have reached this stage is an important question, but
what is more important today is that I share with you
an eyewitness account of the humanitarian situation
in Yemen.
I have just returned from Yemen after a 7-day
mission. That was actually my second trip to Yemen
in two months and my third since the crisis started. On
my latest trip, I visited Sana’a, Hajjah and A-Hudaydah.
I am not a stranger to Yemen. I worked and lived there
for the World Food Programme (WFP) for three years
in the 1990s. But this time, as I was approaching
Sana’a’s airport, looking out from the WFP-operated
flight — which is one of the few special flights that

S/PV.7797

still service Sana’a — I saw the damage that the airport
had incurred.
Several things came to mind. I wondered how
people live. How do people come back to Yemen if they
are stranded outside the country. If someone required
medical evacuation, I wondered, how would that
situation be handled? As a staff member for the World
Food Programme, I also thought about what would
happen if we were asked to carry out an airlift for
urgently needed food and medicines to Sana’a. Would
the airport be able to handle such an operation? I really
do not know. I began to ask my colleagues if the airport
could handle such an operation.
On our way to the WFP offices from the airport, I
really looked into the faces of the Yemeni people on the
streets, among whom, as I mentioned, I had lived for
three years. What I saw were the signs of a lot of wear
and tear on their faces. They truly looked sad as they
watched another United Nations convoy pass through
the streets of Sana’a, not knowing if it was a sign of
hope or an end to the devastating war. When I arrived
at the office, again, I looked into the faces of the staff
and met with them. When I met with the national staff,
I especially sensed that they were actually torn between
fulfilling their humanitarian duties and taking care
of their own crises at home. Many among the United
Nations staff are actually displaced within Sana’a.
For the first few days of my mission in Sana’a, I met
with local authorities civil servants. The one message
that came up consistently in every single meeting was
that needs are increasing. There is a growing number of
people who are in desperate need of assistance and the
humanitarian operations are not keeping up. The food
security situation in Yemen is deteriorating rapidly.
Hunger is becoming epidemic everywhere. This June,
the Integrated Food Security Phase Classification
revealed that over 14 million people in Yemen are
food insecure. Of those, 7 million are severely food
insecure. It is one thing to read those reports, but it
is another to go and speak with a mother and father
who cannot serve a meal to their children at the end
of the day. As Mr. O’Brien said, those people do not
know when their next meal is coming. It is really scary
to not know if you can offer your children a meal. In
some governorates, 70 per cent of the population is
struggling to feed themselves. Nine out of Yemen’s
twenty-two governorates are classified as level three.
In other words, those governorates are at emergency

16-351167/28

S/PV.7797

The situation in the Middle East

levels of food insecurity. In simple terms, that means
they are one step away from hunger.
Once I left Sana’a, I went to Hajjah to see and
speak to people in the field. Our first stop was at the
health centre. It was crowded, with people queued up
almost until the entrance of the hospital. Some of the
beds had two kids in them. Almost all of the children
that I saw were malnourished, and some were severely
malnourished. The mothers of those children told me
that they had had to travel long distances from remote
areas in order to make it to the clinic. They told me
that they had to borrow money from neighbours and
relatives, and even to sell their assets, in order to pay
for treatment.
I am sorry to say that that is the positive side of
things. I can only imagine what I would have seen
if I had had the opportunity to visit more remote
locations. I would have seen parents looking at their
dying children who could not afford the long journey
to the hospitals — hospitals that may or may not have
had the capacity to respond to them. According to
UNICEF , 1.5 million children in Yemen suffer from
acute malnutrition, including 370,000 with severe acute
malnutrition, a life-threatening condition that requires
urgent treatment. The figure of 370,000 represents an
astonishing increase of 65 per cent from 2014. Children
suffering from severe malnutrition are 10 times more
at risk of dying than their peers because their immune
systems are extremely weak.
Our next stop was at the WFP General Food
Distribution office in Hajjah. The streets were crowded
with thousands of people lined up at the entrance. Since
February, WFP has had to split rations to ensure that
we reach as many food insecure people as possible. We
had already planned to reach 3 million people, but with
the rapid increase in the number of hungry people, we
were trying to give everybody something. Our teams
and partners have been forced to reach 6 million people
every month with half a ration. That is not the best way
to fight malnutrition, but it is the way to keep as many
people alive as possible in this situation. Many families
were generous enough to share their struggles with me
and the team. They told us how they experience hunger
every day and, sadder still, how they see it in the faces
of their children. For the first time, I found myself
helpless and unable to offer even words of support, let
alone promises of increased help and assistance that we
might offer.
8/28

31/10/2016

Everyone I met spoke about the increasing food
prices. Food prices are more than 20 per cent higher
than they were before the war. Yemen’s middle class
is now joining the ranks of those who cannot put food
on the table for their children. That is really worrying.
Many civil servants have not been paid for few months
now. They are no longer even able to purchase food.
On the road from Hajjah to Al-Hudaydah, we
stopped along the mountains to speak to one of the
farmers. He was harvesting millet and recounted to us
the details of how his crops had been damaged because
of the conflict. When I asked him how he was planning
to survive and what he was going to do given that he
had already lost his harvest, he kept repeating the words
that I heard from almost every struggling Yemeni that
I met, which translate to “we are in the hands of God”.
The road from Hajjah to Al-Hudaydah was the
same road that I remember from 20 years ago. I have
driven that road many times, except that this time it
was destroyed. Some bridges were destroyed; it was a
bumpy road and we had to take too many detours. It
was difficult. I then wondered how the road was going
to be used when the rainy season started. How is food
going to be moved from Al-Hudaydah to the rest of the
governorates?
Then we visited the port of Al-Hudaydah. As
everybody has said, I looked at the cranes and the port
equipment and so many things were damaged. Yemen
imports 90 per cent of its food requirements. The port
of Al-Hudaydahis a lifeline to many Yemeni people. I
was even told that the labourers are no longer feeling
safe enough to work in the port, so there is a lot of
congestion, a lack of equipment and labourers who
are not working. Even a WFP vessel that was carrying
urgently needed food had been waiting for weeks to
dock so that the food could be delivered to the people
who needed it.
Our next stop was Al-Thawra hospital in
Al-Hudaydah, which was a visit that proved to be
the defining moment of my mission. I saw the faces
of children that have been engraved in my mind as
iconic images of the crisis in Yemen. I saw children
and images — this time real ones — that I have never
seen in my 25 years of working for the World Food
Programme. I will never forget the children that I saw.
I am sure many of those present have seen the
disturbing images on the news recently, including the
heartbreaking photograph of 18-year-old, Ms. Saida
16-35116

31/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East

Ahmed Baghili. She was in the hospital when we
visited. The doctors told me that they had been seeing
an increase in children with severe acute malnutrition.
Malnutrition compromises the immune system of those
children who, like Saida, suffer from other health
complications. That all leading to high rates of child
mortality. The global acute malnutrition rate among
children in Al-Hudaydag, like Saida is one of the
highest around the world. The images of those children
and their mothers shocked me and my colleagues. We
all stood helpless. Overcome by emotion, I could not
decide who to sympathize with more — a malnourished
child sitting on a bed, too tired and sick to even cry,
or his mother next to him, too hungry and tired to
support her child. That really hurt me, not only as a
humanitarian worker but as a father.
Hunger and malnutrition are solvable problems but
only through the right intervention at the right time.
That is why we need to focus on helping the Yemeni
people. That is why we have to make sure that we
have the right access. I would like to thank the donors
that have supported and continue to support WFP in
implementating such programmes. We have been able
to work and assist, but only where we have access.
There are also challenges in getting timely security
clearances for the delivery of assistance. The fluid
security situation and ongoing fighting definitely do
not help WFP and the rest of the humanitarians to work
better to dispatch aid, to monitor and to make sure that
the right intervention is carried out at the right time.
That is something that we worry about, and it is one of
our main concerns. On the long drive back to Sana’a,
I had time to reflect on what I had seen. The situation
is undoubtedly beyond critical. Resources and political
support are urgently needed from the international
community. In 2016, WFP in Yemen has been funded
only 34 per cent of the $6 million needed.
I am not a politician and WFP is proud of its neutral
and impartial stance. I am here not to discuss political
matters, but rather to illustrate the impact of the current
conflict on the humanitarian needs of the Yemeni
people. An entire generation is crippled by hunger today
in Yemen, and we rely on the international community
to support us in this challenging time.
I met many people in Yemen, and I promised them
that I would convey their suffering to the world.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank Mr. Hadi
for his briefing.

S/PV.7797

I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): As
this will be the last time that my delegation takes the
floor during the Russian presidency of the Security
Council, let me thank you, Sir, and your entire team for
guiding our work in a month that has been particularly
challenging. Allow me in particular to highlight your
careful and balanced work in the Security Council with
regard to the process of selecting the next SecretaryGeneral of the Organization.
I would like to thank the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Yemen, Mr. Ould Cheikh
Ahmed; Under-Secretary-General Stephen O’Brien;
and Regional Director of the World Food Programme,
Mr. Muhannad Hadi, for their briefings.
Uruguay is deeply troubled by the worsening of
the conflict in Yemen in the light of the most heinous
violations and abuses of international humanitarian law
and human rights law taking place daily. The scarce
media coverage of the grave conflict in Yemen does not
absolve the perpetrators, the international community
or the Security Council of the responsibility they
shoulder. We are concerned about the ongoing violence
and the dismantling of institutions in the country as
a result of the increase in terrorist activity. Uruguay
regrets the repeated failures of the peace process,
including the most recent attempt to establish a 72-hour
ceasefire. In that regard, I support the resumption of the
negotiation process, which for many months has failed
to achieve tangible results, and which is now dependent
on the impact of a weakened road map.
Uruguay reiterates its appeal to the parties to
resume dialogue and to fully comply with their
commitment to ceasing hostilities to allow for the
conditions conducive to establishing peace. Actors in
the region must demonstrate their commitment to peace
and, in particular, those countries that have influence
with the parties must take vigorous steps to find a
peaceful solution to the conflict. In that regard, I would
like to highlight the work conducted by the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ould Cheikh
Ahmed, and to express my delegation’s support for his
continued efforts to find a solution to end the conflict.
We would also like to deeply thank all those involved
in lending humanitarian assistance in Yemen, for their
tireless and courageous work in bringing hope to the
suffering population.

16-351169/28

S/PV.7797

The situation in the Middle East

Uruguay strongly condemns the repeated attacks
on civilian targets in Yemen — indiscriminate air
strikes, mortar and missile attacks that destroy
hospitals, schools, markets, residential buildings and
infrastructure, and cluster bombs, anti-personnel mines
and snipers, which all wreak havoc on the civilian
population. We also denounce the attacks launched
from within Yemen on holy sites in Saudi Arabia and
on shipping in the Bab-el-Mandeb Strait. All players
in Yemen are demonstrating a complete disregard for
the rules governing armed conflict and causing deep
suffering and disastrous consequences for the civilian
population trapped in the combat areas.
In both Yemen and Syria, we are witnessing
unprecedented levels of dehumanization. In that regard,
allow me to make special reference to the terrorist
attack — I repeat, the terrorist attack — carried out
on 8 October in Sana’a on a community centre where
a funeral was taking place and in which more than 650
people died and more than 500 were injured. I refer to it
as a terrorist attack because in this country, where I was
educated and have lived for many years, I was taught
that if it walks like a duck and talks like a duck, with
its distinctive quack, then we must acknowledge that it
is, in fact, a duck. The operation to which I just referred
was carried out using tactics that are usually employed
by terrorists. It was a surprise attack and timed to occur
when the highest number of people were in attendance.
There was one explosion, followed by a deliberate pause
for several minutes to allow first responders to arrive,
and then a second explosion. That is a typical terrorist
operation but, in this particular case, two explosions
occurred to ensure maximum destruction.
In the various cultures, societies and religions
represented within the Organization, we all have similar
traditions in order to pay tribute to life and death. We
celebrate births and we grieve when someone dies. I
wonder which of our societies, cultures, religions or
gods justifies a terrorist attack on people attending a
funeral. Who would feel so all-powerful to order such
barbarity? Who would feel that much above reproach to
carry out such an atrocity?
Furthermore, that attack was not carried out with
homemade weapons. No improvised explosive devices
were used. No conventional or barrel bombs were
used, nor were cars or trucks loaded with explosives
employed. The Panel of Experts on Yemen stated that,
in the ruins of the community centre, they found the
remnants of a clearly identified sophisticated guidance
10/28

31/10/2016

system for a specific type of aerially launched bomb.
The type of bomb used has the unique feature of being
encased in a hard steel shell that allows the bomb to
penetrate a concrete structure and explode only after
it hits the ground. Although on a smaller scale, I think
that it is similar to the so-called bunker-busting bombs
that are being used liberally throughout Aleppo. There
is also information that that type of guidance system
is manufactured only by two companies in the world,
while the bomb that was used is manufactured by
only one company. It is clear that neither the guidance
system nor the bombs used can be acquired on the
black market. They can be sourced only through
Government-to-Government deals, and at very high
prices. In the Spanish language we say that weapons
are loaded by the devil, but weapons are fired by man
and the responsibility is borne by the person pressing
the launch button or pulling the trigger, as well as by
the individual who facilitates access to the weapon in
the first place.
It goes without saying that attempts to explain what
occurred have already begun, with claims that it was an
inadvertent mistake caused by inaccurate intelligence
and that extensive investigations are under way to
determine the facts of what occurred. I would point out
that in this case we are talking about two inadvertent
mistakes, as two attacks were carried out. In addition,
may I mention what extraordinary precision must
be required to repeat the same mistake on the same
community centre. I wonder if it was the same type of
mistake that led Médecins sans Frontieres to evacuate
six hospitals in Yemen on account of the repeated air
attacks it suffered, despite the fact that the geographic
coordinates of the exact location of those hospitals
were communicated and sent to all parties concerned.
It appears that someone continues to commit the same
mistakes. In those cases it was also said that extensive
investigations would be carried out to determine the
facts but, thus far, we have no information whatsoever
about who carried out the attacks or who supplied the
bombs that were used.
It should be pointed out that the Council has not
been able to issue even a statement condemning the
horrendous attack carried out on 8 October in Sana’a. It
seems that nothing can move the Council.
Neither excuses nor laments, be it because a
mistake was made or because of a claimed attack
against terrorists, will raise from the dead the hundreds
of children, women and elderly persons lying crushed
16-35116

31/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East

beneath the ruins in Sana’a and Aleppo. Uruguay
condemns all attacks against civilians, be it in Yemen,
Syria, Iraq or elsewhere, irrespective of whom the
victims are. We cannot condemn aerial attacks that kill
civilians in Syria but remain mute in the face of similar
ones in Yemen. There is no place for double standards
in this respect, as we are frequently reminded by our
colleague Rafael Ramírez Carreño. Those responsible
for these appalling atrocities and their accomplices
must be held accountable for their crimes.
It is time for a cessation of hostilities and a return
to the negotiating table. We all know very well that
these conflicts have no military solution. The only way
of resolving them is through political agreements that
are negotiated directly between the parties.
At the risk of repeating myself, I wish to state once
again with total conviction that Colombia is providing
the world with an exemplary model of an unrelenting
quest for peace. But, of course, in order to do this, a
great deal of courage is required, not just the superficial
valour demonstrated by beating one’s chest and the
arrogance of brandishing weapons, but, rather, the
deep-rooted courage to extend one’s hand to the enemy,
clasping an olive branch as a sign of peace.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I wish to thank
Ismail, Stephen and Muhannad for their very powerful
briefings. They all are doing vital work on this issue,
and, as Security Council penholder on Yemen, I want
to reiterate at this meeting today our appreciation for
their tireless efforts.
As they all have highlighted, the sheer scale of
the crisis facing the people of Yemen means that there
can be no letup in our efforts. It is a political crisis,
a humanitarian crisis, a crisis where the violence
simply will not end. As a result, civilians continue to
suffer, with more than 14 million people now foodinsecure, and more than 21 million people in need of
humanitarian assistance. That is the tragic cost of the
ongoing conflict in Yemen.
In response, we all know what needs to happen.
First, the violence must stop. There needs to be an
enduring, meaningful cessation of hostilities. I was
proud of the United Kingdom’s efforts to help secure a
ceasefire early this month, but it is clear that three days
is simply not enough. We therefore call on the parties to
renew their commitment and implement an immediate,
sustainable cease-fire.

S/PV.7797

In support of that goal, we also need to make sure
that the De-escalation and Coordination Committee has
the support, training and resources that it needs. The
Committee is a crucial mechanism for building trust
and addressing violations. If the Yemeni parties are
serious about peace, they should engage with it fully.
Sadly, any signs of de-escalation have been elusive
of late. Only last week, a long-range missile was fired
from Sa’dah into Saudi Arabia, reportedly at the King
Abdulaziz international airport, north of Jeddah. This
attack by the Houthi and Saleh loyallists was provocative
and unacceptable. All sides need to show restraint.
We were shocked and appalled by the terrible loss
of life in the airstrikes on the funeral hall in Sana’a
earlier this month. We immediately underlined our
deep concerns at the ministerial level with the Saudi
Government. More than 140 people died that day. Elbio
has just spoken very powerfully about it, and I share
his disappointment and his regret at the fact that the
Security Council was unable to agree on the draft press
statement that the United Kingdom had circulated,
which would have strongly condemned the attack.
Despite this failure, the United Kingdom is clear
that there must be accountability for that attack. The
release of an initial investigation by the coalition’s
Joint Incidents Assessment Team is a positive step in
that direction.
Stopping the violence is just the first step, and even
that will not be enough to help the millions of people
in need of assistance in Yemen. Regardless of progress
on the ceasefire, we also need to make concerted
strides on improving the humanitarian situation. In
the General Assembly last month, the United Kingdom
hosted an event that raised $100 million for Yemen; half
of that money came from United Kingdom itself. The
international community and United Nations agencies
also committed to strengthening their response. But
money alone is never enough. It counts for very little,
in fact, when aid cannot get through. So let us call
on the parties to take every step possible to improve
humanitarian access, so that we can help alleviate the
suffering of the millions in need.
Ultimately, for all of this — the cessation of
hostilities and the humanitarian access — to be
sustainable, we need the stability that comes only from
a political process, and that requires a compromise
between the parties. We therefore welcome Ismail’s
presentation of the road map to the Yemeni parties; it

16-3511611/28

S/PV.7797

The situation in the Middle East

sets out how that compromise can be achieved, it says
clearly the security and political steps that the parties
must take to reach a peaceful resolution.
While the path ahead on the political track has
become clearer, it is still a path that has yet to be
followed fully. We are disappointed at the continuing
failure of the Houthis and Saleh to engage on the Sana’a
security plan, in defiance of resolution 2216 (2015), and
by President Hadi’s public rejection of the road map.
We hope that he will now receive it and engage on it
in good faith. In fact, we call on all parties to engage
in good faith with the Special Envoy and to return to
negotiations on the basis of the road map and in a spirit
of compromise.
As they do so, the Special Envoy will have the full
support of the United Kingdom for his efforts to bring
the parties together. We take note of his requests just
now for full Security Council support, and, as penholder
on this issue, we will continue to work on a draft
Security Council resolution calling on all parties to do
four things: first, return to an immediate cessation of
hostilities; secondly, return to negotiations on the basis
of the road map; thirdly, bring about accountability for
alleged breaches of international humanitarian law; and,
fourthly, allow unhindered access to humanitarian aid.
We pledge to continue working with our partners
on this resolution in support of the Special Envoy and
all his efforts on the road map and on the cessation of
hostilities, and, ultimately, on bringing peace to Yemen.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to express my
gratitude to the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Yemen, Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed; UnderSecretary-General Stephen O’Brien; and Mr. Muhannad
Hadi of the World Food Programme (WFP) for their
comprehensive briefings today. The situation on the
ground is dire.
I will focus first on the humanitarian situation
in Yemen, which Mr. O’Brien and Mr. Hadi vividly
described for us. Civilians are the tragic victims of
the failure to end the fighting and reach a political
agreement. Japan commends the United Nations and
all humanitarian workers in Yemen for their tireless
efforts under extremely difficult circumstances.
We heard from Under-Secretary-General O’Brien
today that 80 per cent of Yemenis are in need of basic
humanitarian aid, which underlines the seriousness of
this crisis. We also heard that the number may increase
12/28

31/10/2016

further. Japan, together with other international
partners, is providing support to help meet these basic
needs. We have announced our renewed commitment
to financially supporting the United Nations and other
international bodies in scaling up operations in Yemen.
Food security, health and education are priority areas.
Collapsing public services and the deteriorating
economy have only further worsened the devastating
humanitarian situation. We were told by the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and WFP
today about the serious humanitarian problems caused
by the destruction of the social infrastructure. We are
also concerned by the recent developments surrounding
the Central Bank and its relocation from Sana’a to
Aden. Japan calls upon the Government of Yemen to
avoid taking measures that may affect the activities of
commercial banks and stresses the importance of the
Central Bank serving the interests of all Yemenis.
A halt to military activities is essential if we are
to achieve fundamental solutions to the humanitarian
and economic crises in Yemen. One and a half years
have already passed since the intensified fighting
began. The Yemeni people are deeply suffering and
exhausted from the continuous air strikes, shelling
and fighting on the ground. All military activities,
including attacks beyond the Yemeni territories, must
be halted immediately.
Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed informed us today
that he presented the Yemeni Government and the
Houthi-General People’s Congress delegation with
a Yemen road map to address security and political
arrangements. This may lead the way to the practical
implementation of the three fundamental components
for peace and stability in Yemen, namely, the Gulf
Cooperation Council initiative, the outcomes of the
National Dialogue Conference and resolution 2216
(2015). Japan welcomes the Special Envoy’s work on
the road map.
It is unclear, however, whether this document is
being seriously considered by the Yemeni parties.
Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed told us that President Mansour
Hadi has rejected the road map. In the statement issued
yesterday, the Houthi-General People’s Congress
complained that the road map does not contain essential
elements for the solution. Although uncertainties
remain, it is time for the parties to take their seats at the
negotiating table and to immediately resume face-toface consultations. The parties should undertake good16-35116

31/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East

faith negotiations under the mediation of the United
Nations to reach an agreement.
Now that Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed has presented
the road map, there may be a chance to advance the
political process. What then should the Council’s
next step be? I believe that the answer is to send a
strong, unified message to the parties. First, we, the
Security Council, must call on the parties to resume
negotiations immediately, to respect the cessation of
hostilities and to allow and facilitate unimpeded and
sustained humanitarian access. The group of 18 and
some States Members of the United Nations have
influence on the parties, but the Council must also
play a proactive role. Equally importantly, we must
ensure that the negotiations bear fruit. While adopting
a resolution is our basic and traditional measure for
ensuring implementation, one potential route is for the
President of the Security Council to present our unified
message at the beginning of the negotiations when
they commence.
We are now at a critical juncture for Yemen’s
future and I would like to request Special Envoy Ould
Cheikh Ahmed to redouble his efforts. We strongly
encourage convening a new round of negotiations. In
addition, the Special Envoy’s direct communication
with key stakeholders, including President Hadi,
Abdul-Malik Al-Houthi and Ali Abdullah Saleh, is
crucial to push the political process forward. I would
appreciate hearing from Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed
about the results of meetings with these figures at our
next briefing. Japan will continue to support Mr. Ould
Cheikh Ahmed’s efforts.

S/PV.7797

whether it calls itself a revolutionary council or a
supreme political council or any other name. We support
any form of settlement agreed on by the Yemeni parties
that would ensure comprehensive and wide-scale
participation of all factions of Yemeni society.
Secondly, Egypt cannot accept under any condition
any threats to the freedom of navigation in Bab-elMandeb Strait and the Red Sea. The protection of the
freedom of navigation is a lifeline for Egypt and for
international trade and transportation. It is at the heart
of our Egyptian and Arab national security.
Thirdly, Egypt cannot accept under any pretext
the continued attacks on the security of Saudi Arabia,
including the launching of ballistic missiles against
civilian centres in Saudi Arabia and the violating of
its border security. The security of Gulf States and
the security of the Arab world is part and parcel of
the security of Egypt. In that regard, we vigorously
condemn the Houthis’ attack on Mecca in an
unacceptable precedent. We cannot stay silent in the
face of this violation of the sanctity of holy sites and
this disregard for innocent civilians and the sentiments
of Muslims around the world.
Having reaffirmed these principles. I would like to
address the future of the crisis and its settlement.

At the outset, with regard to the issue of Yemen,
I would like to underscore the aspects that Egypt, the
Arab member of the Council, considers red lines, which
must not be crossed or breached under any condition
and for any reason.

First, Egypt believes that there is no alternative
to a political settlement to the Yemini crisis. Further
delay in reaching such a settlement will only lead to
more killing, humanitarian suffering and destruction.
In this regard, Egypt commends and appreciates the
efforts of the United Nations over the past month. We
encourage all parties to engage seriously in all efforts
aimed at reaching a settlement in Yemen based on
relevant Security Council resolutions and statements.
These statements call for the return of the legitimate
Government; the withdrawal of the Houthis from cities
and the handing over of their heavy and medium-sized
weapons; and ensuring the return of inclusive the
political institutions.

First, Egypt believes that the Government of
the Yemeni President, Mr. Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi
Mansour, is the only legitimate Government in Yemen.
It is the only Government recognized by Egypt and
by other members of the international community.
Egypt cannot acknowledge the existence of any entity
that seeks to hijack the authority of the Government,

Secondly, agreeing on a cessation of hostilities as
part of the political settlement is of vital importance,
given the continued suffering of Yemenis, regardless
of their political affiliations, and the dire humanitarian
needs and the need to ensure access to humanitarian
assistance in all parts of Yemen. This is a priority for
Egypt and the international community.

Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, and the Russian
delegation and wish you a successful presidency of the
Security Council during this month.

16-3511613/28

S/PV.7797

The situation in the Middle East

In conclusion, Egypt will continue to fully support
the efforts of the United Nations and the Special Envoy
to reach a settlement to the tragedy in Yemen.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I would like to
thank the Secretary-General’s Special Envoy, Mr. Ismail
Ould Cheikh Ahmed; the United Nations Humanitarian
Coordinator, Mr. Stephen O’Brien; and the World Food
Programme Regional Director, Mr. Muhannad Hadi, for
their briefings and for their work and for their support
of Yemen and its people.
It is now more than a year and a half since the attempt
by Houthi forces to seize control of the Government of
Yemen prompted the collapse of the political transition
and the outbreak of the current conflict. It is now clear
that none of the parties can achieve their aims through
military force.
Today’s briefers have underlined just how bad the
situation on the ground has become. Tragically — as
we have been saying for too long — Yemeni civilians
are paying a heavy price for the ongoing hostilities.
More than 10,000 Yemenis have been killed, and most
Yemenis are now in need of humanitarian assistance.
Images of the more 370,000 severely malnourished
children remind us of the fragility of Yemen’s food
supply. Although the United Nations Verification and
Inspection Mechanism for Yemen continues to play
an essential role in managing food imports, a lack of
port capacity means ships face long delays, further
inflating the cost of food and fuel. This, compounded
by the increasingly serious risk of economic collapse,
threatens to put millions of Yemenis at risk of starvation.
The collapse of the public health system also
means that millions of Yemenis lack access to even
the most basic medical services. This medical crisis is
compounded by the ban on commercial flights in and
out of Sana’a, which prevents critically injured civilians
from getting medical assistance elsewhere. We call for
this ban to be lifted immediately.
Both sides have also regularly fallen short of their
obligations to protect civilians caught up in this conflict.
The coalition airstrike against a funeral in Sana’a on
8 October was a shocking example of this failure. It
also makes the reports over the weekend of airstrikes
against a Houthi-held prison all the more disturbing.
Urgent steps are needed to provide accountability
for these actions and to ensure that such incidents do
not happen again. We stress once again the need for
14/28

31/10/2016

all parties fully comply with their obligations under
international humanitarian law.
The conflict has created a conducive environment
for terrorist groups such as Al-Qaida in the Arabian
Peninsula and Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
to expand their influence and reach. Recent attacks
on shipping in the Bab-el-Mandeb have further
demonstrated the emergence of other strategic threats
from this conflict.
Ultimately it is only by ending hostilities that we
can restore stability and end the suffering of the Yemeni
people. This must be our central focus and most urgent
priority. In this regard, we are deeply disappointed
at the failure to extend the recent ceasefire brokered
by the United Nations Special Envoy. An enduring
ceasefire is a necessary step towards a more positive
trajectory for Yemen. We urge all parties to agree to a
sustained ceasefire as soon as possible.
For some time we have appeared frustratingly
close to an agreement on how to end this conflict. The
key elements of a deal have been evident for some
months, with the main points of contention being
their sequencing. The parties have been presented
with a credible road map for security and political
arrangements to end the conflict and resume an inclusive
political transition. We recognize that this road map
requires difficult concessions from all parties, but flatout rejection is not acceptable.
The alternative is a further prolonging of the
current bloody stalemate that can achieve little other
than heaping further misery on the Yemeni people
and creating longer-term problems for the country and
region.We urge leaders on both sides to put the interests
of their people first and accept this road map as the basis
for ending this tragic conflict, and to take it forward in
a spirit of flexibility and compromise. History will not
judge kindly those who seek to delay or derail these
efforts, and neither should the Council.
In the coming weeks, the Council needs to focus
on doing all it can to support the efforts of the United
Nations Special Envoy and others to end the violence. It
must also send a clear signal to the Yemeni parties that
the international community expects them to resume
meaningful negotiations with each other towards
achieving a sustainable end to the conflict, and that that
spoilers will not be tolerated.
16-35116

31/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East

We stand ready to work with Council members on
anything that might be useful to add pressure on the
parties to resolve this conflict.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): First, I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for your efforts
and contributions in the presidency of the Council to
promote the Council’s work. I would also like to thank
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen,
Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed; the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Stephen
O’Brien; and the World Food Programme Regional
Director, Mr. Muhannad Hadi, for their briefings.
At present, the situation in Yemen remains
complicated. Peace talks are stagnant, conflicts are
ongoing and the humanitarian situation is grave. China
is concerned about the situation and empathizes with the
suffering Yemeni people. Political dialogue is the only
way to achieve lasting peace in Yemen. China therefore
welcomes Special Envoy Ould Cheikh Ahmed’s contact
with the parties concerned and his active mediation.
In the current circumstances, China maintains
that the parties to the conflict in Yemen and the
international community should take the following
actions expeditiously.
First, parties to the conflict should exercise restraint
and cease hostilities as early as possible so as to create
the necessary conditions for relaunching peace talks
and improving the humanitarian situation in Yemen.
Secondly, it is imperative to further support Special
Envoy Ould Cheikh Ahmed’s mediation, so as to have a
positive influence on the parties concerned, and to push
for peace through negotiation.
Thirdly, parties to the peace talks should exercise
sincerity and flexibility, narrow their differences
through consultations, and properly address a series
of sensitive issues, including withdrawal, disarmament
and the establishment of a Government of national
accord, so as to reach a comprehensive solution that
fits the national condition in Yemen and addresses the
concerns of all the parties.
Fourthly, parties to the conflict should take effective
measures to alleviate the humanitarian situation. They
should follow international humanitarian law and
actively cooperate with international relief efforts. We
hope that the international community will join hands
in alleviating the suffering of the Yemeni people.

S/PV.7797

Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): Allow me
to thank Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Yemen, whose valuable
and continued efforts we welcome; Stephen O’Brien,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs;
and Muhannad Hadi, World Food Programme Regional
Director, for their briefings and their commitment.
As we have just heard, the humanitarian situation in
Yemen is extremely serious. There are several aspects
that we find particularly troubling.
First is the attacks on the civilian population.
France firmly condemned the attack on 8 October,
where, according to the United Nations, there were 140
deaths and many wounded. We cannot stress enough
how essential it is that all parties respect international
humanitarian law.
The degradation of the health situation is very
troubling. Yemen’s health-care system is almost
completely destroyed, and Yemenis no longer have
access to basic health services. Today more than
19 million people — approximately 80 per cent of the
population — have difficulty in accessing drinking
water and basic sanitation. In these circumstances, the
outbreak of cholera — with 6 deaths, 61 confirmed
cases to date and more than a million potentially
contaminated people — is particularly disturbing and
shows the extent to which the situation has deteriorated.
The picture painted by the World Food Programme
indicates that part of the population is on the brink of
famine. There has been no significant improvement for
months, especially in the regions most affected by the
conflict, and today 14 million Yemenis — over half
the population — live in conditions of food insecurity,
with 7 million of them in a food emergency situation.
Malnutrition rates have also reached alarming heights.
The survival of millions of Yemenis depends
today on the immediate and unimpeded delivery of
humanitarian aid, as well as on the re-establishment
of services that are essential for survival. More than
ever, the parties must ensure total, secure, permanent
and unhindered humanitarian access, pursuant to their
international obligations. In particular, the parties must
facilitate and guarantee the work on the ground by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
Given these tragic circumstances, the recent
military developments are unacceptable, and it is with
great concern that we have noted that the 72-hour

16-3511615/28

S/PV.7797

The situation in the Middle East

ceasefire last week was not only not fully observed, but
it was also not renewed. Attacks on vessels in the Red
Sea and against Saudi territory must cease. Moreover,
it is essential to determine precisely which country is
providing arms to the Houthis.
We once again call on parties to commit to and
honour a new and immediate cessation of hostilities,
which would provide a respite for the local population
and enable a resumption of negotiations. As we have
stated time and again, the only solution to the conflict
is a political one. We deeply regret the rejection of
the peace plan proposed by the Special Envoy. We are
ready, in the Security Council, to determine how to
pressure the parties to the Yemeni conflict to shoulder
their responsibilities. The Yemeni population has been
subjected to untold suffering. Each party must make the
necessary concessions and put their individual interests
aside. Each party must be able to commit to the road
map for peace and its implementation.
The basic parameters of the settlement are known
to one and all, as they were the result of in-depth
consultations over several months in Kuwait, New York
and, in recent days, in Riyadh and Sana’a. It is crucial
that the international community, particularly regional
Powers, support the process and not fuel the risk of
escalation. We reiterate our full support for the tireless
efforts of the Special Envoy and his road map — his
commitment and determination to bring the parties to
an agreement are remarkable and are to be encouraged.
The longer the conflict lasts, the more difficult
it will be to deal with its long-term consequences.
The more the humanitarian situation deteriorates, the
greater the reconstruction needs will be. The longer
the instability persists in the country — not allowing
the legitimate Government to exercise the control that
it should have — the greater the risk of terrorism,
which threatens not only Yemen but, as we know, the
entire world.
In conclusion, I would point out once again our
support for the efforts of the Special Envoy, who spares
no effort or time in securing the commitment of all
parties in restoring peace and stability in Yemen. We
fully trust him in reaching a definitive proposal that
will lead to an agreement. In our national capacity, we
are fully behind him and we will use every opportunity
to engage in dialogue with our regional partners to
advocate a cessation of hostilities and a peaceful
settlement in Yemen. Let us together show that it is
16/28

31/10/2016

possible to have a unified Security Council in order to
settle the crisis, under the aegis of the United Nations. It
is our responsibility to do so, and if we pool our efforts
we will have the means.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
Special Envoy Cheikh Ahmed, Under-SecretaryGeneral O’Brien and World Food Programme Regional
Director Hadi for their briefings. I pay special thanks
to Mr. Hadi for bearing witness on behalf of Yemenis
whose voices, as we all know, are too rarely heard in
this conflict.
Recently, a father of four children in Sana’a
reportedly asked his daughters to post their feelings
about this war on Facebook. Fifteen-year-old Kholud
wrote:
“We, the children of Yemen, want to achieve our
hopes: to study and play and achieve our goals.”
That is something one would expect almost any child
of Kholud’s age to want. But she went on to say that in
this conflict:
“We sleep afraid, we wake up afraid and leave our
homes afraid.”
Kholud’s younger sister, 14-year-old Asma, wrote:
“We are afraid of catastrophe, as it is painful when a
person kills others; mothers, fathers and children.”
And their youngest sister, 12-year-old Haneen, reported:
“Every day, the noises get louder and louder next
to us.”
Although these voices are not with us enough,
whether here in the Council or in our regional or
international media, when we do hear from people on
the ground, people like Kholud, Asma and Haneen,
they are pretty consistent. They demand, or they plead,
for an end to their suffering. We, as members of the
Security Council, need to make the same demand, and
we need to be united in doing so. The parties must
stop escalating their attacks. They must, at long last,
commit to peace, and we need immediate progress
on three fronts: an immediate cessation of hostilities,
a humanitarian surge — the likes of which we have
not seen in Yemen for the life of the conflict — and a
prompt return to political talks.
First, the United States calls on the parties to
recommit immediately to the cessation of hostilities,
which means halting all military actions on the ground,
16-35116

31/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East

in the air and at sea. That includes an end to shelling
and an end to air strikes. A sustained cessation of
hostilities is necessary to give the Special Envoy the
space he needs to engage the parties on the terms of a
political solution to the conflict.
There is very little good news in Yemen, but one
small piece of good news is that we have seen that the
parties can reduce the violence in Yemen when they
show the will to do so. For all of the concerns that all
of us have about command and control, from April to
August this year, the cessation of hostilities led to a
significant decrease in air strikes and violence, and
therefore in suffering on the ground. I do not think
we can overstate the success; the cessation was far
from perfect, but it provided some respite for Yemen’s
civilians and it provided a backdrop to help encourage
talks to continue. We need to get back to where we were
with the cessation, and it needs to be improved.
But since the Kuwait talks ended nearly three
months ago, the parties have intensified their attacks.
Last Friday, forces loyal to the Houthi and former
President Ali Abdullah Saleh reportedly launched a
missile from Yemen towards Mecca and Jeddah, one
among several recent missile launches. The United
States condemns those missile launches in the strongest
terms. Those attacks on Saudi territory are an obvious
attempt to derail the political process, and they must
cease. As we have emphasized, every country has a
right to defend itself, and the United States remains
fully committed to the security of Saudi Arabia.
It is also incumbent upon the Saudi-led coalition
and the forces of the Yemeni Government to refrain
from taking steps to escalate the violence and to
commit to the cessation of hostilities. After 19 months
of fighting, it should be clear that there is absolutely no
military solution to the conflict. Those who believe that
if one increases military pressure, it will strengthen
one’s hand in political negotiations, has 19 months of
evidence not shown that it is not the case. Increasing
military pressure and initiating new operations, at
this point, is only going to prolong the unnecessary
suffering. The longer the conflict continues, the more
that Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula will use this
vacuum to expand its presence and launch new attacks.
Air strikes that hit schools, hospitals and other
civilian objects have to stop. In many cases, these
strikes have damaged key infrastructure that is essential
to delivering humanitarian aid in Yemen. The United

S/PV.7797

States strongly condemns the air strike on mourners at
a reception hall in Sana’a earlier this month. The strike
left 140 mourners dead and more than 600 injured.
The coalition has accepted responsibility, and we look
forward to further reporting on their investigation of
the attack, including on concrete measures taken to
establish accountability, compensate victims and make
certain that such strikes are not repeated. The United
States will continue to underscore to the coalition, the
need to take all feasible measures to reduce civilian
casualties and target precisely, including verifying
targets against a no-strike list.
We also strongly condemn Houthi-Saleh forces
for all the cross-border attacks into Saudi Arabia and
the shelling of populated areas, especially in Taiz. On
4 October, the United Nations reported that artillery
fire in the centre of Taiz killed at least 10 civilians,
including 6 children, and injured 17 others. The civilian
death toll underscores again that the parties need to
commit to the cessation of hostilities.
That brings me to my second point, which is the
need for a humanitarian surge of a different order.
The statistics that Under-Secretary-General O’Brien
and Mr. Hadi have presented show that the problem
is getting worse. Let us take only one as an example.
The number of 370,000 children suffering from severe
acute malnutrition has increased from that of 320,000
reported last year. Severe acute malnutrition means
one thing — unless these kids get an immediate
course of medical treatment, they will likely die. Let
us consider that for a moment. Hundreds of thousands
of children — infants and babies in many cases — are
on the brink of dying not because of bombs or shells,
but just because they cannot get a simple course of
nutritional supplements. Millions more are at risk.
Let us therefore focus on how we can respond. All
Member States should demand here at the United Nations
and in our bilateral relationships and conversations that
the parties allow complete and unfettered humanitarian
access. That means that authorities on the ground need
to approve the United Nations plans to distribute aid
and let convoys through checkpoints. It also means that
roads, bridges and ports that are vital for delivering
aid need to be protected from the fighting. The United
Nations Verification and Inspection Mechanism
(UNVIM) has helped facilitate imports of basic food
and medicine into Yemen, and, as Mr. O’Brien has
noted, it deserves all of our continued support and full
cooperation from the parties.

16-3511617/28

S/PV.7797

The situation in the Middle East

But there are some additional steps that should be
taken. The parties need to reopen the airport in Sana’a
to civilian flights once again, allowing critically injured
Yemenis to leave and Yemenis, who are stranded
abroad and wish to return, to get back to their homes.
When fuel and medicine do enter Yemen, the parties
need to allow such goods to reach hospitals in all parts
of the country. The cranes at Al-Hudaydah port need to
be repaired and the parties should facilitate the United
Nations plans to repair them so as to restore capacity at
what had long been a vital port and source of influx of
many goods.
At the same time, one has to stress that no amount of
aid can make up for the void left by Yemen’s collapsed
economy. That is why we are concerned about the
consequences of the Yemeni Government’s decision to
move the central bank. We call on the Government to
continue paying salaries nationwide. Those salaries are
one of the few sources of income left for many Yemeni
families. I was struck by Mr. Hadi’s account that often
just a small amount of money is what is needed for a
mother to be able move from one part of the country
to a place where a nutritional supplement is available.
When salaries are taken away, a critical sources of
income is taken away, and it becomes more likely that
infants and children will die of starvation.
My third and final point is on the urgent need for
a political solution. The Special Envoy has presented
both parties with a credible and balanced road map for
ending the conflict together with the security plan for
Sana’a. The road map addresses the concerns of the
Yemeni Government about sequenced withdrawals from
the key cities of Sana’a, Taiz and Al-Hudaydah, and it
addresses the concerns of the Houthi and the General
People’s Congress about the transition of executive
authority. The road map is a basis for a negotiation. It
is not a take-it-or-leave-it proposition. Now is not the
time for any of the parties to hedge, stall or add new
conditions. The parties should engage with the Special
Envoy immediately to hammer out the details of a final
agreement. Of course, moving forward with this road
map will require the parties in Yemen to compromise,
which is not a strong suit. It is long past time for them
to do so. The people of Yemen cannot afford for the
parties to continue acting on the illusion that they will
achieve a total victory. It will not happen.
Let me conclude. Earlier, I mentioned the problem
of severe acute malnutrition, joining many voices
around this table. A recent BBC documentary entitled
18/28

31/10/2016

Starving Yemen profiled one such case, that of a toddler
named Abdul Rachman who was born at the start of
the conflict. Abdul Rachman is an 18-month-old infant
now but weighs as much as a six-month-old baby. He is
also lactose intolerant, requiring a baby formula that
used to be widely available before the conflict, but now
his family cannot find the specific formula anywhere.
Looking at Abdul Rachman, his mother finally breaks
down in the documentary. She says, “I am losing my
son, and there is nothing that I can do about it. I have
seen children like him on television. They die”.
At the eleventh hour, an especially determined
doctor just barely managed to find a three-month
supply of formula to keep Abdul Rachman alive. But
let us consider again that there are more than 370,000
kids suffering severe acute malnutrition like Abdul
Rachman, with just as many anguished mothers at their
bedsides who have seen kids like these on television
but never imagined that they would be holding one like
them. The Special Envoy is offering a way out of the
fighting. The plight of children like Abdul Rachman
should compel the parties to negotiate and cease
hostilities immediately. And we, as members of the
Council, should unite in demanding it.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): Senegal
thanks you, Sir, for convening this meeting. My
delegation would like to thank Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed,
Mr. O’Brien and Mr. Muhannad Hadi for their briefings
and poignant descriptions that they have provided us
with regard to the situation in Yemen. Their combined
work on the ground allows us to entertain the hope of the
cessation of hostilities, better access to humanitarian
aid and a final political solution.
Senegal regrets the deteriorating situation in the
country and the innumerable lives lost, including
those who died during a funeral procession, which was
targeted on 8 October. We must remind all the parties
to the conflict, including the Houthis and their allies,
their obligation to protect civilians in accordance
with international human rights laws. Unconditional
and uninterrupted access to humanitarian aid must be
provided to all those in need of it. Once again, we would
like to recall that the challenge to the legitimacy of the
Yemeni Government is at the basis of the crisis. The
conflict has overflowed in the form of missile attacks
on Saudi Arabia in Jeddah and the holy site of Mecca.
Senegal vigorously condemns those missile launchings
and agrees with Egypt that that is a red line, which must
not be crossed.
16-35116

31/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East

The political solution remains possible on the
basis of negotiations between the parties, taking into
account the initiative proposed by the Gulf Cooperation
Council, as well as its implementation mechanism, and
in line with Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolution 2216 (2015).
My delegation would like to condemn the presence
of Da’esh and Al-Qaida in Yemen. We know that
terrorist groups are the only ones that profit from the
instability of countries in crisis, exacerbating the threat
of terrorism throughout the world. My Government
therefore calls on the parties to the conflict, particularly
the Houthis and their allies, to quickly resume in good
faith negotiations and show a realistic attitude and
mutual trust-building, so as to foster the necessary
conditions to end the crisis which has disastrous
humanitarian and security implications.
Senegal urgently calls on the international
community to support the humanitarian action plan
crafted for Yemen aimed at providing humanitarian
assistance, which is vital for millions of individuals. In
the same vein, Senegal encourages the continued efforts
of the United Nations Verification and Inspection
Mechanism, taking into account the importance of
resuming port and airport activities so that highly
needed aid, including fuel, gets to Yemen.
In his briefing, Mr. O’Brien stated that there can
be no humanitarian solution to the crisis in Yemen. The
only solution is political. Senegal, together with the
other members of the Security Council, reiterates its
support for the Special Envoy’s efforts to find a swift
political solution to the crisis.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): At the outset, I join previous
speakers in congratulating you, Sir, and the Russian
delegation on your successful steering of the work of
the Security Council during the month of October.
We are grateful to Special Envoy Ismail Ould Cheikh
Ahmed, Under-Secretary-General Stephen O’Brien and
the Regional Director of the World Food Programme,
Mr. Hadi, for their briefings and for their commitment
to Yemen and its people.
Regarding the political process, we praise Mr. Ould
Cheikh Ahmedfor doing his utmost by working with all
parties to the conflict in order to spell out the technical
details of a peace agreement and find a political solution
to the devastating conflict. The latest proposal of a road
map for a cessation of hostilities and the resumption
of political dialogue on the country’s future is a viable

S/PV.7797

path for the solution to the Yemeni crisis that we would
like to see embraced by the warring parties. We call on
the Houthis and Saleh’s followers to stop their deadly
military offensives, and encourage them to accept the
proposals of withdrawing their military forces from the
capital. We further encourage President Hadi to foster a
sense of flexibility and a spirit of compromise.
However, it is most regrettable that President
Mansour Hadi and the Houthis have rejected the
road map proposal on the grounds that it is not a
balanced solution. President Hadi and the Houthis
should be open to compromise, taking into account
the devastating impact of the conflict on the Yemeni
people and its dangerous repercussions on the region as
a whole, with the terrorists of Al-Qaida exploiting the
situation to advance their sinister agenda. Maintaining
an inflexible stance and preconditions is not the best
course of action to engage in meaningful negotiations
towards a cessation of hostilities.
Enough is enough. We strongly condemn the proxy
war being waged against the Yemeni people by regional
and other Powers and by the Yemeni parties to the
conflict themselves. Sadly, some countries that boast of
being the top providers of humanitarian aid to victims
of conflict are also the main suppliers of weapons and
training to those who indiscriminately bomb civilians
and prolong the war just for the sake of promoting
dubious strategic objectives, in absolute denial of the
basic interests of the Yemeni people.
We are all well aware of the devastating impact the
fighting has had on the civilian population in Yemen, as
well as on the country’s economy. Civilians, including
children, continue to suffer the heaviest burden of the
conflict, with vital infrastructure, such as schools and
hospitals, being bombed and destroyed. The briefings
of Under-Secretary-General O’Brien and Regional
Director Hadi portrayed a situation that is completely
unsustainable and a catastrophe of incalculable
dimensions.
We take this opportunity to call once again on all
the parties of the Yemeni conflict to work towards a
permanent cessation of hostilities and refrain from
air strikes, ground fighting and shelling, especially
in populated areas. It is imperative that the parties
constructively engage with the Special Envoy in order
to overcome the lack of mutual trust. The only solution
is a political compromise and putting an end to external
meddling in the conflict.

16-3511619/28

S/PV.7797

The situation in the Middle East

In order to avoid the deepening humanitarian
and economic catastrophe that would in turn fuel
the criminal and terrorist networks in the country
and throughout the region, all political stakeholders,
as well as the international community and the
Security Council in particular, are called on to uphold
their responsibilities by redoubling their efforts in
support of the Special Envoy’s mediation to foster
confidence-building measures for a more favourable
negotiated environment.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
First and foremost, I congratulate the Russian Federation
on the way in which it has led the deliberations of the
Security Council this month.
After having carefully listened to our excellent
briefers today, I will pick up on the eloquent comment
made by the Ambassador of Angola: “Enough is
enough.” That was very eloquent. The conclusion I have
drawn from the briefers today is that Yemen is facing
a threefold collapse on the humanitarian, political and
economic and financial fronts.
As far as the humanitarian collapse is concerned,
today we have heard a whole slue of figures. I first
would like to pay tribute to the 10,000 victims and then
I would to like to particularly focus on the plight of
the 10 million children suffering from malnutrition
and at risk of losing an entire generation. That goes
hand in hand with the enormous difficulties we are
experiencing in our efforts to provide humanitarian aid
to Yemen. I believe that Samantha Power has urged us
all to do our part to facilitate access to humanitarian
aid in Yemen. We stand committed to her appeal
and join her in calling on all parties. We also have a
humanitarian plan that, regrettably, has been financed
only to 26 per cent so far.
The second crisis that is upon Yemen is a political
collapse. It is political because, on the one hand,
the road map, which in our view is a reasonable and
balanced, has been rejected; and on the other, because
we are seeing indiscriminate attacks on the civilian
population. To that end, I align myself with the eloquent
statement made by the Ambassador of Uruguay. As far
as the road map is concerned, Mr. Ould Sheikh Ahmed
can rest assured that he has our full support. I know
that he will be returning shortly with a view to crafting
an agreement around the road map, and in those efforts
he will have the full backing of the Spanish delegation.
Regarding the indiscriminate attacks against the
20/28

31/10/2016

civilian population, we of course uphold the idea that
said crimes cannot go unpunished.
The third collapse in Yemen is economic and
financial. Before arriving to today’s meeting, I had
intended to ask our briefers about the situation of the
Central Bank reserves. Well, we have such excellent
briefers that the economic and financial situation in
Yemen could not be clearer. The situation is critical;
they are going to have to stop paying salaries, which
will further exacerbate the political and humanitarian
collapse. What will happen if salaries go unpaid? The
result will be bleak for future of Yemen. It will mean
that administration and all institutions will collapse and
the process of reconstruction will become extremely
difficult — almost impossible. Economic support
for Yemen in the current circumstances is therefore
absolutely essential.
What is the message that I would like to convey to
my fellow members of the Council? It is very simple. I
listened very carefully to the Ambassador of the United
Kingdom, who very clearly outlined the elements of a
draft resolution that I believe will bring change to the
situation in Yemen. The elements of said draft resolution
are, first, an immediate cessation of hostilities; it is
quite clear that there can be no military solution to
the crisis in Yemen. The resumption of negotiations is
the second element — I again reiterate my support our
Special Envoy — followed, thirdly, by accountability
for the violations of international humanitarian law,
and fourthly, unhindered access to humanitarian aid.
I would like to conclude by striking a positive note,
echoing what the French Ambassador had to say so
clearly, which is that consensus in Yemen is possible.
We trust that that is the case. Let us rally around the
United Kingdom’s draft resolution to truly bring about
a change to this currently desperate situation.
Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): My delegation is very
grateful to Special Envoy Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator Stephen O’Brien and
Mr. Muhannad Hadi of the World Food Programme for
their briefings.
Malaysia is gravely concerned about the very
bleak picture of the situation on the ground, with
the escalation in violence, the attacks on civilians
and civilian infrastructure, the threat of famine, the
collapse of the health system and the threat of a cholera
outbreak. Regrettaby, unlike other crises in the region,
16-35116

31/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East

the humanitarian crisis in Yemen has remained largely
under the radar. Last week, a side event on Yemen
was held at the United Nations where we were shown
a documentary by the BBC on the threat of famine
in the country. While the international community’s
attention is focused on deaths due to ongoing fighting,
we have largely overlooked the slow but widespread
deaths brought about by starvation and lack of medical
treatment. Mothers have had to watch their children
and babies wither away before their very eyes due to
the lack of milk, food and medicine. Even bringing
their children to the hospital did little to improve their
situation due to the collapse of the country’s health
system and the dire lack of food, fuel and medicine.
That situation is simply unacceptable.
As we have heard today, a staggering 14 million
people in Yemen are suffering from hunger and
malnutrition, over 3 million have been driven from
their homes and 21 million people are in need of
humanitarian aid. We call on all parties to agree to a
lasting and permanent ceasefire that would facilitate
the flow of desperately needed food, fuel and medical
supplies into the country. We also urge the parties to
open up Yemeni air space to commercial aircraft and to
evacuate those in need of urgent medical treatment. We
join others in condemning all attacks against civilians
and civilian infrastructure in Yemen, including the
recent attacks on the marketplace, a water well and a
funeral ceremony. We also condemn attacks on Saudi
territory by the Houthi militias, particularly the recent
targeting of the Holy City of Makka Al-Mukarama.
We support calls by the Secretary-General for
full and independent inquiries to investigate gross
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights law so as to ensure justice and accountability.
The continuing conflict has also led to a marked
increase in the number of children being recruited by
parties to the conflict. About 2 million children are
currently out of school due to the ongoing fighting
and insecurity and are being deprived of their right
to education. That situation has been exploited by our
militias that are actively going to villages to recruit
children. Some have estimated that up to one third of
fighters in armed groups are children. Many of them
are guarding checkpoints, but they are also on the front
line fighting. Malaysia urges all parties to the conflict
to adhere to their obligations under international
law, including international humanitarian law and
human rights law. All parties must make every effort

S/PV.7797

to protect children, civilians and civilian objects,
including in ensuring immediate and unimpeded
humanitarian access.
With the breakdown in the talks in Kuwait, the
conflicting parties in Yemen seem further and further
away from the promising steps they had taken towards
peace several months ago. The recent cessation of
hostilities, as we have seen, is far from sufficient to
address the humanitarian disaster in Yemen. We fully
concur with the assessment by Under-SecretaryGeneral O’Brien that the best humanitarian relief is
to end the conflict. Malaysia echoes the view held by
the international community that there is no military
solution to the conflict. However, the conflicting
parties themselves need to believe in the need for a
political solution. Prolonging the violence will not
benefit either side. Terrorist groups will only exploit
the violence, which will lead to a further catastrophic
humanitarian situation.
A peaceful resolution of the conflict in Yemen
hinges on the political will of the conflicting parties
themselves, but the Security Council has an important
role to play in bringing about the desired outcome by
exerting its authority and its influence on the relevant
parties and by utilizing the various tools at its disposal.
The Council must send a clear signal to the conflicting
parties on the need to cease fighting and to return to
the negotiating table in order to protect civilians and
civilian objects, to ensure immediate and unimpeded
humanitarian access and to adhere to their obligations
under international law. We need to continue to
support the tireless efforts of Special Envoy Ahmed to
secure peace in Yemen. We urge all parties to engage
constructively in negotiating the road map proposed by
Mr. Ahmed, with the aim of ending the conflict and
reaching a political agreement for the sake of peace and
stability in Yemen and the region.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I also thank the Special
Envoy for Yemen and the other briefers for their updates.
Needless to say, the briefers draw a grim picture
of the significant deteriorating of the humanitarian
situation in Yemen, which is a cause of grave concern
for all of us. The ongoing conflict has only aggravated
the already existing problems in that country. There
have been more than 6,800 dead and 33,800 injured
only since March 2015, according to the World Health
Organization. Access to Taiz, with a population of
200,000 people, continues to be limited. Nine of the

16-3511621/28

S/PV.7797

The situation in the Middle East

22 governorates remain at the emergency levels for
food security, if not yet facing famine. Those are just
a few indicators, but they are a timely reminder of
the grim reality in Yemen and require our united and
urgent reaction to stop what Under-Secretary-General
O’Brien describes as a “man-made brutal humanitarian
disaster”and to prevent the country from total collapse,
as many have said already.
On a separate note, we view as equally worrying
the upsurge in rocket attacks launched by the Houthi
forces in Yemen against targets located in Saudi Arabia,
as well as maritime targets, including United Arab
Emirates vessels and United States ships. Keeping the
important shipping passage of Bab Al-Mandeb safe and
secure is of paramount importance for international and
regional peace and stability. We also call on all sides to
prevent any attacks against innocent targets. Immediate
steps are needed to prevent further internationalization
of the conflict.
Against that backdrop, we fully support the United
Nations Special Envoy and hope that his relentless
efforts will bear fruit in the form of a negotiated
settlement. In that regard, the latest United Nations
peace plan for Yemen deserves careful consideration.
The key elements of the plan — a negotiated withdrawal
from Sana’a and the handing over of heavy and medium
weapons, including ballistic missiles, along with the
formation of a national unity Government — appear
to open a path to hard, but necessary, decisions that
may lead to a durable settlement. If fulfilled, that
peace initiative can become a solid foundation for the
continuation of the national political dialogue, on an
inclusive and non-sectarian basis, thus contributing to
the full implementation of resolution 2216 (2015) and
the Gulf Cooperation Council initiative.
In conclusion, the Council should do everything
possible to reverse the trend that makes Yemenis, as
Mr. Hadi rightly described to us, “feel forgotten by
the entire world”. In order to achieve that, we call
on all sides of the conflict to return to negotiations
immediately. As in Syria, there is no military solution
to the crisis in Yemen.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela would like to express its gratitude for the
briefings delivered by Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
22/28

31/10/2016

Coordinator Stephen O’Brien and Regional Director for
the Middle East, North Africa, Central Asia and Eastern
Europe of the World Food Programme Muhannad Hadi.
We thank the briefers for their testimonies.
Venezuela appreciates the commendable endeavours
and facilitation efforts carried out by Mr. Ismail Ould
Cheikh Ahmed to try and seek a political solution to
the current armed conflict that has rocked Yemen for
almost two years. We reiterate to him our full support
for his work on the ground. Venezuela believes that
negotiations will produce positive results only insofar
as the parties show flexibility and commitment to
achieving lasting and sustainable peace in Yemen.
Yemen is one of those cases at the Security Council
that falls into the category of so-called ‘silenced
conflicts’. The Yemeni people are the victims of a brutal
violence that is the result of intense armed conflict,
in which schools, hospitals and housing are targets
of indiscriminate bombing with highly advanced and
expensive armaments known for their precision when
aimed at any given target. We do not believe that errors
are possible in that type of military attack. What does
seem possible is a deliberate attempt used to punish
the Yemeni civilian population — against whom even
cluster munitions have been used, in clear violation
of international human rights law and international
humanitarian law.
In that regard, as has been pointed out by other
speakers, our country resolutely condemns the aerial
attacks carried out by the coalition on a funeral
procession in Sana’a on 8 October, in which 140 people
were killed and 525 civilians were injured. We also
condemn the bombing of hospitals run by Médecins
sans Frontières, as well as the bombing of civilian
sanitation centres and services. We believe that such
illegal actions cannot go unpunished, for which it is
essential that there be investigations into the violations
of international human rights law and international
humanitarian law that have been committed during the
conflict.
On that point our country would like to make it
very clear that we categorically reject any attack on the
civilian population, wherever such attacks may take
place — whether in Syria, Yemen, Iraq or Palestine.
The Security Council seems to remain passive when
faced with such an awful reality; it has given little or
no visibility to such a critical issue. We must remember
that, months ago, Under-Secretary-General O’Brien
16-35116

31/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East

described the humanitarian situation in Yemen as being
proportionately worse than that in Syria. There seems
to be a brutal competition taking place in terms of the
playing out of a culture of death, war and violence in
the region.
The exchange of opinions we are engaged in today
at this briefing meeting is a rare occurrence, as there are
very few opportunities in which the Security Council
discusses this issue in open format. We would therefore
like to thank the President for having facilitated today’s
dialogue and for making it possible for us show this
problem to the rest of the United Nations membership.
We hope that the same will hold true with regard to
other issues that are confined to closed consultations.
For the sake of transparency, open meetings should
be the rule, not the exception — something that is one
of the shortcomings in the working methods of the
Security Council.
Since Venezuela became a member of the Security
Council — and just a couple of months from ending our
term in this organ — we have seen with great regret
how the political and humanitarian situation in Yemen
has worsened as a result of the armed conflict. It is
probably high time to review resolution 2216 (2015) and
adapt it to the situation on the ground. In that respect,
we support the road map that has been proposed by the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, which seeks
to de-escalate and halt the conflict. Furthermore, the
Security Council should as soon as possible adopt a
draft resolution on the humanitarian situation that
includes the establishment of humanitarian pauses
and the cessation of all armed attacks, including aerial
bombing. In line with its primary responsibility to
maintain international peace and security, the Council
cannot continue to remain indifferent in the face of
the gravity of the events taking place in Yemen every
day, and must stop seeing them as routine occurrences:
business-as-usual. It is fundamental to achieve a
sustained cessation of hostilities in order to provide an
opportunity for humanitarian agencies on the ground
to do their work. Any solution to the conflict must
include, as a basic principle, respect for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Yemen.
Moreover, such a solution must also proscribe and
condemn attacks against the territory of Saudi Arabia
as well as on maritime traffic in the Red Sea. Our
country express its absolute rejection of attacks against
the territory of Saudi Arabia and against navigation in
the Bab-el-Mandeb Strait.

S/PV.7797

The Council must move forward constructively
in addressing the political and humanitarian crisis
affecting the brotherly people of Yemen. Members
of the Security Council must address the subject
objectively, with determination and commitment,
putting aside national expediency and the positions of
its members. We are concerned that the geopolitical
agendas of certain regional actors, and some outside
the region — some of them Council members — are
hampering any possibility of reaching an agreement
that would put an end to the current armed clashes,
and are undermining diplomatic efforts led by the
Special Envoy.
Although the people of Yemen are the main losers
in this war, countries that manufacture and export
weapons have profited outrageously by providing
highly sophisticated weapons to one of the parties, in
amounts that total billions of dollars. It is therefore
paradoxical that countries that emphatically promoted
the Arms Trade Treaty are now the ones that are stoking
the armed conflict by providing sophisticated weapons
for financial gain, which are then used by one the
parties to intentionally violate the population’s rights
and international human rights law.
Venezuela reiterates that the solution to the
armed conflict in Yemen lies with its citizens — its
people — along with the support of the international
community, as they exercise their right to selfdetermination. Our country will support all peaceful
political attempts aimed at safeguarding the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of this brotherly
nation, pursuant to the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.
Armed clashes have plunged the country into a
very grave and deplorable humanitarian crisis, as has
been pointed out by all the relevant agencies of the
United Nations — and revealed today in stark relief.
This devastating scenario serves to highlight the urgent
need to urgently respond to a problem that is having
a negative impact on the humanitarian situation when
it comes to providing food, medicine, water, nutrition
supplements for children, psychosocial services and
other basic services. We therefore call upon the parties
to allow humanitarian agencies and other organizations
to reach the entire population in order to allow the
delivery of assistance, so as to address the most pressing
needs of the Yemeni population.

16-3511623/28

S/PV.7797

The situation in the Middle East

It is vital to reach a political solution to the conflict
as soon as possible. The institutional collapse and the
current sectarian rhetoric in Yemen have benefited
Al-Qaida and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
in furthering their terrorist activities, which are a threat
to regional and international peace and security. We are
concerned by the fact that fighters from both terrorist
organizations are prepared to cooperate tactically to
achieve their destabilizing aims in Yemen and the rest
of the region.
Once again, we encourage the parties to make
a decisive commitment to inclusive dialogue, with a
view to achieving a settlement that puts an end to the
hostilities and thereby achieves a solid, lasting peace
in Yemen. We believe it particularly important that
there be an atmosphere of mutual confidence and that
confidence between the parties be re-established, in a
way that tensions can be decreased and that negotiations
can take place successfully. Countries with any
influence on the parties must continue to work to make
progress in this process.
The tragic situation and prolonged crisis in Yemen
require that we not relent in our efforts to help the parties
turn the tide on the atmosphere of violence that prevails
in this Arab nation. We trust that the stakeholders will
once again assume their commitments to find political
solutions that put an end to the war and allow the
people of Yemen to regain hope for peace. Our brothers
and sisters in Yemen deserve to live in peace. Public
discussion of these matters in the Security Council will
serve to ensure that all parties are aware of the need to
find a political solution together.
In conclusion, our delegation would like to
acknowledge once again the efforts made by all
volunteers and humanitarian personnel on the ground
in Yemen who are making a contribution to helping
the Yemeni people. We also appreciate the work of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and of its staff deployed on the ground, who are involved
in the noble task of supporting the affected population
under very adverse circumstances. Venezuela would
like to reiterate its support for the initiative and
political efforts championed by the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity as the representative
of the Russian Federation.
24/28

31/10/2016

We would like to thank the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed;
the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. O’Brien; and
the Regional Director of the World Food Programme,
Mr. Hadi, for their briefings.
We are surprised that what is taking place in Yemen
has not resulted in a frenzy in the mass media, or indeed
in the Security Council. Oddly, it is not being covered
at the same level as the Syrian problem. We must stress
that the scale of the humanitarian situation in that
country on a number of parameters is even worse than
that in Syria and can only be qualified as catastrophic.
Fully four fifths of the 26 million people in Yemen
require urgent humanitarian assistance. The country
has more than 3 million internally displaced people.
Approximately 14 million people are experiencing food
shortages, and the infrastructure essential for daily
life — medical, educational and other needs — are in
ruins. Under the pretext of preventing violations of an
arms embargo, there has been a ground, air and sea
blockade of Yemen, which impacts first and foremost
the peaceful population. There is now an acute lack of
food, medicine and other basic necessities.
We would not want to exploit the issue of civilian
losses, including from air strikes; however, it is
impossible not to mention the cynical double standards
that we are encountering. It is known, for example,
that the United Kingdom has been one of the major
suppliers of various kinds of weaponry in the region,
which are then used against the Yemenis. Since March
2015, according The Guardian and The Independent,
London has sold more than £3 billion, or $5 billion, in
weapons into the region. That is not a small amount of
money to be made from war. Those weapons also result
in the loss of civilian lives.
The question then arises: How can a country with
a clear material interest in extending the military
conflict be a penholder for the Yemen file in the
Security Council? Let us take the most recent draft
press statement prepared by the so-called penholder.
It was not simply broadly general, but it was openly
weak in its discussion of an air strike, which, according
to the information cited, was made against a funeral
procession in Sana’a on 8 October. It was not stated who
made the strike, even though the coalition has already
accepted the responsibility. There was not a call for
an investigation to punish those responsible. We were
not in a position to support that draft, considering that,
16-35116

31/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East

given the atrocities committed, the toothless text would
have been an insult for the Yemenis.
After that, the delegation of the United Kingdom
announced they were preparing a draft resolution
on Yemen, which has not yet seen the light of day. It
would be interesting to know whether such a draft
resolution will contain a provision establishing a no-fly
zone over Sana’a, which, even before the tragedy at
the funeral, was subjected to random strikes on more
than one occasion. I think the time has come to review
the penholdership on Yemen. We have new members
preparing to become members of the Council in 2017,
and we think that they could take upon themselves the
responsible and objective penholding of the Yemen file
in the Security Council.
Let me return to the situation in the country.
Despite the ceasefire announced by the Special
Envoy, it is being violated on both sides. The first
violations came just several hours after the statement
made by Ismail Ahmed. We hope to see the road map
on settling the Yemen crisis prepared by the Special
Envoy. We have heard a lot about that, but given that
we understand that it does not exist on paper, it is not
yet possible to evaluate it adequately. We think that it
should concern moving simultaneously on political and
military tracks, including a Government of national
unity with the Houthis. What is important is to ensure
that the parties return to the negotiating table to discuss
the details. That is because the devil is in the details.
That is, if both countries agree on the principles of an
approach — although now there is information that one
of the parties, namely, President Hadi Mansour, has
already rejected the plan — then we will have a number
of accompanying issues that will need to be worked
through and agreed upon.
In particular, the road map, as far as we understand,
does not talk about the withdrawal of coalition troops
from Yemen or stopping air strikes against the territory
of the country. Without that assurance, implementing
any kind of agreement would be more than problematic.
In turn, we would like to say that we support any and
all agreements that are consensual in nature and with
which all political forces in Yemen can agree. We will
work actively with all parties to the conflict. The main
goal is to ensure that there is a sustainable ceasefire.
That is a must, both from the humanitarian and the
anti-terrorist viewpoints, as well as to strengthen the
parties’ confidence in order to ensure that there can be a
comprehensive agreement on how to settle the conflict.

S/PV.7797

Unfortunately, the clear winner in the Yemeni
conflict is still the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham,
Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula and other terrorist
and extremist groups that control whole regions in the
south and east of the country. From experience in Syria,
we know that we need to combat the fighters now,
without putting it off for later. The earlier all political
forces in Yemen pool their efforts to counter the threat
of terrorists, the fewer the chances for radical Islamists
to keep their positions.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Yemen.
Mr. Alyemany (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, allow me to express thanks to you,
Mr. President, Ambassador Vitaly Churkin, Permanent
Representative of the friendly Russian Federation, for
your wise leadership during the deliberations of the
Security Council for the month of October and for
granting us this opportunity to address the Council. I
would also like to express thanks to His Excellency the
Secretary-General and his Special Envoy for Yemen,
Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed, for their great efforts
to reach a peace agreement to end the coup against
the Yemeni State and the tragedy of war launched by
the Houthi militias and the pro-Saleh forces against
our people since September 2014. We also wish to
thank Mr. O’Brien, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, and Mr. Hadi of the World Food
Programme (WFP) for their briefings. We also thank all
members of the Security Council for their statements,
all of which reflect great concern with regard to the
tragic conditions in my country, Yemen.
Today, after two years of the coup in Yemen, the
scene is depressing and dark. The Houthi militias, allied
with the former President, have tampered with the fate
of the Yemeni nation, looted our scare resources and
paved the way for hunger, diseases and epidemics that
devastate the people. They are telling all Yemenis either
to accept the coup, the prevalence of sectarian politics
and the Iranian plot in Sana’a, which creates permanent
tension in the area, or to face death and destruction.
The Under-Secretary-General and the representative
of the WFP have presented a glimpse into the dire
humanitarian situation my country has reached.
In areas under the control by those masterminding
the coup, who are not Yemenis, access of humanitarian
aid to the besieged city of Taiz has been impeded and

16-3511625/28

S/PV.7797

The situation in the Middle East

access to the United Nations mission in the city has also
been denied. This Organization failed to condemn that
fact during the cessation of hostilities. Since the end
of the talks in Kuwait, the coup party has refused to
interact positively in the framework of the proposed
peace process based on the three terms of reference.
They have continued waging war and exploited the
cessation of hostilities to smuggle mid-range missiles
with a range of more than 600 kilometres, such as those
that targeted the holy sites in Saudi Arabia that are
sacred to all Muslims throughout the world.
Iranian-made Noor and Kosar missiles — naval
missiles that have been modified to launch from land
to attack sea vessels — have targeted international
waterways in the southern part of the Red Sea. Reports
of the Panel of Experts on Yemen and the American
Fleet in the region have confirmed the scope of the
shipments from Iran to the coup masters in Yemen. The
Security Council has failed to issue a single statement
condemning that terrorism-sponsoring State, despite
several communications transmitted by Member States
to the Secretary-General and the Security Council.
The choice of peace was, and remains, the choice
of the Yemeni Government. It is our unwavering
position, and the only alternative to end the suffering
of our patient and strong Yemeni people, who have
been continued to pay the price of an unjust war waged
everywhere in Yemen by the militias of the Houthi and
Ali Abdullah Saleh. We in the Government believe that
peace is the only way to eradicate the criminal gangsters
and warlords and to liberate the people from those
murderers who, devoid of conscience, have destroyed
our resources and valuable infrastructure and threaten
our daily life.
For the past two years, the Yemeni Government
has demonstrated its positive and responsible position
and participated interactively in initiatives of the
international community. We have continuously
proposed painful concessions for the sake of peace in
Yemen, while the coup masters continue to refuse a
peaceful settlement and persist in carrying out militia
activity. As a result some may have thought that we
might propose measures to undermine sovereignty
and the restoration of the State, resorting to security
arrangements without guarantees or an understanding
of the social, geographical and political background of
the conflict in Yemen.
26/28

31/10/2016

While we emphasize the importance of the three
terms of reference for peace in Yemen, the coup side
has insisted on evading those solutions and continuing
unilateral actions that have been rejected by the
international community, such as establishment of a
political entity to administer the State and appointing
a coup-based Government. When the consultations in
Kuwait ended, owing to the refusal of the other side
to interact with the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral, international efforts continued, leading to
ministerial meetings of the four in Jeddah, New York
and London. We in the Government welcomed the new
efforts supplementing the United Nations efforts. We
emphasize that any attempt to evade the three terms
of reference for peace, as represented by the Gulf
Cooperation Council initiative and its implementing
mechanism, and the National Dialogue Conference
outcomes and Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 2216 (2015), all serve to stoke actions by the
coup, and thus the violence in Yemen. Any proposal
that is not aimed at ending the coup and its withdrawal
from all of the cities and the State institutions and the
handing over of weapons and missiles and release of
the prisoners, all of that would be taking the side of
the militias and accepting the logic of terrorism and its
control over the fate of nations.
Sustained peace cannot be achieved by rewarding
the coup masters for their coup and handing them
authority on a golden plate. It cannot be achieved
by keeping most of the weapons in the hands of the
militias, while they continue to occupy villages and
governorates and cities under the pretense of a gradual
solution, while demanding an end to legitimacy. Peace
will not be achieved by ignoring the recognized terms
of reference and ignoring the sacrifices of the Yemeni
people or their victories. Peace will not be achieved
without removing all those that have impeded the
peaceful transfer of power in Yemen, sabotaged the
transitional period, rejected the outcomes of the
National Dialogue Conference outcomes and waged
war and destruction and threatened international
peace and security and navigational activities in
international waterways. Peace will not be achieved
without removing every person so involved, including
former President Ali Abdullah Saleh, his son Ahmed
Ali Abdullah Saleh and Abdulmalik al-Houthi and their
brothers and assistants.
All parties in Yemen, including political parties,
military leaders, security leaders and elected leaders of
16-35116

31/10/2016

The situation in the Middle East

local governate councils and youth groups and women’s
organizations, have issued statements in the past few
days condemning any deviation from the path of peace
and any attempt to thwart efforts to stop the conflict in
Yemen. They have expressed support for His Excellency
the President to prioritize the negotiations so that we
can bury the coup and ensure victory to democracy and
the Republic of Yemen.
Today Yemen’s sovereignty is represented by the
presidency. It cannot be compromised, as it is the sole
guarantor of the completion of the political transition
in Yemen. To complete the new federal constitution, we
have warned many times, as Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh
Ahmed well knows, that further pressure against the
legitimate Government will lead to strengthening of
the coup’s forces and will not allow the international
community to contribute to rebuilding the Yemeni
State. On the contrary, that will fuel the coup forces
and the idea that the international community is closer
to understanding the Iranian expansion plan in Yemen.
We have affirmed several times in this Chamber
that the war in my country, Yemen, can end today. As I
stated, that is based on the power of the Yemeni people
and their rejection of the death banner raised by the
militias, through raising their voices as one in rejecting
and demanding an end to the coup and this unjust war
against our great Yemeni people.
I therefore call upon the Yemeni people to reject
the devilish criminal militias that have transformed
life in our nation into a real nightmare, so that we
can implement together, once again, the outcomes of
the National Dialogue that we formulated with our
dreams and aspirations in order to catch up with the
rest of humankind and build a federal, democratic,
peaceful Yemen.
In conclusion, Yemen highly appreciates the
efforts of His Excellency the Secretary-General and his
Special Envoy Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed, as well
as those on the part of the Security Council and the
Ambassadors of the Group of 18 for peace and stability
in Yemen. We also renew our thanks and gratitude to
our brethren in Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates
and Egypt and the remaining States Organizationf the
Arab Coalition to restore legitimacy in Yemen. We call
upon all members of the Security Council to continue
making the unified efforts that have accompanied the
crisis in Yemen since it began in 2011. Because of
the Council’s unified position, a great deal has been

S/PV.7797

achieved in Yemen in partnership with the Yemeni
Government. This can be added to the impeccable
record of the United Nations in conflict resolution in
the world.
The President (spoke in Russian): I would ask
speakers to be very, very brief, as we have one more
meeting scheduled.
I give the floor to Mr. O’Brien.
Mr. O’Brien: Extremely briefly, I just wanted to
reiterate that the best humanitarian response is to find
a way forward to peace, and I would certainly urge all
to get behind the plan put forward by the Special Envoy.
I just want to give total assurance to the
representative of the United States that if we have
access, then we can certainly make sure that we go
through an extraordinary level of surge in order to meet
the needs, providing we are given the resources to do
so; I am confident that we will be given the chance.
I call on all parties to respect all provisions for the
protection of civilians, and at the same time I wish to
add my voice to those that have lauded the incredible
bravery of the aid workers who are getting significant
amounts of aid through, even in these very challenging
times of an absolutely vast humanitarian requirement
of 21.2 million people in need.
As was reiterated by the President himself, this is a
catastrophe, and that is why I am calling for us to take
immediate steps to do what we can to get to grips with it.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. O’Brien for his statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. Hadi.
Mr. Hadi: First, I should like to thank the United
States for having invited me today. I think that this very
much helped me to fulfil the promise that I made to the
people that I would convey their suffering to the Council.
Secondly, I wish to thank the Member States for
listening to me. As a matter of fact, this is the first time
that I feel that I am working as an ambassador, but this
time an ambassador for the women and the children,
an ambassador for the voiceless and an ambassador for
the people in Yemen, who do not have the opportunity
to come here and express what they are going through.
When I was speaking, the images of the people that I
met came into my mind, and I am glad that I am able to
convey part of what I saw to the Council.

16-3511627/28

S/PV.7797

The situation in the Middle East

Last but not least, I wish to leave the Council with
one thought: saving lives in Yemen is doable. It is not
mission impossible. It can be done, and we have done
it in many places in the world. What we want is the
support of the Council. We want the support of all
Member States. We want the support of the international
community. There is no reason to lose even one life in
Yemen, so I would repeat once again that saving lives is
not mission impossible. We will do it.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank Mr. Hadi
for his statement.

28/28

31/10/2016

I believe that today’s meeting was very useful and
enabled us to once again better understand how tragic
and complicated the situation in Yemen is and the
complicated nature of the work of the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh
Ahmed. I would therefore like to conclude this meeting
by expressing strong support for his efforts, which we
all hope will lead to peace in Yemen as soon as possible.
The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m.

16-35116
