THIRTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

tll

MEETING:

I4 FEBRUARY

1983

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/24 13) . . . . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . , . . . . . . . , . , .
Adoption of the agenda. . . . . . . , , . . . . . . . . . , . . . . a. , . . . . , , . , . . . , . . , . . f . . . , .
The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 5 November 1982 from the Permanent Representative of
Morocco to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/1548 1);
Letter dated 9 November 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Niger
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15483);
Letter dated 8 February 1983 from the Chargk d’affaires a-i. of the Permanent Mission of Jordan to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/15599). I . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . , , . . . . . , .

SlPV.2413

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. , .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplement,s of the OSficial Rccods of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 196.5, became fully operative
on that date.

2413th MEETING
Held in New York on Monday, 14 February 1983, at 3.30 p.m.
President:

Mr. Oleg Aleksandrovich
TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Zaire, Zimbabwe.
Provisional

agenda (SlAgendai2413)

I.

Adoption

2.

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 5 November 1982 from the Permanent Representative
of Morocco to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/15481);
Letter dated 9 November I982 from the Permanent Representative of Niger to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/15483);
Letter dated 8 February from the Charg6
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Jordan to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/ 15599)

of the agenda.

The meeting was called to order at 4.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 5 November 1982 from the Permanent
Representative of Morocco to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15481);
Letter dated 9 November 3982 from the Permanent
Representative of Niger to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15483);
Letter dated 8 February 1983 from the charge
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Jordan
to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/15599)
I,
In

The PRESIDENT
accordance with

(interpretatiorl J+orn Russian):
decisions taken at previous

meetings [2401st and 2412th meetings], I invite the
representatives
of Egypt, India, Morocco, Niger,
Senegal, the Syrian Arab Republic, Yemen and
Yugoslavia to take the places reserved for them at the
side of the Council table; I invite the representative of
the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) to take a
place at the Council table.
At the invitation
of the President, Mr. Khalil
(Egypt), Mr. Krishnan (India), Mr. Mrani Zentar
(Mosocco), Mr. Oumarw (Niger), Mr. Saw! (Serzegulj, Mr. El-Fattal (Syrian Arab Republic), Mr. Sallam (Yemen) and Mr. Golob (Yugoslavia) took the
pluces reserved for them at the side of the Cormcil
chamber; Mr. Twzi (Palestine Liberation Organization) took a place at the Council table.
2. The PRESIDENT
(intrrpr’etation from Russian):
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received letters from the representatives of
Algeria, Cuba, the German Democratic Republic, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Kuwait, Lebanon, Turkey
and the United Arab Emirates in which they request to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item
on the agenda. In conformity with the usual practice,
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
those representatives to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure.
At the invitation
of the President, Mr. Sahnow
(Algeria), Mr Ron KOIIH (Cuba), Mr. Ott (German
Democratic
Republic), Mr. Rajaie-Khorussani
(Islamic Republic
of Iran), Mr. Ablrlhassun (Kuwait),
Mr. Labaki
(Lebanon),
Mr. Kirqa (Turkey) and
Mr. Al-Amri (Urzited Asab Emirates) took the places
reser~vd fos them at the side of the Council chamber.
3. Mr, SINCLAIR
(Guyana): Sir, I congratulate you
most warmly on your accession to the presidency for
the month of February. My satisfaction at seeing you
presiding over this body now is all the keener wlien
1 consider that you are the worthy representative of a
country with which Guyana enjoys relations of solid
friendship and fraternal co-operation, one with which
my country shares a firm commitment to the goal of
iasting peace and the strengthening of security among
nations. 1 need not express my confidence that under
your guidance the work of the Council will be
efficiently managed. 1 am certain that this is the
unanimous feeling and expectation around this table.

Arab populations.
Israel’s acts of aggression are
clearly designed to weaken and demoralize
those
peoples, in particular the Palestinians, and thereby
-so it hopes-to
suffocate all nationalist sentiment
within them and force their acquiescence in perpetual
second-class citizenship and Israeli domination.

4. Mr president, YOU have succeeded mY very deal
colleague and brother, Mr. Ameg% of friendly, nonaligned ~~~~~ I am pleased to SfY that, in the few
months that Mr. Amega has been In New York, relations between Togo and Guyana hav.e both strengthened and deepened. Our tWO.cpuntrles have happily
developed a healthy and promlslng CO-operation, both
within the Security Council and in other forums, in
defence of principles and values dear to both our
countries and both our peoples. I PaY a tribute to
Mr. Amegafor the serenity, the maturity and the sense
of dedication which characterized his PreSidenCy
during the month of January.

10. Attempting
to liquidate the Palestinians
or to
erase the Palestinian national identity will not bring
peace. In Guyana’s view, the manifest basis of any
lasting solution to the Middle East question remains a
clear recognition
of the inalienable
rights of the
Palestinian people, including their right to self-determination
and to establish their own independent
sovereign home. Peace and security in the Middle East
demand that Israel come to terms with the Palestinian
people.

5, It is most appropriate that the Council, at the
request of Jordan on behalf of the Group of Arab
States, should have resumed consideration of Israel’s
persistent policy of establishing settlements in the
occupied West Bank and the escalating violation of the
human rights of the populations of those territories.

Il.
Guyana recognizes the right of all States in the
region to Iive in peace and security. But Israel’s peace
and security and its neighbours’ peace and security are
two sides of the same coin. The first requirement,
therefore, for any such rCgime of peace and security is
that Israel cease forthwith its policy of territorial
expansion and annexation.
Israel must withdraw
completely from all Palestinian and Arab territories
occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem.

6, It is an instructive coincidence that this series of
meetings was resumed only a few days after the
publication of the report of a special commission set
up to investigate the massacre of Palestinians in Beirut
last September. In that report we see responsibility
attributed to high-ranking Israeli civilian and military
leaders, especially Ariel Sharon, for the massacre of
those unfortunate Palestinians. That report merely
serves as additional confirmation of the genocidal
attitude of the Israeli leadership towards the Palestinians. It is that same attitude of callous indifference
pn the part of those leaders to the life and well-being of
the Palestinians-an attitude that the report makes so
clear-which lies at the root of the brutality and the
repression about which the representative of Jordan,
on behalf of the Group of Arab States, has complained
to the Council.

12. The enemy of peace in the Middle East, the State
which is most vocal in its professions of a longing for
peace with its neighbours yet which systematically
pursues towards them policies which themselves lead
to greater tension and instability, is Israel. It is not
without significance that Israel’s acts of aggression
against the populations of the occupied West Bank and
its expansion of settlements there coincide with the
displacement and murder of Palestinians in refugee
camps in Lebanon, with the intensification
of Israeli
occupation of that country, with its refusal to withdraw its troops as called for in Council resolutions 508
(1982) and 509 (1982), and with the increased repression in the Golan Heights. Do we need any further
evidence of where the obstacle to peace in the Middle
East lies? Is there no end to the permissiveness being
shown towards Israel?

7. It is with much anguish that my delegation has
been reading, during the past weeks, reports of
consistent complaints against Israel for arrests of
students and faculty members, closures and blockades
of institutions of learning, the fencing in of Palestinians
like animals in a corral, the closure of health clinics,
the demolition of homes, the confiscation of private
lands and the establishment of yet more settlements in
the illegally occupied West Bank.
8. MY delegation strongly condemns these actions,
which 11~ in the face of every norm of peaceful,
friendly relations among States and peoples and
blatantly defy the Charter of the United Nations and
the decisions of the Organization, which have on
numerous occasions condemned Israel’s aggressive,
expansionist pOkieS and reaffirmed the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people to self-determination
and to their own independent homeland.

13. The arrant defiance being displayed by Israel is
made possible only through the assured support, both
political and material, which the Israelis receive from
their powerful friends. Like the racist rigime
in
Pretoria, Israel, secure in the protective embrace of
its principal supporter, is buttressed and encouraged
in its repeated flouting of decisions of the United
Nations and in its continuing aggression against the
inhabitants
of the occupied Arab territories
and
against neighbouring Arab States, all of which only
serves to make more difficult the goal of a secure and
lasting peace,

g. The Policy of the Zionists towards the occupied
territories is clearly one of creeping co]onization
combined with violent suppression of the rights of t&

14. In this regard, the Secretary-General’s report on
the work of the Organization comes immediately
to
mind. Members of the Council will recall that in that
2

19. All of Israel’s military attempts, all its diplomatic
cannot camouflage
the reality of its
manoeuvres,
occupation of the Arab territories or the fact that it
is denying the Palestinian
Arab people its right to
self-determination
on its national soil. All of these
manoeuvres and oppressive acts cannot camouflage
two basic facts concerning this occupation by Israel:
first, that the occupation is illegal and, secondly, that
there will be no peace unless the occupation is
terminated.

report, which is at present under our informal consideration, the Secretary-General
expresses his concern about the inability of the Council to play its role
as the primary world authority for international peace
and security. He also reminds us that those members
of the Council which have special rights and special
responsibilities under the Charter share a sacred trust,
and that trust must be a paramount consideration.
15. Guyana believes, and we have so stated on
numerous occasions, that it is high time that the
Council was allowed to rise out of the paralysis
imposed upon it and become responsive to the
demands of crisis situations, such as that in the Middle
East, which threaten a confrontation extending well
beyond the confines of the region. It is time that the
Council ceased being a mere spectator and was
allowed to become meaningful and relevant to those
people, such as the Palestinians in the occupied West
Bank, who look to us to guarantee their safety against
the forces of foreign occupation. The recent actions by
lsrael in the occupied West Bank and the annexationist threats hanging over those territories have made
more urgent the need for effective action in accordance with the provisions of the Charter to compel
Israel to abide by the decisions of the Council.

20. Israel has ridden roughshod over all of the
resolutions of the United Nations and especially over
Council resolution 465 (1980), which calls upon it to
stop establishing
settlements,
Instead, Israel has
expended tremendous
efforts at various levels to
legitimize its occupation of the Arab territories. It has
pursued that policy by creating llew fuits nccomplis,
both within the occupied territories and in the framework of its relations with its Arab neighbours. In so
doing, it has intensified its settlement activities in the
occupied Arab territories; it has attempted to fragment
the Palestinian Arab people and monopolize military
superiority; and it has maintained the drastic imbalance
of power vis-d-vis the Arab States.
21. Israel has violated the fourth Geneva Convention
of 1949,’ especially paragraph 6 of article 49 of that
convention. That provision would prohibit the introduction of any alterations in the demographic nature of
the occupied Arab territories in any circumstances. It
would prohibit the occupier from undertaking any
settlement activities in the territories it occupies.

16. Mr. BATAINAH
(Jordan) (interpretation
.fiom
Arabic): At the outset, Sir, I should like to extend to
you sincere congratulations
and deep appreciation on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
this month. Your presence in the Chair is a source of
pleasure and satisfaction to us; your well-known
diplomatic skill and expertise will enable the Council
to achieve the most effective results. It is gratifying for
me to refer to the friendly relations which link our two
countries, and especially for me to recall your country’s firm support for Arab rights in the face of
aggression and domination.

22. Moreover, Israel has striven by every means and
by employing the most drastic methods of violence
and terror to destroy the moral and material existence
of the Palestinian Arab people. Its recent invasion of
Lebanon and the acts of violence by its military forces
against defenceless civilians in the refugee camps in
Lebanon proved beyond a doubt Israel’s deliberate
intent and persistent endeavour not to recognize the
rights of the Palestinian Arab people.

17. I should like to extend deep thanks and appreciation also to your predecessor, Mr. Amega, of Togo.
The skill and effectiveness with which he guided the
work of the Council last month won him the admiration of all. His diplomatic expertise and experience
played a vital role in the achievement of tangible
progress and in crystallizing substantive principles for
the work of the Council in particular and for the work
of the United Nations in general, as regards the
effective maintenance
of international
peace and
security. On behalf of the Jordanian delegation and on
my own behalf, I extend sincere thanks and appreciation to Mr. Amega.

23. That policy, which is based in essence on an
attempt to make the entire region prey to the aggressionist and expansionist nature of Israel, has led to the
bloody wars that have broken out in the area and to the
intense terror and tension that prevail today in the
Middle East. That tension jeopardizes not only the
security and safety of the region, but also international
peace and security.
24. Adding to the gravity of the situation is the fact
that Israel, within the framework of justifying the
policy it is pursuing, has at times fabricated Talmudic
historical pretexts and at other times false security
reasons based on its claim of its absolute right to
assimilate the occupied Arab territories and to direct
military blows at will against the Arab nation. The first
fruits of that policy are the inflated security interests
claimed by Israel, which include an area extending

18. Despite the fact that 15 years have elapsed since
the beginning of the abominable Israeli occupation of
the Arab territories, despite the proliferation of forms
of aggression, of the many methods of achieving
hegemony, of the variety of the means of oppression,
and of the arbitrary acts committed by Israel against
the Palestinian Arab people and against the Arab
nation, the essential question remains: “When will
Israel end its occupation of these Arab territories?”
3

spare the region the scourge of war and destruction.
That policy prevents the achievement of peace because it undermines its main and sole basis, namely,
peace in exchange for land, as provided in Council
resolution 242 (1967).

from North Africa iI1 the west to the frontiers of China
in the east, That geographic inflation of Israel:s
security concerns is paralleled only by its Talmudfc
claim, which dates back thousands of Years. This
claim has led to the theory of Israel’s security-which
rests on a purely
aggressive basis-and to its attempts
to achieve an absolute monopoly on military superiority and to destroy the Palestinian Arab People, as
well as to the obstruction of any Progress towards
Arab stability, to the pursuit Of the Policy of Preemptive war and blitzkrieg, to the continued expansion at Arab expense and to i.ts absolute reliance on
war as the sole option in its relations with the
Palestinians and the entire Arab nation. Israel has
failed to entertain any positive or moderate position on
(he part of the Arabs short of full Capitulation.

28. Mr. BORG (Malta): Sir, on behalf of the delegation of the Republic of Malta, I should like to associate
myself with previous speakers and offer our sincere
and warmest congratulations
on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for the month of
February. The high post which you now occupy is an
honour not only for you personally but also for the
great country you represent.
29. My country looks upon your presidency as
another inspiring link in the development
of the
relations of friendship and co-operation which our
two countries greatly cherish and which culminated in
the agreement on the neutrality of Malta, signed
between our two countries in 1981. We assure you of
our continued
co-operation
and support in your
endeavours.

25. Linked to this theory of Israeli security is the
pursuit of an Israeli foreign policy with regard to the
Palestinian Arab people in particular and the Arab
nation as a whole that is based solely on the principle
of power and devoid of any moral or human foundation. It is a policy whose only pillars are destruction,
domination and hegemony, instead of coexistence and
understanding, It is a policy based on fanaticism and
terrorism rather than on moderation and the peaceful
settlement of disputes.

30. I also take this opportunity to express our sincere gratitude and appreciation to your predecessor,
Mr. Amega, of Togo, for the wise and excellent
leadership he manifested during the deliberations
of
the Council last month.

26. Israel has striven to achieve one of the basic aims
of that policy, namely, to portray any concession or
recognition of the rights of the Arabs and the Palestinians as a threat to its existence. Under the pretext of
that claim, it has sought to justify its absolute
intransigence with regard to the legitimate demands of
the Palestinian Arab people, to resist any international
pressure aimed at prevailing upon it to recognize those
rights. and to justify its concept of security based on
aggression and expansion. Within this framework,
Israel has sought to uphold the premise that the State
may place the requirements of its own survival above
the interests of the international system in order to
justify a raw drive for power by Tel Aviv and the
achievement of regional gains. In a nutshell, Israel has
sought to portray unjustly the Arabs as working for its
destruction, in order to justify its own plans for their
destruction. In that light we can understand the Israeli
Claim that it is pursuing a policy of self-defence while
engaged in acts of domination over its neighbours and
waging wars against them, as well as its use of the
pretext of security in consecrating its settlement
Policy. The Israeli propaganda machine has fabricated
the Palestinian and Arab threat to its security and has
exaggerated that fabrication in an attempt
to justify
Israel’s pEiCtiCeS in assimilating the West Bank, Gaza
and all the other occupied Arab territories and its acts
Of aggreSSiOn
against the Arabs and against the
Palestinian people,

31. Mr. President, you and the other members of the
Council may perhaps recall that my delegation had the
honour on a previous occasion, some seven years ago,
to address the Council on the question now before us.
Our delegation spoke then in its capacity as Rapporteur of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People. On that occasion, we explained the legal and political foundations
on which the Committee’s
recommendations
were
solidly based and asked that the Council use them as a
basis for progress.
32. Since then, as we are unfortunately only too well
aware, Palestine has burned while the Council has
fiddled. 1 doubt that any other region in the world is
better equipped than Palestine is for the proverbial
ploughshare; but the area has instead received in
recent decades the modern version of the sword
-napalm
and cluster bombs. If we in the Council
continue inactive, last year’s most recent horrors may
unfortunately be repeated.
33. We should not be facing this prospect. In our
statement to the General Assembly on 30 November
1982, we quoted official records of the voting pattern
on the question of Palestine over the past seven years,
from which it clearly emerged that the community
of
nations earnestly wishes to respond to the just and
legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people to selfdetermination;
that has so far been denied them. That
is the single and essential element we are called upon
to remedy.

27. That pre-ordained policy has resulted in the
stagnation and fanalicism that is being inflicted On the
Middle East region and that has become a stumblillgblock in the path of every attempt and sincere effort to
4

34. All nations seem to recognize that something
positive needs to be done-something
generous, constructive and long-lasting, an investment in the future
designed to advance the prospects of peace. A number
of plans are under discussion and a number of
initiatives have been announced, but all are under
Israeli assault. Israel is on the spot; it has so far been
acting with irresponsible arrogance, backed by misuse
of military muscle, in its desperate search for security.

It is absolutely essential that serious negotiations on
the various aspects of that problem involve all the
parties concerned at the earliest possible time. Far
too much time has already elapsed, far too many
lives and far too many opportunities have been lost,
and too many.faits accomplis have been created.“’
The Committee

40. The Committee
itself, as long ago as 1976,
expressed the view that the Council

35. Too many dreary statistics can be quoted of
Israel’s violation of its responsibilities under the fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949,’ of Israel’s defiance of
numerous Security Council resolutions and of Israel’s
unrepentant attitude with regard to the rights of the
Palestinian
people. The statistics make for sorry
reading, for they are the seeds of future strife and
conflict. Israel’s repressive measures range from land
confiscation to transfer of population, to use of force,
to different laws applied to people of different racial
origin and to illegal occupation of territory.
These
have been described by Natan Donvitz, a writer on
moral problems and human suffering in Israel, very
succinctly but with uncompromising
frankness as a
policy “to expel all the Arabs of the occupied
territories and to kill those who resist”.

“might be more actively utilized
moves towards a settlement”.J

for constructive

It also stated that:
“Against the background of the reported difficulties in the search for a peaceful solution to the
Middle East question, the members of the Committee, within their more limited terms of reference,
considered that the recommendations
which follow
would, in their implementation,
constitute a contribution within the framework of the United Nations and would complement
efforts towards the
establishment
of a just and lasting peace in the
region. ’ ‘4

36. If is, of course, highly commendable
that these
policies can be criticized openly. But the fact of
criticism does not justify the original acts of inhuman
repression and the insidious policy, behind them.

41. Those recommendations
have remained unchanged, their value uncliminished
by the passage
of time. In the mean time, the Committee has not
ceased its indefatigable pursuit of a just solution. On
the Committee’s
suggestion, the United Nations is
engaged in much preparatory work on this question.
Between now and August, practically every week will
see some United Nations activity in preparation for
the forthcoming
International
Conference on the
Question of Palestine. The ob.iectives of the Conference have been overwhelmingly
endorsed by the
Assembly; and so have the Committee’s recommendations for seven consecutive years, faithfully based, as
they were and still are, on the previous decisions of the
Organization.

37. If Israel continues to refuse to heed the calls for
restraint or to see the soundness of reason, then the
residual responsibilities of the Council must be utilized
in the overall interests of peace, Israel can no longer
be allowed to hold to ransom the peace and economic
well-being of its region and, indeed, of the entire
world. The carnage of Beirut should never have taken
place; most certainly, it should not be allowed to be
repeated either in Beirut or elsewhere.
38. Even as Beirut burned, amid the stench of death,
the seed of hope was never completely extinguished. It
is in the interests of all that it should be nourished to
healthy growth. But action cannot be postponed
indefinitely.

42. The Conference provides a unique opportunity lo
take into account the events of the past decades and to
devise a permanent and equitable solution with universal backing which corresponds to modern realities and
which the Council would then, acting in concert,
oversee and implement,
That is the hope of the
Committee. That is the wish of the Assembly. That is a
resolute expression of the yearning for peace-at long
last-in the Middle East.

39. The Council has a paramount role to play in any
attempt to lay the foundations of peace. As the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inahenable Rights of
the Palestinian People observed in its 1977 report and
as the Secretary-General
noted in his report to the
Assembly last year:

43. The position of my country as regards this issue
is well reflected in the following statement contained
in the address by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Malta to the General Assembly last October:

“the Security Council [is] the only place in the
world where all of the parties concerned can sit at
the same table”.?
The Secretary-General

could not agree more.

also stated in his report:

“For the Palestinian people the road to dignity
and freedom is proving particularly tragic, as the
recent events in Lebanon have shown, These events

“Let us consider what is perhaps our most
formidable international problem-the
Middle East.
5

terrorism against the Palestinians in the occupied
territories.
Similar
violence continues to be perpetrated against the Palestinians in Lebanon; a very
recent example was the destruction of the Palestine
Research Centre, in which more than 20 innocent
lives were lost and over 120 people were seriously
wounded. This relentless repression of the Palestinians is compounded by an intensification of the Israeli
policy of illegal confiscation of Palestinian and Arab
lands and properties in the occupied territories.
It
appears that Israel’s aggression against Lebanon has
further emboldened it in its design to lend permanence
to its control over the occupied territories of the West
Bank, Gaza, the Golan Heights and the Holy City of
Jerusalem.

have not broken the spirit of the Palestinian People
in continuing their struggle but the OPPortunities for
a peaceful solution, which under the leadership of
the PLO were genuinely being sought, have been
dealt a severe blow. The Israeli actipns *have
deliberate]y p]aced a policy of aggression wht In the
path of the road to peace; in the process they have
inflicted unbelievable suffering, and they have torn a
country apart.
“The threat to the peace and stability of the
Middle East and the Mediterranean which arises out
of the Palestinian and Lebanese tragedies constitutes a direct threat to peace and stability even
outside the region. European nations should play a
major role to help bring about a solution which both
respects the inalienable rights of the Palestinians
and at the same time safeguards other legitimate
interests in the region. Malta is proud of the role it
has played in supporting the Palestinian cause and
pledges to continue steadfastly in this course.“’

49. In the occupied territories, including Jerusalem,
Israeli policies and practices have the single objective
of the annexation of those territories in order to build a
Greater Israel. Those policies and practices take the
form of repression and harassment of the Arab and
Palestinian population, forcing them into exile; alteration of the historical and cultural complexion of the
occupied territories; usurpation of land and resources;
implantation
of Jewish settlements to change the
demographic character of the territories; and, finally,
steps towards their juridical annexation. The relentless
process of the setting up of new settlements is the
primary instrument for the achievement of this final
goal.

44, It is therefore essential that all members of
the Council should join ranks in this common endeavour. At this stage, surely we can all see that
Israel’s settlement policy and present repression in the
occupied territories represent a clear obstacle to the
prospects for peace. If we do, then we should say so,
singly and collectively, and ask Israel to desist from its
present unacceptable policies; instead, Israel should
be encouraged, persuaded and convinced to join the
rest of the world in a resolute search for justice for the
dispossessed Palestinian people, within a settlement of
the Arab-Israeli conflict.

50. The authoritative
report of the Security Council
Commission established under resolution 446 (1979)
determined that by 1980 about 33 per cent of the
occupied West Bank had been confiscated by the
Israeli authorities
[S/14268, para. 1701. It is now
estimated that 55 to 60 per cent of the area in the West
Bank has been usurped by the occupying Power and
more than 139 settlements have been created on that
land. Israeli leaders also make no secret of their
designs to settle nearly 400,000 immigrant Jews in the
West Bank within the next five years and 1.4 million
over the next 30 years.

45. Mr. SHAH NAWAZ (Pakistan): First of al], Sir,
I should like to offer you our congratulations on your
assUmPtiOn
Of the presidency for the month
of
February. We greatly respect your wide experience
and knowledge of international affairs, which will be a
great asset in guiding the important work of the
Council this month.
46. I also wish to pay a tribute to your predecessor,
Mr. Amega, of Togo, who steered the work of the
Council with great dedication, distinction and success.

51. The meaning of this massive colonization of the
occupied territories becomes clear from the description of the occupied territories as Judea and Samaria,
in a totally impermissible
attempt to integrate the
territories with Israel.

47. The Council is meeting once again to consider the
grave situation in the occupied territories, in particular
the lsraeli policy of establishing illegal settlements in
its relentless pursuit of expansion and consolidation of
its occupation of Arab and Palestinian lands, The
situation inside the occupied territories, which continues to deteriorate, must not suffer neglect on
account of the broader issues resulting from the Israeli
invasion of Lebanon, its continuing aggression in the
area and its defiance of all efforts aimed at achieving
peace.

52. It is nniversally recognized that the Israeli policy
of settlements has the gravest juridical and political
consequences.
53. Juridically,
these settlements constitute flagrant
violation of the fourth Geneva Convention of 1949’ and
open defiance of Council resolutions, particularly
resolution 465 (1980), which determined in categorical
terms that:

4X. At
the Council’s
meeting
last
Friday
[2412th ,rreefing], the Observer of the PLO, Mr Terzi
provided us with details of the latest acts of Israeli

“all measures taken by Israel to change the physical
character, demographic
composition,
institutional
6

structure or status of the Palestinian and other Arab
territories occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem,
or any part thereof have no legal validity and that
Israel’s policy and practices of settling parts of its
population and new immigrants in those territories
constitute a flagrant violation of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons
in Time of War and also constitute a serious
obstruction to achieving a comprehensive, just and
lasting peace in the Middle East.”

57. The Council must overcome the paralysis which
has frozen its efforts for the realization of those
objectives which are the quintessence of resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973). There should be no difficulty
in overcoming this paralysis since the members of the
Council share the concern over the dangers implicit in
the continuation of the Israeli policy of repression and
settlements in the occupied territories. Failure to act
expeditiously
and firmly in this direction could have
the gravest consequences for international peace, as
became apparent in the recurrence of Israeli aggression against Lebanon last year.

54. Politically,
the Israeli pursuit of systematic
annexation of the occupied territories strikes at the
very basis of international efforts for a just and lasting
peace in the Middle East, including those undertaken
by the United Nations. It is designed to create fbits
accomplis which would close all avenues towards
peace. The immediate and unconditional withdrawal of
Israeli forces from Lebanon is the sine qua non for the
success of any peace initiative. However, it is unimaginable that any progress towards peace in the
Middle East will be possible unless Israel halts all
settlement in the West Bank. The realization of the
hopes for peace offered by the Fez plan [S/15510,
RnnCX, sect. 11 depend entirely on whether Israel
responds by desisting from further usurpation of Arab
lands. The United States Administration,
which has
put forward its own peace proposals,” has also acknowledged that calling a halt to the setting up of Israeli
settlements in the occupied territories is the indispensable condition for the continuation
of the peace
efforts.

58. Almost two generations of Palestinians have been
subjected to violence and terror or to the rigours
of exile. Their tragedy is epitomized in the massacre of
thousands of innocent men, women and children in the
Sabra and Shatila refugee camps. The courage and
restraint shown by the Palestinians and their leadership in the face of unbridled repression have won
universal acclaim. Their pain is deepty felt throughout
the world; yet nothing has been done for the restitution
of their national rights and the restoration of their
homeland.
59. The Coulicil has a historic obligation to fulfil
towards the Palestinian
people: to close their tragic
chapter of suffering and travail. Failure to do so will
result in the complete erosion of international
confidence in its role as the primary instrument for the
maintenance of international
peace and security and
the promotion of a world order based on justice and
the principles of the Charter.

55. In contemptuous
disregard of this prerequisite
for peace, the Government of Israel has approved the
establishment of more new settlements in the occupied
West Bank. In the face of this open defiance of its
decisions, the Council cannot escape its responsibility
to act firmly and decisively under the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations. Within the Council and
outside it, those Powers which bear special responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and
security, particularly the United States, need to take
credible steps to force Israel to rescind its recent
decision to expand Israeli settlements in the West
Bank. Only in this way can the expectation of peace
aroused by the Twelfth Arab Summit Conference, held
at Fez in November 1981 and September 1982, and
other peace initiatives be sustained and the opportunity for a just and honourable solution of the Middle
East conflict be seized.

60. Mr. NATORF
(Poland): At the very outset
I should like whole-heartedly to congratulate you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency for the month of
February. We are happy to see in the President’s seat
the representative
of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics,
a brother, socialist country with which
Poland has relations of friendship, alliance and cooperation. Your extensive diplomatic experience and
abilities are well known; they have been demonstrated
many times in the Security Council and in other
United Nations ‘forums in the course of often difficult
and most demanding negotiations. We know that you
will guide our proceedings towards the successful
discharge of the duties before us, and we wish you
every success in your important and difficult work.
61. 1 should like also to express our appreciation
of the contribution
made by the outgoing President,
Mr. Amega, of Togo, who, with wisdom, remarkable
skill and dedication, led our work during the month of
January.

56. Speaking of a lasting peace in the Middle East,
we remain of the firm belief that a just and peaceful
political settlement of the Middle East conflict cannot
be achieved without the total withdrawal of Israel
from Lebanon, as well as from all the Palestinian and
Arab territories occupied since 1967, including the
Holy City of Jerusalem, and without full respect for
the inalienable
national rights of the Palestinian
people, including the right to establish their sovereign
State in Palestine.

62. Barely half a year ago the Council, appalled at
the massacre of Palestinian civilians in Beirut, met to
condemn that criminal act [2396t11 meeting]. During
the debate that preceded the adoption of the resolution
calling for respect for the rights of the civilian
population
[resoiution
521 (1982)], all the speakers
7

expressed profound shock at those Cold-blooded
atrocities. The responsibility
for them and for the policy
which Icd to such losses iJJld
human suffering was
strongly emphnsized.

solution. The complete and unconditional withdrawal
of Israeli forces from all the occupied Arab territories,
including Arab Jerusalem, is a prerequisite for that.

63. Today we SlI’C JW.Xthg UgEliIi lo continue
the
discussion of the policy of creeping annexation
of the
occupied Arab territOrieS that iS being pursued by the
Israeli authorities, CoIltIX’Y
to international
law and
numerous
Jx%dlltiO~S
Of the
council
and other United
Nations organs.

68. For years now, we have been pointing out that
the policy of the Israeli authorities, supported by their
strategic ally, the United States, can lead only to a
deepening of the crisis. It can only intensify threats of
conflagration in that very sensitive area on a wider
scale, bearing disastrous consequences which are
difficult to foresee.

64. One need not argue that the expanded construetion of new Israeli settlcmcnts,
the
eXpr0pri:~tioJ-J
of
Arab property to carry OlJt those projects
and the
application of SUCK methods a~ demolition
and sealing
of habitations and commercial
premises
constitllte
integral parts of thut policy. It is being conducted
in
defiance of the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations, in flagrant violation
of Security
Council
decisions and with total disregard
for international

69. The continued Israeli aggression in the Middle
East which is reflected, inter nlia, in the persistent
occupation of parts of Lebanon by Israeli armed
forces-not without the assistance of their proxy, the
so-called de .fcrcto forces-should
be seen in much
broader than regional dimensions, for it constitutes a
part of the confrontational
course of the imperialist
policy conducted from a position of strength and
leading towards further destabilization
in the world
and an increase in international tensions. It is a policy
that violates the principle of the inadmissibility
of the
acquisition and occupation
of foreign territory by
force, a policy of imposing upon others unjust,
separatist solutions, under the alibi either of Camp
David or of the more recent plan which, though
rejected by Israel, is designed to promote United
States interests in the region. And these have nothing
in common with the interests of the peoples of the
Middle East or with the interests of strengthening
international peace and security.

law.

65. Also, there is no need to argue that these
notorious activities are directed nt changing the status
of the occupied Arab tcrrituries.
Proof of Israeli
expansionism is offered by its unilateral
annexation
of
the eastern part of JC~XJS~CIII,
a deliberate
CoIonization
effort leading to the gradual economic
and administrative integration of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip
with Israel, the extension of the Israeli juridical
and
administrative
system over the Golan Weights, and
practices of a dubious character in the southern part of
Lebanon. Evidence provided in some statements
by
high-ranking Israeli officials is further
testimony
to
the expansionist policy of Israel.
Those practices,
accompanied by various l*orms of repression
and
terror, permit the harbouring
OF no illusions
a.s
to the true intentions of the invaders.
Last Friday,
the Council heard the stntcmcnts
in this respect
made by the representatives
of Syria and the PLO
[24/2th mectingj.
The cases presented
illustrate
shockingly that policy of the Israeli authorities.

70. Addressing the thirty-seventh
session of the
General Assembly in the general debate, the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Polish People’s Republic,
Stefan Olszowski, said, inter nlia:
“Peace in the Middle East cannot be a sum total
of separatist endeavours and agreements but a
collective and comprehensive
settlement that respects the fundamental
and just rights of all its
parties, and in particular the right of the people of
Palestine to establish its own State.“’

66. Poland’s position concerning the Israeli policy of
setticments on Arab lands in particular
and the
situation in the occupied Arab territories
in general is
well known. It has been prcscntcd
on numerous
occasions in the course ofdcbales in this chamber and
in other forums as well. It was given, inlet* nlict, in our
reply to the Secretary-Genc~~l’s
note concerning
General Assembly resolution ES-9/I
of 5 February
1982.

71. The dust and the gun smoke of Israeli aggression
have not yet settled in Lebanon. The Israeli forces are
yet to be withdrawn. Peace is still awaited in the
Middle East. The problem of the Middle East can be
solved only on the basis of a comprehensive approach.
Today, as the Council takes up the issue of the illegal
construction and expansion of Israeli settlements on
Arab territories,
we should realize that this very
important issue is part of the problem.

67. We have always resolutely and consistently
condemned the policy of Israeli ilggression and annexation
in all its forms. WC have always strongIy opposed the
Israeli policy of interference in the internal
affairs Of
Arab countries. For years now we have been pointing
out that a settlement which would bring lasting peace
and security to all the States and peoples of the region
can be reached only through a comprehensive
and just

72. Mr. LING
Qing (China) (interpretation
fr-om
Chinese): At the outset, Sir, I wish to congratulate you
on behalf of the Chinese delegation on your assumption of the presidency for this month.
73. I should also like to express sincere appreciation
to your predecessor, Mr, Amega, whose diplomatic
8

skill and tireless efforts enabled the Council successfully to fulfil its responsibilities
last month.

the Palestinian refugees there. There have been recent
discoveries of systematic massacres of Palestinian
refugees by Israeli troops in Lebanon. The whereabouts of large numbers of Palestinian civilians seized
by Israeli troops are unknown. In view of the lessons
of the Sabra and Shatila massacres, these new
developments
should receive the serious attention of
the international
community.

74. As this is the first time the Chinese delegation has
made a statement in the Council this year, I should like
to take this opportunity
to extend the warmest
welcome to our new colleagues, the representatives of
Malta, the Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan and
Zimbabwe. Their experience and wisdom and their
commitment
to the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations will undoubtedly enable the Council to
carry out more effectively the noble tasks assigned
to it by the Charter. I personally, as well as my
delegation, look forward to the most fruitful co-operation with them and their delegations. I also wish to pay
a tribute to our outgoing colleagues, the representatives of Ireland, Japan, Panama, Spain and Uganda,
whose contribution to the work of the Council during
the past two years is well known to us all. The Chinese
delegation
sincerely hopes that the Council will
continue to benefit from their useful contribution.

79. The question under consideration today not only
concerns the inalienable national rights of the Palestinian people but also affects the evolution of the Middle
East situation as a whole and the comprehensive and
just solution of the Middle East question. The Council
must therefore unequivocally
condemn the aggressive
‘and expansionist conduct of Israel, consider effective
measures to stop Israeli expansion in the occupied
territories and compel Israel to withdraw from all Arab
territories occupied by it since 1967.
SO. The PRESIDENT
(inter~retation~om
Russian):
The next speaker is the representative of Algeria.
1 invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

75. Recent developments in the occupied West Bank
and Gaza are a cause for deep concern. The Israeli
authorities have refused to implement relevant resolutions adopted by the General Assembly and the
Security Council, have intensified their expansionist
and colonial policy in the occupied territories, and
have adopted high-handed repressive measures against
the Palestinian civilians in the We’st Bank, in an
attempt permanently to .occupy and annex that Palestinian territory. In defiance of unanimous condemnation by world opinion, the Israeli authorities have
recently accelerated the expansion of settlements in
the West Bank. Not long ago they approved the
establishment
of four additional settlements in the
West Bank and declared their intention to bring in
hundreds of thousands of settlers within the next five
years.

81. Mr. SAMNOUN
(Algeria) (interpretation from
French): AlIow me first to extend to you, Sir, on
behalf of my delegation, the most heartfelt and sincere
congratulations
on your accession to the presidency.
My pleasure and that of my delegation is all the greater
since you represent a country which maintains exemplary relations of friendship and co-operation with
Algeria. The competence
that. you
have already
demonstrated in many situations, as well as your indepth knowledge of international
problems, guarantees the success of the work of the Council.
82. I also take this opportunity
to address the
congratulations
of my delegation to your predecessor,
Mr. Amega, the representative
of Togo, who last
month conducted the work of the Council with his
well-known keenness, skill and tact.

76. In order to realize this wild scheme of expansion,
the lsraeli authorities are illegally appropriating large
tracts of the land of the inhabitants of the West Bank,
seizing and demolishing
civilian dwellings and displacing hundreds and even thousands of Palestinian
families, which are now deprived of the land they have
worked for generations.

83. My delegation is particularly happy that countries with which Algeria maintains special relations,
such as Malta, Nicaragua, Pakistan, the Netherlands
and Zimbabwe are now sitting in the Council. We wish
them every success in their difficult and inspiring task.

77. In addition, the Israeli authorities have subjected
Palestinian workers, teachers, students, writers and
journalists
who oppose their colonial rule in the
occupied territories to arbitrary arrest and unreasonable interrogation;
they have wilfully closed down
Palestinian schools and have even used troops to crack
down on demonstrators,
plunging the Palestinian
people in the occupied territories into a state of
outright terror. Ail this has exacerbated the already
tense situation in the West Bank.

84. The delegation of my country has repeatedly had
occasion to express in this forum and elsewhere its
serious concern and profound disquiet over the particularly critical situation prevailing in the occupied
Arab territories.
85. A Council meeting was convened, it will be
recalled, last November
[2401st meeting], after the
announcement
by the highest official organs of the
Israeli administration
of a plan to establish dozens of
settlements with the avowed intent of changing the
demographic
nature of the Arab territories and of
rendering irreversible
the process of expropriating

78. It must also be pointed out that the Israeli
aggressor troops that invaded Lebanon have taken
barbarous and ruthless measures of repression against
9

Hebron, the publication of the findings of the Commission of Inquiry should be followed up by the indictment of the Israeli Government by the international
community,
not only for its attitude during the
massacres at Sabra and Shatila but also for its whole
policy towards the Palestinian people. That criminal
policy is not new, nor is it surprising since it proceeds
from a philosophy which has always underpinned and
fed the mad fantasies of certain Zionist leaders,
including Begin himself.

Arab resources and property by the forces of occupation, the logical end of which could be the annexation
of the territories occupied in 1967.
86. At one time, one ventured to believe that the
condemnation by the international Community Of that
criminal policy, as well as the damning report of the
Special Committee to Investigate Israeli , Practices
Affecting the Human Rights of the Population of the
Occupied Territories, would have had a deterrent
effect on the Israeli leaders.

92. For some decades that philosophy has sought, on
the basis of theses which arc as absurd as they are
aberrant and which we are told are inspired by Holy
Writ, to expand the sphere of Israeli influence to the
whole of the region and to that end to maintain a
permanent climate of insecurity and war. ‘“We found
an Arab country and we have made it a Jewish
country”, said Moshe Dayan proudly in 1972 when he
was Minister for Defence. Begin himself, who speaks
glibly of Judea and Samaria, has been saying since
1967 that the occupied territories should be Judaized
as were Jaffa and Haifa before. Mr. Halevy cites the
following formula used by a Zionist activist that is very
eloquent about the profound thinking of the Israeli
leaders: “we cannot bear the sight of a land that is not
inhabited by Jews”. And further on he said: “with the
help of God we will manage to settle not only Mount
Ararat, in northern Turkey, where Noah’s ark ran
aground, but also Yemen, the beloved fatherland of
our King Solomon”.

87. Likewise, the feeling of horror prompted by the
terrible act of aggression carried out against Lebanese
territory and the ghastly massacres which followed
could have led one to believe that the impact of that
tragedy would prevail upon the Zionist leaders to
exercise greater restraint and greater consideration
and respect for human rights. Unfortunately,
the
Israeli leaders-scorning
the condemnation of the
international community, including those giving them
financial, military and diplomatic support-have been
pursuing with the same contempt and with the same.
cruelty their policy of conquest and aggression against
the Arab peoples of the region, and in particuIar
against the Palestinian people, which have been driven
to the wall.
88, The pursuit of the policy of settlements knows no
respite. Recently again, on 2 February to be precise,
the Israeli military authorities seized 2,800 hectares of
arable land adjoining the village of Salem, near
Nablus, in the north of the occupied West Bank. In the
same week, 400 hectares of land adjoining the village
of Dayr Dibwan, near Ramallah, were simply confiscated from Arab families which rejected the compensation that the Israeli authorities wanted to pay them.
The daily newspaper Ha’aretz announced on Sunday,
30 January, the seizure of 2,000 hectares of land in
various sectors of the occupied territories near the
frontiers which antedated the war of 1967-land to be
used to expand Israeli settlements,

93. The newspaper Ha’awtz gives precise details
about the mobilization
of the diaspora to finance the
colonization now under way. Its 19 January 1981 issue
reported that:
“At the present time a plan to finance settlements
is under way among the Jewish communities of the
diaspora. In the United States, the inhabitants of
Kiryat Arba have set up a special fund for settlements in the Al-Khalil
district. In South Africa, a
campaign is being waged by Tsi Salonien, an activist
of the Gush Emunim.
The creation of a city of
donors is envisaged, and efforts are under way to
seek immigrants to people it.”

89. Furthermore, the repression of the inhabitants of
the occupied territories and the very serious violations
of human rights which have been admitted by Israeli
officers and soldiers and in which the Head of State
himself has been implicated ase now well known.

94. The Zionist leaders stop at nothing to achieve
their ends. A few moments ago we cited here some of
their methods, which include intimidation;
expulsion;
massive internments;
expropriation;
the use of an
arsenal of repressive laws, some of which date from
the British Mandate; punitive operations; summary
measures; and, finally, the slaughter and massacre of
Palestinians-whom
they have pursued in Lebanon
and elsewhere-to
which the whole world was witness, thanks to the mass media.

90. The recent discovery of mass graves where
several people were summarily massacred near the
refugee camps of El Ansar and Air Heloua, in southern
Lebanon, and the multiple searches and arrests of
Palestinians in Sidon and elsewhere are surely stages
in a policy of annihilation and of a final solution to the
Palestinian problem, to use a phrase of sad renown.
91. It is understandable that the findings of the socalled Commission of Inquiry into the massacres at
Sabra and Shatila were met by the Palestinian people
with indifference and a general feeling of disappointment. As was quite frankly said by the Mayor of

95. Today Palestinians,
oppressed or ousted from
their homeland by the champions of a racist ideology,
are turning to the international community and finding
a conspiratorial
silence, in particular among the
IO

leaders of certain countries where, unfortunately,
Zionist influence and propaganda have to a large
extent anaesthetized part of public opinion. It is timely
to remind those Powers that they bear a heavy responsibihty to history in protecting and giving strength to
an expansionist entity which, not content with having
uprooted and expelled entire populations from their
territories, has pursued them beyond those territories
to decimate them. Today it is in Lebanon. Where will
it be tomorrow?

103. The time has come for the Council, which has
been enriched by the valuable contributions of new
countries whose support of just causes has always
been constant, to revise its position and to co-ordinate
its action with that of the General Assembly, so that
the Palestinian people, which has been the victim of an
historic injustice, can return to the land from which it
was ousted and recover the property of which it was
stripped, and so that peace and harmony may return to
that battered land, the cradle of civilizations and the
crossroads of mankind.

96. The arbitrary measures taken in violation
of
conventional
international
law by the Israeli military
authorities
against the inhabitants of Syrian Golan,
measures which seek to complete the process of
zionization
of that territory and to change its juridical
status, are ample proof of the profoundly chauvinistic
character of the Israeli leaders and their inflexible
determination
to pursue the realization of their Greater
Israel.

104. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Russian): The next speaker is the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran. I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.
105. Mr. RAJAIE-KHORASSANI
(Islamic Republic
of Iran): I thank you, Sir, for calling upon me, and
1 sincerely congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency for this month, when the meetings of the
Council are so very important. I believe that your rich
political background and experience will contribute to
the achievement
of good and successful results at
these meetings.

97. The situation of the population of Golan since its
annexation in December 1981 by the occupying Power
constitutes a grave source of concern because of the
risks it entails for a general conflagration of the region.

106. After three months of hard work on and in the
demanding
General Assembly, we are again back
where we have been for the past 35 years, namely,
the Zionist invasion of Palestine, As members of the
Council can see, in spite of the clever General Assembly resolution 180 (II) of 21 November 1947-the result
of a conspiracy against Palestine carried out 35 years
ago under the pretext of the maintenance of international peace and security-there
has been no peace
and security in our area ever since that time.

98. At the time, the Council denounced that act of
juridical
piracy [resolution 497 (1981)], and it is dutybound to repeat its condemnation of that intolerable
failure to obey ethical rules and international
law,
because it constitutes a grave precedent and a particularly
outrageous act of defiance of the United
Nations.
99. The United Nations, after a good deal of trial and
error and a conspiratorial silence which has lasted for
two and a half decades, did identify the original cause
of the Middle East contlict.

107. What my delegation
understands from this
perennial situation is not that the Zionist furuncle was
transplanted
to Palestine for the maintenance of
international
peace and security, but that, on the
contrary,
as a historical
fact, the occupation of
Palestine by the Zionist aggressors and the formal
recognition of that occupation by the United Nations
at that time were an imperialist conspiracy against the
Muslims of the Middle East in general and against the
Palestinians in particular and, as such, constitute a
blatant act of violation
of international
peace and
security.

100. At its twenty-ninth session, the General Assembly courageously lifted the veil from a tragedy produced 35 years ago by recognizing that the question of
Palestine constituted the Gordian knot of the Middle
East problem, by restoring the inalienable national
rights of the Palestinian people and by making official
the representation
of the PLO [resolutions
3236
(XXIX) nnd 3237 (XXIX) of 22 NovernDer 19743.
101. Since then, the General Assembly has on various occasions reaffirmed by overwhelming majorities
the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people and has
called on the occupying Power to withdraw from the
occupied Arab territories.

108. In spite of a considerable-and
fortunately
increasing-number
of individual cases of good intentions in the United Nations, and even in the Security
Council, it would be too optimistic to believe that the
general trend in the international
body has changed
considerably. That is so simply because those satanic
Powers which have been backing the Zionist aggressors in the area are still supporting them in the United
Nations,
to the extent that those Powers do not
hesitate to threaten the United Nations in order to
crush any resistance to the presence of the forged
political entity in the international
body.

102. The recent tragic developments in that part of
the world, with their train of atrocities-the
full horror
of which has been impressed upon us by the mass
media-demand
that we once again call the attention
of the international
community
to what remains the
cardinal
element, the sine qus 12011, of any just,
honourable settlement of the Middle East problem: the
fact of the Palestinian nation.
11

“But the present American policy serves no good
purpose. The linkage suits Begin and Sharon well,
They drag their feet on the Lebanon negotiations not
because they want to stay there but because they
want to stay in the West Bank.”

10’~ Moreover, the philosophy behind the creation
af ;he United Nations was not the defence of the
oppressed or the prevention of aggresslou ?r the
eradication of imperialism; it was the preservatron of
peace and security as defined by the fourders of this
internation; club and the preservation Of lnt~rnatlona~
pcacc and tr;mqnilJity and the maintenance of the thenprcvaiIing international status C/L/Oin the interests of the
ruling Powers and Super-Powers. That is why there is
not one single instance of any international crisis or
problem having been resolved against the interests of
Western or Eastern imperialism.

114. The showmanship
of Sharon’s resignation
should not fool any realistic person. The criminal
policies of the Zionists started long before Sharon’s
membership in the ruling body of the usurping Zionist
rCgime, and they will continue after him. His resignation is only a pacifier that facilitates the continuation
of aggression and serves as a manoeuvre to gain
sympathy for the criminal Zionists whose crimes in the
Sabra and Shatila camps have broken the Nazi
criminal record.

1 IO. The United Nations did not and could not end
the Viet Nam war; the United Nations is not capable
of preventing United States support for the inhuman
South African rigime; the United Nations is not
capable of forcing the Russian army to withdraw from
Afghanistan. Similarly, the United Nations is not
capable of restoring the usurped rights of the Palestinian people. We have therefore maintained that any
success in the United Nations for the Palestinians
would be, at the most, another pacifying resolution
which, if’ it were strong enough to count as a political
victory, would definitely bc vetoed by the imperialist
Power, the United States.

11.5. The Zionists have meanwhile started another
conspiracy inside the occupied territories. The same
issue of The Je~~~salem Post has another article, this
one entitled
“West Bankers to Consider ‘Peace
Convenant’ “. According to the article, the aggressors
are working out a pro-Zionist fake Palestinian political
group in order to divide the united front of the
Palestinians’ struggle under the leadership of the PLO.
They should know, however, that there is no room for
such dirty plots to deceive the struggling Palestinians,
or even the United Nations.

I I I. We are also of the opinion that the political
history of occupied Palestine is very well known to
United Nations offjcials, as well as to Member States.
How could it be possible for a problem to become part
and parcel of the entire United Nations household and
yet for the nature of that problem to remain obscure?

116. As we have said before, Palestine is an Islamic
land, and as such its occupation is the concern of all
Muslims, regardless of their national backgrounds.
The Muslims of the Middle East, despite the imperialist hegemony and the servile attitude of some kings
and presidents in the Muslim world, will continue their
struggle against the Zionist base. It is important at the
present stage that the United Nations exercise some
independence and take a constructive position in order
that the oppressed Muslim nations may have some
respect for it and participate in the further liberation of
the international
body from the domination
of the
super-Powers. The Muslims would indeed follow the
Koranic dictum that says:

112. Moreover, most of the Member States belonging to the third world have had enough personal
experience of imperialism. Therefore, the reason why
a serious political decision against the Zionist base is
not made here is to be sought in the mechanisms of
imperialist manipulation and interference here in
the United Nations. Thus, so long as the presence
of global arrogance and its lackeys remains as it is
now, it will be vain to anticipate a miracle in the
United Nations in favour of the Palestinians. When
United States imperialism and its servile puppets in
the area are defeated, then there will be no need for the
generosity of the international body, or-to be optimistic-the
United Nations too will enjoy more
independence from the super-Power’s influence and
will act rationally and correctly.

“If then any one transgresses the prohibition
against you, transgress ye likewise against him. But
fear God, and know that God is with those who
restrain themseIves.“n
117. It is very important that the Council not fall into
the trap of Camp David, Fez, King Fahd-or any other
trap-and,
instead of taking sides with any of these
treacherous satanic plots, that it take sides with the
Muslim
masses in order to regain an acceptable
minimum of international
prestige.

113. My delegation would only hope that our participation would shed some more light on the issue and
consequently affect the international consciousness in
such a manner that many more of the oppressed might
stand against global arrogance, The present stage of
the Zionist plots against the Palestinians is very
crucinI. The Zionists, as we have reiterated before
intend to annex the VGcst Rank and GaLa Strip to thei;
zone of permanent occupation. In an article entitled
“Blaming the U.S.” that appeared in T/ZEJer~l,~ulem
?‘o.s~of 3 January 1983, Asher Maniv stated:

118. At this stage, United States imperialism
is
pIeased with a mild and acceptable resolution,
to
pretend to be on the side of the Arabs in order
to deceive the masses of the Arab world and to make
the implementation
of President Reagan’s plot against
Palestine and Palestinians more feasible. A construc12

tive resolution at this stage is usually vetoed. If a
resolution is not vetoed by the United States, then it
serves as a device to strengthen the United States
Government’s
foothold in the area by concealing the
nature of United States policies and those of the
United States lackeys.

126.

The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
.fiowz l-h~The next speaker is the representative
of
Turkey. 1 invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.

sian):

127. Mr. KIRCA (Turkey): I wish at the outset, Sir,
to convey our felicitations to you on your assumption
of the presidency for the current month. Your abilities
and skills are, by now, well known to all of us, and we
are confident that the deliberations of the Council will
once again greatly benefit from your wisdom and
experience. In your important endeavours you will
have the full co-operation of Turkey.

119. My delegation therefore requests the Council
not to compromise.
May the Council not forget the
massacres of thousands of innocent Palestinians of all
ages in the Sabra and Shatila camps. The Council
would be responsible for all the Zionists’ occupations
and crimes if it were to ignore its heavy responsibilities
towards Palestine and the Palestinian people.
120. The Council
that the United
international
club
world that come
sincerity.

128. It is instructive to note the fact that this is only
the second question that has come before the Council
in 1983, and yet we are again gathered here to consider
problems in the Middle East generated or sustained
essentially by Israel’s p’olicies. This fact attests to the
necessity and urgency of finding a just, comprehensive
and lasting solution to the question of Palestine. The
Israeli policy of establishing settlements in occupied
Arab and Palestinian
territories
continues to be a
primary source of tension in the area and progressively
reduces the chances for a just solution to the question
of Palestine. While, of course, the policy of settlements constitutes perhaps the most serious dimension of Israeli practices in the occupied territories, it is
not the only element in the arsenal of Israel’s approach
to these territories.

needs to show the rest of the world
Nations is no longer a private
deceiving the small nations of the
here with so much goodwill and

121. The Government and the Muslim people of the
Islamic Republic of Iran are fully determined to stand
beside their Palestinian brothers and sisters regardless
of the cost. I would hope that the Council would act
today in such a way as not to regret today’s record in
the future.
I22. The Government and the Muslim people of the
Islamic Republic of Iran strongly condemn the Zionist
atrocities
in occupied Palestine. We condemn the
national
and internatiohal
conspiracies that have,
contrary to all principles of justice, morality
and
inlernational
law, imposed the Zionist base of imperialism upon the Muslims of the Middle East. The
Government
and the Muslim people of the Islamic
Republic of Iran cannot recognize such self-refuting
devices, which have violated international peace and
security in our area under the guise of maintaining
peace and security, We strongly condemn any compromise with or concession to the Zionist usurpers,
whether it comes from the imperialist Powers or from
their agents in the ruling bodies of our area.

129. We are all too familiar with Israel’s record in the
occupied territories, and the subject needs no elaboration here. Israeli policies range from annexation of
occupied territories
to the oppression of the Arab
Palestinians living there. Turkey has always taken a
resolute stand against Israel’s negativist policies in
the occupied territories,
in the conviction that any
eventual settlement must provide for an Arab Palestinian homeland. Without Israel’s withdrawal from the
occupied Arab Palestinian territories and their return
to the Palestinians, there will be no homeland for the
Palestinians,
Without a Palestinian homeland, there
can be no solution to the Palestinian question.

123. We strongly condemn any concessionary resolution which, under the guise of peaceful coexistence, justifies the preservation of the usurping Zionist
r$gime. Today, commitment to the principles of divine
morality,
to justice and to avoidance of all miserable
concession are usually labelled fanaticism and, hence,
undermined.
Indeed, what count on the side of the
IsIamic Republic are the Holy Koran and divine law.
124. Let me remind
United Nations that:

the Muslim

Members

130. Just as it is incumbent
upon the international
community to remind Israel constantly of its responsibilities under the relevant 1949 Geneva Conventions
towards the territories it has occupied since 1967 and
their inhabitants, it is the duty of the Council to take
appropriate measures when an occupying Power fails
to meet its obligations under international law. In the
case of Israel, we have a flagrant case of persistent
violations of rules and norms of international law and
of the inalienable rights of the Arab Palestinian people.

of the

“If any do fail to judge by (the light of) what God
hath revealed, They are (no better than) those who
rebel.“’

13 1, The international
community
has denounced
Israel’s actions in the occupied Arab territories and
declared Israel’s unilaterat decisions, including those
on Jerusalem and the Syrian Golan Heights, to be null
and void. The Government
of Turkey
has, in the
context of its Middle East policy, similarly condemned

125. I would want them not to adopt a nai’ve position
contrary to the faith and the strong belief of their own
people just in order to please others.
13

have taken us by surprise. They are part of an overall
Israeli expansionist
plan to settle the Middle East
question through the extermination and expulsion of
the Palestinian people from their homelands.

Israel and rejected all its illegal decisions in respect of
the territories under its occupation since 1967.
132. It is perhaps unnecessary to demonstrate the
wrongness of Israel’s policies in the occupied territories because it is clear that those policies are
unquestionably
wrong. Why are they wrong? Because
they are contrary to international law and the principles of the Charter of the United Nations; because
they make an extremely complex and difficult situation even more intractable;
because they serve to
erode further the fragile chance for peace; and because
they undermine the prospects for success of the efforts
for peace at present under way in the area.

139. Members of the Council are welt informed about
the so-called diabolic master plan for the development
of settlements in Judea and Samaria in the period 19791983. To us, the plan also came as no surprise, since,
according to The Jerusalem Post of 26 July 1973, none
other than the Prime Minister of Israel had stated that:
“These outposts and settlements are seeds which
will develop in the future, growing in population and
becoming more firmly rooted. This settlement activity has deepened our roots in the land and strengthened the foundation of the State. Preparations and
plans are under way for the continuation
of this
important
activity,
whether rural or urban settlements.”

133. The Government of Turkey reiterates its firm
commitment
to the aspiration of the Arab Palestinian
people to exercise their legitimate national rights,
including the right to self-determination
and the right
to establish their own independent State. The PLO, as
the representative of the Palestinian people, has our
full support in its legitimate struggle on behalf of their
national cause.

140. Such action has been and continues to be a
violation of the fourth Geneva Convention of 1949,’
particularly article 47. That provision has been disregarded by Israel. It even has the audacity to dispose
of occupied Arab land through private sales. Israel has
formally rejected resolutions 446 (1979) and 452 (1979)
and has also refused to co-operate with the Security
Council Commission established under resolution 446
(1979). Under resolution 446 (1979), the Council
upheld the view that the annexation of occupied
Palestinian lands has no legal validity and that it
constitutes a serious obstruction to achieving a just
and lasting peace in the Middle East.

134. It is our view that Israel’s continued policy of
illegal settlements affects negatively the prospects of
an eventual solution. We call on Israel to put an
immediate end to this policy, particularly in the light of
the present configuration of the dynamics for peace in
the area. This would contribute significantly to the
amelioration of the situation. Israel’s persistence in its
dysfunctional policies in the occupied territories, on
the other hand, will only serve to make lasting peace
and security unreachable.
135. Mr. KITIKITI
(Zimbabwe): Mr. President, my
delegation wishes to associate itself with the felicitations that have been extended to you by other
members of the Council. We are very pleased that the
representative of a friendly country is presiding ove1
the Council at a time when we are deliberating a very
important
question: the rights of the Palestinian
people.

141. There is a human element involved which we
cannot afford to ignore. Among the recommendations
contained in the Commission’s report, it was observed
that a correlation exists between the establishment of
Israeli settlements and the displacement of the Arab
population [S/14268, pnra. 2341. The treatment of the
Arabs at the hands of the Israeli Zionists leaves us in
no doubt that the legacy of Adolf Hitler is very much
alive today. What crimes can one commit against
mankind which exceed systematic assassinations, the
limiting of the access to water by women and children,
the seizure of private property, the destruction of
homes and the banishment of persons? One can name
any atrocity, any act of genocide, and Israel is guilty of
it. What about the recent massacres in Lebanon?

136. We are also very proud of the manner in which
our brother, Mr. Amega, of Togo, presided over the
work of the Council last month.
137. The purpose of convening the Council at this
time should be emphasized at the outset: it is an appeal
to the members of the Council for justice and an appeal
to their conscience to put a haIt to the systematic
dehumanization,
dispossession and annihilation of the
PaIestinian people.

142. It is clear that the authorities in Tel Aviv have
lived up to the standards of their Nazi mentors, to the
admiration of the Fascist rkgime in Pretoria.

138. The persistent flouting of international law and
of the decisions of the Council by a fellow Member of
the United Nations has reached outrageous proportions and strained the patience of this body to the limit.
We have been informed that a further 20,000 dunums
of Palestinian land have been confiscated by the Tel
Aviv authorities.
We cannot say that these events

143, The Security Council, in a statement adopted by
consensus on II November 1976 [1969th meeting],
deplored Israel’s failure to show any regard for
Council resolutions and it affirmed the rights of the
Palestinians as a people under the fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949. What surprises us is that certain
members of the Council who were party to the
14

’

consensus continue to treat Israel with kid gloves.
Israel’s intransigence has been made possible by the
protection it enjoys from esteemed members of this
body.

stone allegedly thrown at an Israeli military vehicle
travelling along the road near the refugee camp.
151. It is known that the Israeli occupation authorities continue
to impose collective
punishments
against the inhabitants of this Jalazone refugee camp,
near Ramallah.
For five consecutive days a curfew
was imposed on them. The residents who were outside
the camp when the curfew was put into effect are still
not allowed to return to the camp. As a result, they are
in the open air in very cold weather, and they are
suffering.

144. We wish to affirm that the present situation,
which is a threat to international peace and security,
cannot be isolated from the problem of the selfdetermination
of the Palestinian people. Israel should
withdraw unconditionally
from all the occupied lands.
The Security Council and the General Assembly have
adopted many decisions in this regard. The inaction of
the Council seems to suggest that it is concerned about
the rights of the Israeli Zionists only. What about the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people‘?

152. Moreover, yesterday, Sunday, the Israeli military tribunal in Jerusalem decided to try a IO-year-old
PaIestinian child, named Ma’amoun Daoud Najeeb.
He had been arrested and then released on bail on
Friday. The allegation was that he had held up Arafat’s
picture during the demonstration
that had started
following the Friday noon prayers.

145. The failure of the Council to act has been
facilitated by the allies of Israel. So, for as long as
Israel’s allies are not willing to compel Israel to
comply with Council decisions, I think the Council has
no option but to implement Chapter VII of the Charter
of the United Nations. The existence of a threat to
peace has already been ascertained, and we submit
that the Council should now concentrate its discussion
. around the mechanics of Articles 41 and 42 of the
Charter.

153. Furthermore,
we know that the Israeli occupation authorities have continued to impose a curfew on
Zahiriyeh village for 17 consecutive days. The pretext
they have used for doing this is that the Zahiriyeh
villagers threw stones at an Israeli vehicle passing
through the area.

146. The Council has an obligation to reciprocate the
faith and the trust which the sole, authentic representative of the Palestinian people has in it. Failure on
our part to act and to implement
our decisions is
tantamount
to compromising
the Charter and the
ideals which it represents. We trust that the present
series of meetings will result in a decision which
exceeds the customary strong condemnations.
The
Secretary-General
has already made us aware of the
consequences of inaction by the Council on the entire
system of collective security.

154. Again, Israeli soldiers and gangs of Zionist
settlers stoned the Kalandia refugee camp on the
13th and 14th of this month. The camp’s inhabitants,
of course, did not stand idly by; they resisted by
throwing stones. Apparently a Zionist Israeli officer
and a number of soldiers were injured in this confrontation.
155. Today the Israeli occupation authorities decided
to extend the school holiday in the occupied West
Bank until next Saturday. The reason is that the
Palestinian students were demonstrating in support of
the meetings of the Palestine National Council. As the
Security Council is aware, the Palestine National
Council commenced its session today in Algiers. One
hundred and eighty seats on that Council remain
unoccupied because the Palestinians who live under
Israeli occupation are threatened with not being able
to return if they go to Algiers to participate in the
deliberations on their own future. And yet we heard
the word “democracy”
used here. 1 do not know what
it means in this context.

147. We continue to state that a solution to the
Palestine question is inseparable from a comprehensive solution to the overall problem of the Middle
East.
148. In conclusion, we should like to affirm our
support for the legitimate struggle being waged by the
PLO for self-determination.
The struggle for the
Palestinians’
homeland is also the struggle of the
people of Zimbabwe.

156. We are pleased that today, at last, the Secretary-General
has made a statement that he is following closely and with great concern the matter of
the safety of Palestinians in Lebanon and that, in close
co-operation
with the Commissioner-General
of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), he is stuclying
possible action that may be taken by the United
Nations in this regard. Naturally,
he is also in
touch-the
statement continues-with
the Lebanese
Government and with a number of other Governments
which have expressed their concern.

149. The PRESIDENT
(inteipretatiotz
jko177
Rsrssian): The next speaker is the representative of the
Palestine Liberation Organization, upon whom I now
call *
1.50. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization):
While
the Council
was deliberating
on Friday
[24/2r/z mretin~], Israeli troops broke into the Jalazone refugee camp and ordered the residents out of
their homes into the main street, where they were
forced to remain for several hours. This collective
punishment
was an official Israeli retaliation for a
15

157. I think that the Secretary-General’s statement
was made as a result of a statement made by
Mr. Rydbeck, the UNRwA commissioner-General,
informing us that 011 10 February three bodies had
been delivered to the government hospital in Sidon
-under occupation-one
of them the mutilated body
of a 17-year-old resident of the Ein el-Hilweh camp;
the other two bodies had been burned, and one was
later identified as that of a male over 40 years of age
from the Bul-j el-Shemali camp at Tyre.
158. The UNRWA
Commissioner-General
further
informed us that, on 9 February, 10 refugee families
living in Abbdousieh, a village near Sidon, had been
warned to leave within 24 hours and go to Ein elHilweh or Rashidieh camps, The CommissionerGeneral’s statement continued:

159. However, again in Mr. Rydbeck’s words, it is
Israel’s responsibility
“to ensure the safety of the
civilian population”,
since Israel controls the area.
160. 1 have brought these facts to the Council’s
attention in the hope that maybe the Council will be
interested in the fate of the Palestinian refugees and
that of the Palestinian people, and maybe the Council
can invoke the powers vested in it by the Charter of
the United Nations and take some action to stop the
new Judeo-Nazis from committing further crimes.
The meeting

rose at 6 p.m.
NOTES

’ GenevaConvention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons

in Time of War, of 12 August 1949 (United Nations, Treaty Series,
vol. 75, No. 973).

“The potential for further intimidation”-1
repeat
“intimidation”-“of
refugees in the Sidon area is
enormous . . . About 50,000 refugees are receiving
emergency help from the Agency there. Only 15,000
are living in Ein el-Hilweh and about 1,200 in the
Mieh Mieh camp.”

? Official
Rrcards
Session, Sttpple~~~enf
’ Ihid.,
i%hy,fitw

para. 56.

qf the Get~ertrl A.s.setnhly,
No. I (A/37/1 1, D. 4.
Sessiotl,
Sttp~letttem
No.

Thirty-seventh
3S

(A13 l/35),

4 Ibid., para. 58.
’ Qficial
Records
o,f the General
Assembly,
Thirty-seventh
Se.s.siott, Plenary
meetings,
32nd meeting, paras. 108-109.
’ Weck/.v Compilariort
of Presidetltial
Docutnenrs (Washington,

DC., Government Printing Office, 1982). vol. 18, No. 35, p. 1081.

The others will, of course, be driven like sheep into the
corral. For what reason? Only God knows. But, from
the experience at Sabra and Shatila, we have every
reason to fear for the future of those persons.

’ Ojficial
Record.s
of the General
Assrmhl~,
Thirty-sevetztlr
Scssiatz, Pkmtty
tncefit?gs,
5th meeting, para. 138.
H See The Holy Koran,
II: 194.
‘See The Holy Koran,
V:47.

16

HOW TO OBTAIN
United
world.

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

Nations publications
ma) be obtained
rrom bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
Consult your bookstore
or write to: United Nations. Sales Section, New York or Geneva.

COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

Les publications

UNIES

des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
monde entier. Informez-vous
auprh
de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous
ties vcntes. NW York ou Cen&.

et les agcnces
A : Nations

COMO

UNIDAS

CONSECUIR

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
todas partes del mundo. Consulte
h’ueva York o Ginebra.

DE LAS NACIONES

llnidas
estdn en venta en librerias
a su librcro
o dirijasc a: Nacioncs

y casas

Unidas,

deposita&
du
Unies, Section

distribuidoras

Seccih

en

de Ventas,

Litho

in United

Nations.

New York

00400

60205~July

1990--2,050
