United Nations

A/RES/66/229

General Assembly

Distr.: General
21 March 2012

Sixty-sixth session
Agenda item 69 (a)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 24 December 2011
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/66/462/Add.1)]

66/229. Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and
the Optional Protocol thereto
The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous relevant resolutions, the most recent of which was
resolution 64/154 of 18 December 2009, as well as relevant resolutions of the
Human Rights Council, the Commission for Social Development and the
Commission on Human Rights,
Noting the request of the Committee on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities, contained in annex XVI to its report, 1 that the General Assembly
authorize an extension of its meeting time,
Noting also that document and translation costs for the reports of States parties
constitute the largest part of the budget for the Committee,
Noting further that, while the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities 2 has enjoyed a very high level of ratification in a short time, the
Committee currently meets for only two sessions of one week per year, and noting
that, in particular cases, members of the Committee may require reasonable
accommodation, as defined in the Convention,
Welcomes the fact that, since the opening for signature of the Convention
1.
on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities2 and the Optional Protocol thereto 3 on
30 March 2007, one hundred and fifty-three States have signed and one hundred and
six States have ratified the Convention and ninety States have signed and sixty-four
States have ratified the Optional Protocol, and that one regional integration
organization has ratified the Convention;
Calls upon those States that have not yet done so to consider signing and
2.
ratifying the Convention and the Optional Protocol as a matter of priority;

_______________
1

Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 55 (A/66/55).
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2515, No. 44910.
3
Ibid., vol. 2518, No. 44910.
2

11-47256

*1147256*

Please recycle

♲

A/RES/66/229

3.
Welcomes the holding of the third and fourth sessions of the Conference
of States Parties to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and
the work of the Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities;
Invites States parties to adhere to the page limit established by the
4.
Committee for reports of States parties, and notes that this would reduce the
operating costs of the Committee;
Notes the ongoing process of reform aimed at strengthening the treaty
5.
body system, including the report of the Secretary-General on measures to improve
further the effectiveness, harmonization and reform of the treaty body system, 4 and
invites the Committee, in the context of this strengthening process, to continue to
enhance its working methods and efficiency, including by sharing good practices
with other treaty bodies;
Decides to authorize for the Committee an additional week of meeting
6.
time per year to be used consecutive to an existing regular session, bearing in mind
the requirements of the Committee for reasonable accommodation, and without
prejudice to the ongoing process of reform aimed at strengthening the treaty body
system;
Invites the Chair of the Committee on the Rights of Persons with
7.
Disabilities to present an oral report on the work of the Committee and engage in an
interactive dialogue with the General Assembly at its sixty-seventh and sixty-eighth
sessions, under the item entitled “Promotion and protection of human rights”, as a
way to enhance communication between the Assembly and the Committee;
Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General 5 and the activities
8.
undertaken in support of the Convention;
Encourages the Inter-Agency Support Group on the Convention on the
9.
Rights of Persons with Disabilities to continue its work to mainstream the
Convention throughout the United Nations system through its Strategy and Plan of
Action, approved in 2010, and calls upon the Department of Economic and Social
Affairs of the Secretariat and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights to continue strengthening their cooperation in this regard;
10. Invites the Secretary-General to intensify efforts to assist States to
become parties to the Convention and the Optional Protocol, including by providing
assistance with a view to achieving universal adherence;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to continue the progressive
implementation of standards and guidelines for the accessibility of facilities and
services of the United Nations system, taking into account relevant provisions of the
Convention, in particular when undertaking renovations, including interim
arrangements;
12. Also requests the Secretary-General to take further actions to promote
the rights of persons with disabilities in the United Nations system in accordance
with the Convention, including the retention and recruitment of persons with
disabilities;

_______________
4
5

2

A/66/344.
A/66/121.

A/RES/66/229

13. Requests United Nations agencies and organizations, and invites
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, to continue to strengthen
efforts undertaken to disseminate accessible information on the Convention and the
Optional Protocol, including to children and young people to promote their
understanding, and to assist States parties in implementing their obligations under
those instruments;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
sixty-seventh session a report on the status of the Convention and the Optional
Protocol and on the implementation of the present resolution.
93rd plenary meeting
24 December 2011

3
