General Auembly -

32

2. Reaffirms the terms of reference of the Committee
as laid down in General Assembly resolutions 693 (VII~
of 25 October 1952;
3. Decides that the Secretary-General shall, if the
Committee so requests, arrange an appropriate meeting
or meetings of Member and non-member States at which
the pledges of Members and non-members may be made
known;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of the
eleventh session of the General Assembly the item "Report of the Negotiating Committee for Extra-Budgetary
Funds".
541st plenary meeting,
8 November 1955.

B
The General Assembly,
Having noted the concern again expressed by the
Negotiating Committee for Extra-Budgetary Funds in
the light of its experience during the past year at the
effect of the establishment of financial targets unlikely
to be realized in actual receipts of contributions,
1. Requests the organs of the United Nations concerned with the approval of activities and programmes
to be financed by voluntary contributions to take into
account, when establishing the budgetary levels of those
programmes, the probabilities of collection of contributions for such activities and programmes;

2. Appeals to the Governments of Member and nonmember States to make voluntary contributions to the
fullest extent to carry out the programmes approved
by the C~neral Assembly to which reference is made in
paragraph 1 of resolution A above.

541st plenary meeting,
8 November 1955.

*
*
*
At the 558th plenary meeting, on 16 December 1955, the President of the General Assembly announced that, in accordance
with the terms of resolution A above, .he had a/lflointed a Negotiating Committee for Extra-Budgetary Funds, composed of
representatives of the following Member States, to serve-until
the close of the eleventh session of the General Assembly:
ARGENTINA, AUSTRALIA, CANADA, CHILE, FRANCE, LEBANON,
PAKISTAN, the UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND and the UNITl!:D STATES OF AMERICA.

959 (X). Appointments to fill vacancies in the
membership of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions

The General Assembly

1. Appoints the following persons as members of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions:
Mr. Carlos Blanco,
Mr. Arthur H. Clough,
Mr. John E. Fobes,
Mr. T. J. Natarajan;
2. Declares Mr. Blanco, Mr. Clough and Mr. Fobes
to be appointed for a three-year term to commence on 1
January 1956, and Mr. Natarajan for a one-year te.rm
to commence on 1 January 1956.

549th plenary meeting,
29 November 1955.

Tenth Se1eion

960 (X). Appointments to fill vacancies in the
membership of the Committee on Contributions

The General Assembly
1. Appoints the following persons as members of the
Committee on Contributions :
Mr. Robert E. Merriam,
Mr. Jii-1 Nosek,
Mr. Agha Shahi;
2. Declares Mr. Merriam, Mr. Nosek and Mr. Shahi
to be appointed for a three-year term to commence on
1 January 1956.
549th plenary meeting,
29 November 1955.
961 (X). Confirmation of the appointment made
by the Secretary-General to the membership
of the Investments C.>mmittee

The General Assembly
Confirms the reappointment by the Secretary-General of Mr. Ivar Rooth as a member of the Investments
Committee for a three-year term to commence on 1
January 1956.
549th plenary meeting,
29 November 1955.
962 (X). Appointments to fill vacancies in the
membership of the United Nations Administrative Tribunal

The General Assembly
1. Appoints the following persons as members of the
United Nations Administrative Tribunal:
Mrs. Paul Bastid,
Mr. Omar Loutfi,
Mr. R. Venkataraman;
2. Declares Mrs. Bastid, Mr. Loutfi and Mr. Venkataraman to be appointed for a three-year term to
commence on 1 January 1956.
549th plenary meeting,
29 November 1955.
963 (X). Audit reports relating to expenditure by
specialized agencies of technical assistance
funds allocated from the Special Account

The General Assembly
Takes note of the audit reports14 relatin~ to expenditure by specialized agencies of technical assistance funds
allocated from the Special Account, for the financial
year ended 31 December 1954, and of the observations
thereon of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions, as set forth in its twelfth
report15 to the General Assembly at its tenth session.
549th plenary meeting,
29 November 1955.
964 (X). United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East: accounts for the financial year ended 30 June
1955 and report of the Board of Auditors

The General Assembly
1. Accepts the accounts of the United Nations Relief
a Ibid, Annexes, Audit reports of specialized agencies, document A/2958 and Corr. 1.
u Ibid., Annexes, agenda item 46, document A/3015.

Resolutions adopted on the reporla of the Fifth Committee

and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East for the financial year ended 30 June 1955 and the
certificate of the Board of Auditors,16
2. Takes note of the observations 17 of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
as set forth in its thirteenth report to the General Assembly at its tenth session.
550th plenary meeting,
3 December 1955.
965 (X). United Nations Korean Reconstruction
Agency: financial report and accounts for the
financial year ended 30 June 1955 and report
of the Board of Auditors

The General Assembly
1. Accepts the financial report and accounts of the
United Nat ions Korean Reconstruction Agency for the
financial year ended 30 June 1955 and the certificate of
the Board of Auditors ;18
2. Takes note of the observations19 of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
as set forth in its eleventh n·port to the General Assembly at its tenth session.
550th plenary meeting,
3 December 1955.
966 (X). Registration and publication of treaties
and international agreements

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report 20 of the Secretary-General and the tenth report 21 of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions to the General Assembly at its tenth session on the registration and
publication of treaties and international agreements,
Recalling its resolution 97 (I) of 14 December 1946
adopting regulations to give effect to Article 102 of the
Charter of the United Nations, as amended by its resolutions 364 B (IV) and 482 (V), of 1 December 1949
and 12 December 1950 respectively,
Noting the economies which have been achieved during the current year in the publication of the United
Nations Treaty Series as a result of more favourable
printing contracts and of the use of more economical
methods of production,
Considering that, in view of the heavy volume of
material for publication, further measures should be
taken, without unduly impairing the value of the Treaty
Series or in any way infringing Article 102 of the
Charter, to reduce both the delay in the publication of
treaties and international agreements and the expenditure incurred,
Believing it desirable, however, that the various measures considered in the course of the present session
should be further studied,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to Memlbid., Tenth Session, Supplement No. 6B (A/2989).
Iqid., Tenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 36, document
A/3021.
18 Ibid., Tenth Session, Supplement No. 6C (A/2987).
19 Ibid., Tenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 36, document
A/30lt.
20 Ibid., agenda item 54, document A/2971.
2 1 Ibid., document A/3010.
16
17

33

her States and to the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions by 1 July 1956, for
consideration by the General Assembly at its eleventh
session, a report covering particularly the following
matters:
(a) The desirability and means of supplying translations in English or French of treaties and international agreements;
( b) The possibility of eliminating, as far as practicable, duplication in the publishing of standard form
treaties and international agreements in the United Nations Treaty Series by the use of cross references to a
model text already published in the Treaty Series;
( c) Possible arrangements with the specialized agencies and other international organizations, including the
Contracting Parties to the General Agreement on Tariffs
and Trade, whereby duplication in the printing and publication of treaties and international agreements can he
avoided while at the same time meeting the needs both
of the United Nations and of the other organizations
concerned;
(d) The possibility of avoiding duplication in the
publishing of the United Nations International Tax
Agreements and the Treaty Series;
( e) The method and effect of applying the suggestion
concerning the elimination of the publication of annexes contained in part IV, B, of the report 20 of the
Secretary-General and the consequent savings in time
and money, illustrated in relation to the treaties and
agreements published in the Treaty Series in the course
of any one year;
(f) The possibility, having regard to the types of
treaties and agreements likely to be filed and recorded
in the future under article 10 of the above-mentioned
regulations, of effecting further economies in the publication of such treaties and agreements without und11ly
impairing the usefulness of the Treaty Series;
(g) The possible advantages of publishing sub-series
of the Treaty Series for certain categories of treaties
and agreements ;
2. Invites the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to bring about further printing economies without,
however, lowering the present standard of reproduction
of the Treaty Series, and to keep under review the distribution of the Treaty Series so as to ensure a strict
curtailment of the free mailing list.
550th plenary meeting,
3 December 1955.
967 (X). Appointment to fill a vacancy in the
membership of the Board of Auditors

The General Assembly
Appoints the Auditor-General of the Netherlands as
a member of the Board of Auditors for a three-year
term to commence on 1 July 1956.
557th plenary meeting,
15 December 1955.
968 (X). Appointments to fill vacancies in the
membership of the United Nations Staff
Pension Committee

The General Assembly
1. Appoints the following persons as members and
