A/57/PV.73

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-seventh session

73

rd plenary meeting
Wednesday, 11 December 2002, 10 a.m.
New York

Mr. Kavan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

President:

In the absence of the President, Mr. Mamba
(Swaziland), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 3 (continued)
Credentials of representatives to the fifty-seventh
session of the General Assembly
Report of the Credentials Committee (A/57/634)
The Acting President: The draft resolution
recommended by the Credentials Committee in
paragraph 11 of its report reads as follows:
“The General Assembly,
“Having considered the report of the
Credentials Committee and the recommendation
contained therein,
“Approves the report of the Credentials
Committee.”
We shall now take action on the recommendation
of the Credentials Committee set forth in paragraph 11
of its report.
The Credentials Committee adopted the draft
resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
57/114).
The Acting President: I now call on the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran, who
wishes to speak in explanation of position on the

(Czech Republic)

resolution just adopted. May I remind delegations that
explanations of position are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Hamzehei (Islamic Republic of Iran): My
delegation would like to express its reservations on
those parts of the report of the Credentials Committee
contained in document A/57/634 which may be
construed as recognition of Israel.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of position.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 3.
Agenda item 19
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
Report of the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples on its work during 2002 (A/57/23
(Part I, Part II and Add.1 and Part III))
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/57/73,
A/57/206)
Draft resolutions (A/57/23 (Part III), Chapter
XIII, Section G, para. 7; A/57/L.52)
The Acting President: I call on the Rapporteur
of the Special Committee, Mr. Fayssal Mekdad of the

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

02-73386 (E)

A/57/PV.73

Syrian Arab Republic, to introduce the Committee’s
report.
Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic), Rapporteur
of the Special Committee: As the General Assembly
begins its consideration of the question of
implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, I
have the honour to present the report of the Special
Committee on decolonization on its activities during
2002.
The report is contained in document A/57/23 and
consists of three parts. Part I of the report provides
information on the history, organization and various
aspects of the work of the Committee. It describes the
matters on the Committee’s agenda and its interaction
with other United Nations bodies, as well as with
intergovernmental, non-governmental and regional
organizations. Part I also provides a review of the work
of the Committee during the reporting period. I would
like to draw the attention of the Assembly to section J,
in particular, which contains the projections for future
work of the Committee in 2003, subject to the approval
of this body.
Part II of the report presents detailed information
on the activities of the Committee with respect to the
items on its agenda. It gives an account of its
deliberations on such issues as the dissemination of
information on decolonization; the question of sending
visiting missions to the Territories; economic and other
activities that affect the interests of the peoples of the
Non-Self-Governing Territories; military activities
carried out by the administering Powers in the
Territories; the implementation of the Declaration by
the specialized agencies and international institutions;
and information transmitted under Article 73 (e) of the
United Nations Charter. In addition, that part of the
report includes a brief summary of the Special
Committee’s deliberations related to the 16 remaining
Non-Self-Governing Territories.
Part
III
of
the
report
contains
the
recommendations of the Committee, in the form of
draft resolutions.
The year under review was marked by a
significant and outstanding event for the Special
Committee on Decolonization and, indeed, for the
United Nations. One of the Non-Self-Governing
Territories, namely, East Timor, became an independent
State. On 1 May 2002, the General Assembly, by

2

resolution 56/282, decided to remove East Timor from
the United Nations list of Non-Self-Governing
Territories, upon its accession to independence. In
September 2002, Timor-Leste joined the United
Nations family as a new Member of the Organization. I
take this opportunity to reiterate our warm
congratulations to the Government and the people of
Timor-Leste.
During the period under review, the Special
Committee continued to work within the framework of
the Second International Decade for the Eradication of
Colonialism and its Plan of Action. The Committee
focused its efforts on two main areas: the continued
review of the developments in the remaining Non-SelfGoverning Territories and the development of
programmes of work for specific Territories. Regarding
information on the Territories, the Committee benefited
considerably
from the
participation
of
the
representatives of the Non-Self-Governing Territories
and experts in its work.
Regarding the development of programmes of
work, the Committee continued to emphasize the need
for constructive cooperation with the administering
Powers for the successful completion of the
decolonization process in all the Territories. The report
of the Committee indicates that France participated in
the work of the Committee during its consideration of
the question of New Caledonia, while the delegations
of the United Kingdom and the United States continued
informal consultations with the Committee. The
Special Committee is determined to intensify its efforts
and to work with the administering Powers towards the
development of work programmes for specific
Territories under their administration.
Nowhere has that cooperation been more
productive than in the case of Tokelau, where the
representatives of the administering Power, New
Zealand, alongside Tokelau, have had fruitful
discussions that have allowed us to achieve further
progress in formulating the work programme for the
Territory’s decolonization. The meetings among the
three parties, held in New York in 2001 and 2002,
improved understanding of the tasks at hand. As a
further development, in August 2002 a visiting mission
of the Committee travelled to Tokelau. Once again, we
should like to express our gratitude and appreciation to
the Government of New Zealand and to the United
Nations Development Programme, which organized
and facilitated the mission.

A/57/PV.73

The annex to Chapter II of Part I of the report
contains information concerning the Pacific Regional
Seminar held by the Committee in Fiji in May 2002.
The participants in this year’s Seminar included the
delegation of the Special Committee; the United
Kingdom, France and New Zealand, as administering
Powers; other United Nations Member States;
representatives of the Territories; and nongovernmental and regional organizations, as well as
experts. The Seminar provided a unique opportunity for
direct interaction and exchange of views between
Committee members and representatives of the
Territories. It generated a fruitful and constructive
discussion on political, economic and social issues. Its
conclusions and recommendations represent an
invaluable contribution to the future work of the
Committee.
As I noted earlier, during the past year, the
Committee continued to consider the information
transmitted under Article 73 (e) of the Charter by the
administering Powers. With respect to economic
activities affecting the interests of the peoples of the
Territories, the Special Committee reaffirmed the
legitimate right of the peoples of the Territories to their
natural resources. On the issue of military activities
and arrangements by colonial Powers in the Territories,
the Committee called on the administering Powers not
to involve the Territories in any offensive acts or
interference directed against other States. The
Committee also considered the activities of the
specialized agencies and of other international
organizations in Non-Self-Governing Territories. The
Special Committee reiterated the importance of the
dissemination of information on decolonization and
noted with appreciation the new brochure on
decolonization produced in 2002 by the Department of
Public Information in cooperation with the Department
of Political Affairs.
The Committee has continued to devote special
attention to political, economic and social issues
related to the small island Territories. It has followed
the situation in American Samoa, Anguilla, Bermuda,
the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, Guam,
Montserrat, Pitcairn, St. Helena, the Turks and Caicos
Islands and the United States Virgin Islands, as well as
Tokelau and New Caledonia. The report also reflects
the Special Committee’s consideration of the question
of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas), Gibraltar, the
question of Western Sahara and the decision

concerning Puerto Rico. The Special Committee’s
consideration of the developments in the Non-SelfGoverning Territories has been facilitated by the
working papers on each Territory prepared by the
Secretariat.
In conclusion, I should like to express the
gratitude of the Special Committee to the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Kofi Annan, for his unconditional support
of the Special Committee’s efforts aimed at the
eradication of colonialism. I should also like to
highlight with appreciation the substantive political
support and advice provided by the Department of
Political Affairs, whose input has been invaluable in
the work of the Committee and in the implementation
of its mandate. I should also like to refer to the
excellent technical Secretariat services provided by the
Department for General Assembly and Conference
Management.
The Acting President: I now call on the ViceChairman of the Special Committee, Mr. Bernard
Tanoh-Boutchoué of Côte d’Ivoire, to introduce draft
resolution A/57/L.52 on behalf of the Chairman of the
Special Committee.
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoué (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in
French): I have the great honour, in my capacity as
interim Chairman of the Special Committee, to address
the General Assembly as it considers the question of
the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
The Rapporteur, Mr. Fayssal Mekdad, has just
presented to Members the report of the Special
Committee (A/57/23).
On behalf of the Chairman of the Committee,
who unfortunately was unable to be here today, I
should like to present a few points regarding the
activities carried out by the Committee during the past
year, to introduce the draft resolution now before the
Assembly (A/57/L.52) and to give Members an idea of
the challenges that we shall all have to address
together.
As the Assembly is aware, despite the progress
achieved since 1960, when the Declaration was
adopted, the decolonization process continues because
it has not yet attained all its goals. Two years ago, the
Second International Decade for the Eradication of
Colonialism began, and 16 Non-Self-Governing
Territories remain on the United Nations list. Over the
course of the year, in accordance with our mandate, we

3

A/57/PV.73

analysed the information that we had received from the
administering Powers, in conformity with Article 73
(e) of the Charter, and the working papers drawn up by
the Secretariat on each of the Territories. We also
studied the statements made by the representatives of
the Territories, by various officials, by petitioners and
by non-governmental organizations. In June, at the end
of its session, the Committee adopted a draft decision
and nine draft resolutions by consensus. It also
unanimously adopted a draft resolution on Puerto Rico.
In parallel with that work, we have constantly
stressed the need to work together with the Economic
and Social Council. In that regard, the Council adopted
a draft resolution last June on the implementation of
the Declaration by the specialized agencies. In May
2002 in Fiji, the Special Committee held its regional
seminar for the Pacific region. This was its opportunity
to communicate with the representatives and the people
of the Territories, and also to answer questions
regarding its work. In particular, we stressed the
Committee’s desire to urge the administering Powers to
develop decolonization plans in the form of special
work programmes for each Territory. We also
emphasized the fact that throughout the process we
considered the opinions of the people of the Territories.
Clearly, in order to make progress in carrying out
its mandate, the Special Committee needs to be able to
count on unreserved cooperation from the
administering Powers. With this in mind, we should
emphasize that in 2002 we were able to benefit from
the constructive cooperation of New Zealand, which I
will mention again later on.
France also participated in our seminar. The
United Kingdom and the United States attended some
meetings informally and I would like to emphasize that
the United Kingdom attended our regional seminar for
the second year in a row. Our work relations with all of
the administering Powers will, we hope, strengthen
next year, so that we will be able to make constructive
progress in our consideration of the needs and
aspirations of the peoples of the Territories.
In this connection, a good example of what can
be achieved when a constructive dialogue is created
with an administering Power is provided by the work
relations we have been cultivating with New Zealand
regarding the future of Tokelau. This year, in 2002, we
have continued to work side by side with the
representatives of New Zealand and Tokelau in order to

4

move forward with the work programme that is to lead
to the decolonization of the Territory.
Last summer, the chairman of the Special
Committee made a visit at the invitation of the
authorities of New Zealand and Tokelau. The report of
this mission, which just appeared in document
A/AC.109/2002/31, shows quite clearly that there is
nothing more useful for our work than direct
knowledge of what is happening in a Territory.
Moreover, through its presence alone, the Visiting
Mission of the United Nations to the Non-SelfGoverning Territory of Tokelau and New Zealand has
had a positive effect on the decolonization process by
giving rise to a lively debate between the three parties.
As the report of the Mission indicates, Tokelau
and New Zealand maintain constructive relations and
are making resolute progress towards the expansion of
the autonomy of the Territory, while maintaining the
quality of the public administration and the vitality of
the economic development of the Territory. The result
of the meetings in Wellington, devoted to setting a
framework for the relations between the two countries,
will be decisive from the standpoint of items still
pending, for example, the circumstances in which New
Zealand will provide administrative and economic
assistance to the Territory, as well as assistance with
security and defence, participation in regional and
international affairs and the decolonization process
itself.
In this regard, the Mission states in its report that
the population of Tokelau as a whole should be better
informed of its options for self-determination, as well
as their consequences. It recommends that Tokelau and
New Zealand launch an education campaign and that
they conduct a study of the various options and their
consequences, under the auspices of and with the
assistance of the United Nations.
The case of Tokelau shows the considerable value
of decolonization programmes and their importance for
a given Territory when they are carried out with the
goodwill of all parties involved.
I ask for the support of the Assembly for the draft
resolution
in
document
A/57/L.52
on
the
implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
which I shall now introduce. Beforehand, I would like

A/57/PV.73

to mention that the following countries have joined the
list of sponsors: Côte d’Ivoire and Fiji.

commemorate every year a Week of Solidarity with the
peoples of Non-Self-Governing Territories.

The text of the draft you have before you is
nearly analogous to the resolution adopted by the
General Assembly at its last session. It recalls the
proclamation of the Second International Decade for
the Eradication of Colonialism, and reaffirms that
colonialism is incompatible with the United Nations
Charter, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
and the Declaration on Decolonization of 1960. It also
reaffirms the determination of the General Assembly to
eliminate colonialism quickly and completely from the
history of humankind.

The draft resolution also contains paragraphs
devoted specifically to economic activities, the
exploitation of natural resources and military activities
and arrangements within the Territories. The General
Assembly urges Member States and specialized
agencies to lend moral and material assistance to the
people of these territories and requests that
administering Powers make effective use of bilateral
and multilateral assistance in the strengthening of the
economies of those Territories. The text reaffirms the
effectiveness of visiting missions to the Territories and
asks the administering Powers to facilitate them. Those
who have not officially taken part in the work of the
Committee should do so at its 2003 session.

The General Assembly declares, once again, that
it supports the aspirations of people subjected to
colonial domination who wish to assert their right to
self-determination, including independence, pursuant
to United Nations resolutions on decolonization.
The draft resolution asks the administering
Powers to complete before the end of 2003 the
preparation of constructive work programmes suitable
to each Non-Self-Governing Territory, in order to
facilitate the implementation of the mandate of the
Special Committee, and the implementation of the
relevant decolonization resolutions, especially those
bearing on certain specific Territories.
In this regard, wording has been added in
paragraph 7, new wording compared to previous texts.
It welcomes the consultations between the Special
Committee and the representatives of the New Zealand
Government and the people of Tokelau with a view to
advancing a programme of work on the question of
Tokelau. It also welcomes the report of the United
Nations Mission that I mentioned a moment ago.
Subject to some minor editorial changes,
paragraph 8 contains, as before, provisions on the work
programme of the Special Committee. The Special
Committee is asked to find specific ways to put an end
to colonialism and to continue to monitor the manner in
which Member States are implementing resolutions
that the General Assembly has adopted in this regard;
to continue to study the political, economic and social
situation of Non-Self-Governing Territories; to
conclude before the end of 2003 the preparation of a
work programme in each and every case of a Non-SelfGoverning Territory; and to continue to send visiting
missions, organize seminars, mobilize support
throughout the world for decolonization and finally, to

In conclusion, the Secretary-General, specialized
agencies and other organizations of the United Nations
system are asked to provide assistance to Non-Self
Governing Territories, especially in the economic and
social sphere, and that they continue to do so as
appropriate after these Territories have exercised their
right of self-determination, including independence.
The text before the Committee is the culmination
of consultations held by interested delegations in the
spirit of accommodation and consensus. Therefore I
urge delegations in the General Assembly to consider
favourably the recommendations submitted to them by
the Special Committee. This will enable it to continue
its mission, which is to promote the rights and interests
of the peoples of Non-Self-Governing Territories.
This Special Committee is determined to have a
decisive influence on the assistance given to peoples of
Non-Self Governing Territories so that they may be
able to exercise their right to self-determination,
pursuant to the resolutions of this Assembly. But the
Committee cannot do so if we confine ourselves to
adopting, year after year, the same resolutions without
action. The Committee must carry out its mission and
play an active role in decolonization by creating special
work programmes and other diverse activities. It is
absolutely necessary that administering Powers work
along with it, in a constructive and transparent manner,
in an attempt to achieve this noble objective. It is also
absolutely necessary that the representatives of these
Territories take part in these activities at every stage.
Next year will be decisive for the actions
undertaken
by
the
Special
Committee
on

5

A/57/PV.73

Decolonization. Not only do we hope that our dialogue,
which has just began with New Zealand on Tokelau,
will continue, but we also hope to get into a
relationship at the beginning of 2003 with other
administering Powers, especially the United States and
the United Kingdom, in order to draw up a work
programme for each Territory. If we all wish to put an
end to such a complex process as decolonization, all
the parties involved must show special sincerity in the
effort.
Before concluding, on behalf of the Chairman of
the Special Committee, may I thank the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Kofi Annan, for the efficiency with which
the Secretariat has provided us with intellectual and
technical support throughout the session. The
Chairman has also asked me to express his gratitude to
the bureau of the Special Committee for the
cooperation and support it gave him during the session.
He has also instructed me to commend the
effectiveness of the Secretariat staff dealing with
decolonization.
The Acting President: I would like to inform
members that the General Assembly will take action on
the draft resolutions under agenda item 19 after all the
reports of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee) have been considered.
Reports of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
The Acting President: The General Assembly
will consider the reports of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee on agenda items 74 to 80,
81 and 19, 82 and 12, and 83, as well as 19. I request
the Rapporteur of the Committee, Mr. Andrej Droba of
Slovakia, to introduce in one intervention the reports of
the Special Political and Decolonization Committee.
Mr. Droba (Slovakia), Rapporteur of the Special
Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth
Committee): It is a privilege and a great personal
honour for me to introduce to the General Assembly
the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee), submitted under
agenda items 74 to 83, as well as items 12 and 19.
These reports, contained in documents A/57/518 to
A/57/528, include the texts of draft resolutions and
decisions recommended to the General Assembly for
adoption. For the convenience of delegations, a
checklist prepared by the Secretariat for voting in the

6

Special Political and Decolonization Committee is
contained in A/C.4/57/INF/3.
During this first part of the fifty-seventh session
of the General Assembly, the Fourth Committee held a
total of 23 formal meetings. The Committee continued
its practice of having an informal interactive meeting
under agenda item 78, “Comprehensive review of the
whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their
aspects”. An open-ended working group established by
the Committee under item 75, “International
cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space”, also
held a number of informal meetings.
At this stage of its work, the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee adopted 24 draft resolutions
and 3 draft decisions, of which 11 draft resolutions and
3 draft decisions were adopted without a vote.
The first report, submitted under agenda item 74,
“Effects of atomic radiation”, is contained in document
A/57/518. The Fourth Committee considered the report
of the United Nations Scientific Committee on the
Effects of Atomic Radiation (UNSCEAR), as contained
in document A/57/46. The draft resolution submitted
under this agenda item is contained in paragraph 8 of
the Committee’s report.
In the draft resolution, the General Assembly
would, among other things, request UNSCEAR to
submit its programme of work, as well as to report to
the General Assembly on its work on ionizing
radiation. The United Nations Environment Programme
is urged to review and strengthen the present funding
of UNSCEAR, so that it can discharge the
responsibility and mandate entrusted to it. On behalf of
the Fourth Committee, I recommend that this draft
resolution be adopted by the General Assembly.
The second report, submitted under agenda item
75, “International cooperation in the peaceful uses of
outer space”, is contained in document A/57/519.
During its consideration of the item, the Fourth
Committee held a number of informal meetings of an
open-ended working group, chaired by the delegation
of Chile. The working group formulated the draft
resolution contained in paragraph 10 of the report.
In the draft resolution, the General Assembly
would, among other things, endorse the work
programmes of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space and of its Scientific and Technical
Subcommittee and Legal Subcommittee. The Assembly

A/57/PV.73

would also agree that its 2004 review and appraisal of
implementation of the recommendations of the 1999
Third United Nations Conference on the Exploration
and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (UNISPACE III)
should be conducted in plenary meetings under a
separate agenda item entitled, “Review of the
implementation of the recommendations of the Third
United Nations Conference on the Exploration and
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space”. The General Assembly
would also decide to accept, on an exceptional basis,
Algeria’s membership in the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space. On behalf of the Fourth
Committee, I recommend this draft resolution to the
General Assembly for adoption.
The third report, submitted under agenda item 76,
“United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East”, is contained in
document A/57/520. The Fourth Committee considered
the report of the Commissioner-General of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, contained in document
A/57/13, as well as the report of the Working Group on
the Financing of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA), contained in document A/57/462, and other
relevant reports by the Secretary-General. Under this
item, the Committee adopted seven draft resolutions
related to various aspects of the work of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East. Their adoption would
ensure the continuation of the important work of
UNRWA in alleviating the sufferings of the Palestine
refugees. These draft resolutions are contained in
paragraph 23 of the report. The Fourth Committee
recommends the adoption of these draft resolutions to
the General Assembly.
The fourth report, submitted under agenda item
77, “Report of the Special Committee to Investigate
Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the
Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the Occupied
Territories”, is contained in document A/57/521. The
Fourth Committee considered the report of the Special
Committee concerning the protection and promotion of
the human rights of the Palestinian people and other
Arab inhabitants of the occupied territories, as well as
other reports by the Secretary-General submitted under
this item. Throughout the debate on this item, the
activities of the Special Committee were widely
supported and appreciated by many States. Meanwhile,

some delegations also expressed concern about the
nature of the activities of the Special Committee.
Under this item, the Fourth Committee adopted five
draft resolutions, which can be found in paragraph 24
of its report. The Fourth Committee recommends these
draft resolutions to the General Assembly for adoption.
The fifth report, relating to agenda item 78,
“Comprehensive review of the whole question of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects”, is
contained in document A/57/522. The Fourth
Committee heard a comprehensive introductory
statement by the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno
and held a general debate under this item. It also held
informal interactive discussions with the UnderSecretary-General and other senior officials of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations. Many of the
issues raised during the general debate and the
interactive discussions will be further considered by
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations in
its coming session early next year. One draft resolution
was submitted under this item, as contained in
paragraph 9 of the report. In the draft resolution, the
General Assembly would designate 29 May as the
International Day of United Nations Peacekeepers. The
Fourth Committee recommends this draft resolution to
the General Assembly for adoption.
The sixth report, submitted under agenda item 79,
“Questions relating to information”, is contained in
document A/57/523. The Fourth Committee considered
the report submitted by the Committee on Information,
contained in document A/57/21, and the report of the
Secretary-General (A/57/157). The Under-SecretaryGeneral for Communications and Public Information,
Mr. Shashi Tharoor, made a comprehensive
introductory statement and responded to questions
raised by delegations during the general debate on the
ongoing and fundamental reorientation of the focus and
structure of the Department of Public Information. The
Fourth Committee adopted, without a vote, two draft
resolutions and one draft decision, which are contained
in paragraphs 9 and 10 of the Committee’s report.
In draft resolution A, the Assembly would be
asked, inter alia, to enhance regional efforts and
cooperation among developing countries, as well as
cooperation between developed and developing
countries; to strengthen communication capacities; and
to improve the media infrastructure and communication

7

A/57/PV.73

technology in the developing countries, especially in
the areas of training and dissemination of information.
In draft resolution B, the Assembly would, among
other things, ask the Department of Public Information
to maintain and improve its activities, through its
reorientation, in the areas of special interest to
developing countries and other countries with special
needs, including countries in transition. The draft
decision would also appoint Saudi Arabia to be the
99th member of the Committee on Information.
The Special Political and Decolonization
Committee thus recommends that the General
Assembly adopt both draft resolutions and the draft
decision.
With regard to the cluster of items on Non-SelfGoverning Territories and the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, which includes agenda items 80, 81, 82, 83,
12 and 19, the Fourth Committee considered these
items together. The Committee had one single general
debate on the cluster of items and heard three
representatives and 16 petitioners from various NonSelf-Governing Territories. Under those items, the
General Assembly has before it five reports.
The report submitted under agenda item 80,
“Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories
transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the
United Nations”, is contained in document A/57/524.
The draft resolution submitted under this item appears
in paragraph seven of the report. The Fourth
Committee recommends it to the General Assembly for
adoption.
The report relating to agenda items 81 and 19,
“Economic and other activities which affect the
interests of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing
Territories” and “Implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples”, is contained in document A/57/525.
Under these two items, the Fourth Committee adopted
one draft resolution entitled “Economic and other
activities which affect the interests of the peoples of
the Non-Self-Governing Territories” and one draft
decision entitled “Military activities and arrangements
by colonial Powers in Territories under their
administration”. They are contained in paragraphs 9
and 10 of the report, respectively. The Fourth
Committee recommends this draft resolution and the
draft decision to the General Assembly for adoption.

8

The report relating to agenda item 82,
“Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples by the
specialized agencies and the international institutions
associated with the United Nations” and item 12,
“Report of the Economic and Social Council”, is
contained in document A/57/526. In paragraph 7 of the
report, the Fourth Committee recommends one draft
resolution to the General Assembly for adoption.
The report relating to agenda item 83, “Offers by
Member States of study and training facilities for
inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories”, is
contained in document A/57/527. Under this item, the
Fourth Committee recommends one draft resolution,
which is contained in paragraph six of the report, for
adoption by the General Assembly.
The report submitted under agenda item 19,
“Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples”, is
contained in document A/57/528, which contains the
report of the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples relating to specific Territories not covered by
other agenda items.
In this context, the Fourth Committee adopted
four draft resolutions and one draft decision. The draft
resolutions on the “Question of Western Sahara”,
“Question of New Caledonia”, “Question of Tokelau”,
the consolidated omnibus draft resolution concerning
the eleven territories, as well as the draft decision on
the “Question of Gibraltar”, were all adopted without a
vote by the Fourth Committee. The four draft
resolutions are contained in paragraph 25 of the report
and the draft decision is contained in paragraph 26. The
Fourth Committee recommends that the General
Assembly adopt these draft resolutions and the draft
decision.
Before concluding, I should like to stress the high
level of cooperation prevailing in the Special Political
and Decolonization Committee. This enabled it to fulfil
the mandate entrusted to it by the Assembly and to
complete its work effectively and constructively
despite time constraints occasioned by the changes in
its work schedule.
I should also like to express, on behalf of the
Bureau of the Fourth Committee, our profound
appreciation to those delegations that coordinated the

A/57/PV.73

drafting of the resolutions adopted by the Committee. I
should also like to thank all delegations that
participated in our efforts to reach consensus on many
draft resolutions and decisions.
I should like to pay particular tribute here to the
Chairman of the Fourth Committee, Mr. Graham
Maitland of South Africa, whose knowledge and
experience in multilateral forums, enhanced by his
consummate diplomatic skills, enabled the Committee
to consider in depth all the agenda items allocated to it
by the General Assembly. This was particularly
important given the wide-ranging and often difficult
issues assigned to this Committee. The ViceChairpersons — Ambassador Margaret Hughes Ferrari
of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Ms. Debra Price
of Canada and Mr. Mansour Ayyad Al-Otaibi of
Kuwait — with whom I had the pleasure of working,
also contributed to the successful conclusion of the
work of the Committee.
I should also like to place on record our
appreciation for the able and efficient cooperation
provided by Ms. Lesley Wilkinson, the Secretary of the
Committee, and her very competent team from the
Secretariat. It is through their efforts that the work of
the Committee always proceeded smoothly and in an
atmosphere of genuine cordiality and efficiency. We
are indeed grateful to them for ensuring that we
completed our work successfully.
I now have the honour to submit to the General
Assembly for its consideration and adoption the
recommendations of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee, contained in the reports
contained in documents A/57/518 to A/57/528.
The Acting President: If there is no proposal
under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it
that the General Assembly decides not to discuss the
reports of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee which are before it today.
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Statements will therefore
be limited to explanations of vote. The positions of
delegations regarding the recommendations of the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee have
been made clear in the Committee and are reflected in
the relevant official records.

“When the same draft resolution is
considered in a Main Committee and in plenary
meeting, a delegation should, as far as possible,
explain its vote only once, that is, either in the
Committee or in plenary meeting unless that
delegation’s vote in plenary meeting is different
from its vote in the Committee.”
May I also remind delegations that, in accordance
with General Assembly decision 34/401, explanations
of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made
by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee, I
should like to advise representatives that we are going
to proceed to take decisions in the same manner as was
done in the Committee, unless the Secretariat is
notified to the contrary in advance. This means that,
where recorded votes were taken, we will do the same.
I should also hope that we will proceed to adopt
without a vote those recommendations that were
adopted without a vote in the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee.
Agenda item 74
Effects of atomic radiation
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/57/518)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by
the Special Political and Decolonization Committee in
paragraph 8 of its report.
The Special Political and Decolonization
Committee adopted the draft resolution without a vote.
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to do
the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
57/115).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 74?
It was so decided.

May I remind members that, under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that

9

A/57/PV.73

Agenda item 75
International cooperation in the peaceful uses of
outer space
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/57/519)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by
the Special Political and Decolonization Committee in
paragraph 11 of its report.
The Special Political and Decolonization
Committee adopted the draft resolution without a vote.
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to do
likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
57/116).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 75?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 76
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/57/520)
The Acting President: I call on the
representative of Papua New Guinea for an explanation
of vote.
Mr. Ovia (Papua New Guinea): As everyone in
this Assembly is well aware, Papua New Guinea’s
policy on the inalienable rights of all peoples to selfdetermination, including those of the Palestinian
people, remains firm and unwavering. However, we
also believe that this inalienable right must be
exercised through peaceful means and without any
duress and violence.
For the Middle East region, we believe that the
two States of Israel and Palestine have a right to exist
as sovereign States side by side and within secured
borders. The statement of Papua New Guinea’s Foreign

10

Minister, Sir Rabbie Namaliu, to the General Assembly
during the general debate this year further reaffirmed
that position.
The current state of violence on both sides of the
Middle East conflict cannot and must not be condoned
by the international community, including Papua New
Guinea. We condemn the violent methods employed by
some amongst the Palestinian population to achieve
these aims. We appeal to them to cease these methods
and to take the peaceful route of dialogue and
negotiations. At the same time, we call for fair
treatment of innocent Palestinian people by the Israeli
army in its attempts to catch those individuals,
organizations and leaders responsible for the violence.
The delegation of Papua New Guinea has in
recent times further observed that many resolutions on
Palestine and the Middle East question are not fair and
balanced. They condemn Israel for taking action to
protect its citizens and bring to justice those
responsible for taking the lives of innocent people,
including children. At the same time, the resolutions
say little or nothing about Palestinian suicide bombing
and other methods used to try to send a message and/or
achieve the intended goal of freedom.
Papua New Guinea, like others in our subregion,
believes that dialogue and negotiations with our rivals
and even those who do not necessarily agree with us
are always the best way forward. We believe therefore
that peace and harmony will come to the Middle East
region by very hard and constructive discussions and
decisions. We call on both Israel and the Palestinian
authorities to come to the negotiating table to discuss
their differences and the difficult questions.
Papua New Guinea will therefore vote in favour
of most of the draft resolutions, but abstain in the
voting on others.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the seven draft resolutions
recommended by the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee in paragraph 23 of its report
(A/57/520).
After all the votes have been taken,
representatives will again have the opportunity to
explain their vote.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled
“Assistance to Palestine refugees”.

A/57/PV.73

A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Bolivia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Mongolia,
Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia,
Nauru,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Yugoslavia, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel

Abstaining:
Honduras,
Marshall
Islands,
Micronesia
(Federated States of), Palau, United States of
America
Draft resolution I was adopted by 158 votes to 1,
with 5 abstentions (resolution 57/117).
[Subsequently the delegation of Nepal informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is
entitled “Working Group on the Financing of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East”.
The Special Political and Decolonization
Committee adopted draft resolution II without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
57/118)
The Acting President: Draft resolution III is
entitled “Persons displaced as a result of the June 1967
and subsequent hostilities”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Bolivia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Libyan
Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,

11

A/57/PV.73

Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and
Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, South
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Yugoslavia, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Palau, United States of America
Abstaining:
Nauru, Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands
Draft resolution III was adopted by 155 votes to
5, with 3 abstentions (resolution 57/119).
[Subsequently the delegation of Nepal informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The Acting President: Draft resolution IV is
entitled “Offers by Member States of grants and
scholarships for higher education, including vocational
training, for Palestine refugees”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Bolivia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa

12

Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Libyan
Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall
Islands,
Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay,
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
None
Abstaining:
Israel
Draft resolution IV was adopted by 164 votes to
none, with 1 abstention (resolution 57/120).
[Subsequently the delegation of Nepal informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The Acting President: Draft resolution V is
entitled “Operations of the United Nations Relief and

A/57/PV.73

Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Bolivia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark,
Djibouti,
Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Libyan
Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Mongolia,
Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and
Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, South
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Yugoslavia, Zambia, Zimbabwe

Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Palau, United States of America
Abstaining:
Nauru, Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands,
Vanuatu
Draft resolution V was adopted by 155 votes to 5,
with 4 abstentions (resolution 57/121).
[Subsequently the delegations of Nepal and
Pakistan informed the Secretariat that they had
intended to vote in favour.]
The Acting President: We now turn to draft
resolution VI, entitled “Palestine refugees’ properties
and their revenues”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Bolivia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark,
Djibouti,
Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Libyan
Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino,

13

A/57/PV.73

Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Seychelles, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tonga,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu,
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Palau, United States of America
Abstaining:
Nauru, Solomon Islands
Draft resolution VI was adopted by 159 votes to
5, with 2 abstentions (resolution 57/122).
[Subsequently the delegation of Nepal informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The Acting President: Draft resolution VII is
entitled “University of Jerusalem ‘Al Quds’ for
Palestine refugees”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Bolivia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark,
Djibouti,
Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho,

14

Libyan
Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Mongolia,
Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Seychelles, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo,
Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Palau, United States of America
Abstaining:
Nauru, Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands,
Vanuatu
Draft resolution VII was adopted by 155 votes to
5, with 4 abstentions (resolution 57/123).
[Subsequently the delegation of Nepal informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
76.
Agenda item 77
Report of the Special Committee to Investigate
Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of
the Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the
Occupied Territories
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/57/521)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it five draft resolutions recommended by the Special

A/57/PV.73

Political and Decolonization Committee in paragraph
24 of its report.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled “Work
of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli
Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the
Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the Occupied
Territories”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Armenia,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belize,
Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea,
Ghana, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jordan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Philippines,
Qatar, Saint Lucia, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Singapore, Somalia, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Nauru, Palau, United States of
America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Bahamas, Barbados, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany,
Greece,
Guatemala,
Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Monaco,
Netherlands,
New
Zealand, Norway, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,

Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Rwanda, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Tonga, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay,
Vanuatu, Yugoslavia
Draft resolution I was adopted by 86 votes to 6,
with 66 abstentions (resolution 57/124).
[Subsequently the delegation of Nepal informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is
entitled “Applicability of the Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War, of 12 August 1949, to the Occupied Palestinian
Territory, including East Jerusalem and the other
occupied Arab territories”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Bolivia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Cambodia, Canada, Cape Verde, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Grenada, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Netherlands,

15

A/57/PV.73

New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and
Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, South
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Yugoslavia, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Nauru, Palau, United States of
America
Abstaining:
Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands, Vanuatu
Draft resolution II was adopted by 155 votes to 6,
with 3 abstentions (resolution 57/125).
[Subsequently the delegation of Nepal informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The Acting President: Draft resolution III is
entitled “Israeli settlements in the Occupied Palestinian
Territory, including East Jerusalem and the occupied
Syrian Golan”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Bolivia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Cambodia, Canada, Cape Verde, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark,

16

Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Grenada, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Mongolia,
Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and
Principe, Saudi Arabia, Seychelles, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, South Africa, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet
Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Nauru, Palau, United States of
America
Abstaining:
Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands, Vanuatu
Draft resolution III was adopted by 154 votes to
6, with 3 abstentions (resolution 57/126).
[Subsequently the delegation of Nepal informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The Acting President: Draft resolution IV is
entitled “Israeli practices affecting the human rights of
the Palestinian people in the Occupied Palestinian
Territory, including East Jerusalem”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

A/57/PV.73

In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Bolivia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Cambodia, Canada, Cape Verde, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El
Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Libyan
Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Mongolia,
Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Paraguay, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino, Sao
Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Seychelles, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Yugoslavia, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Nauru, Palau, United States of
America
Abstaining:
Papua New Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands,
Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu
Draft resolution IV was adopted by 148 votes to
6, with 6 abstentions (resolution 57/127).

[Subsequently the delegation of Nepal informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The Acting President: Draft resolution V is
entitled “The occupied Syrian Golan”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Bolivia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Cambodia, Canada, Cape Verde, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Mongolia,
Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino,
Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Seychelles, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Yugoslavia, Zambia, Zimbabwe

17

A/57/PV.73

Against:
Israel
Abstaining:
Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Nauru, Palau, Solomon Islands, Tonga,
Tuvalu, United States of America, Vanuatu
Draft resolution V was adopted by 155 votes to 1,
with 9 abstentions (resolution 57/128).
[Subsequently the delegations of Nepal and
Pakistan informed the Secretariat that they had
intended to vote in favour.]
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 77?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 78
Comprehensive review of the whole question of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/57/522)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by
the Special Political and Decolonization Committee in
paragraph 9 of its report.
The draft resolution is entitled “International Day
of United Nations Peacekeepers”. The Special Political
and Decolonization Committee adopted the draft
resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
57/129).
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 78.
Agenda item 79
Questions relating to information
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/57/523)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the two draft resolutions

18

recommended by the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee in paragraph 9 of its report
and the draft decision recommended by the Committee
in paragraph 10 of the same report.
Draft resolution A is entitled “Information in the
service of humanity”.
The Special Political and Decolonization
Committee adopted draft resolution A without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution A was adopted (resolution
57/130 A).
The Acting President: Draft resolution B is
entitled “United Nations public information policies
and activities”.
The Special Political and Decolonization
Committee adopted draft resolution B without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution B was adopted (resolution
57/130 B).
The Acting President: The draft decision is
entitled “Increase in the membership of the Committee
on Information”.
The Special Political and Decolonization
Committee adopted the draft decision without a vote.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 57/412).
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 79.
Agenda item 80
Information from the Non-Self-Governing
Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the
Charter of the United Nations
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/57/524)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by
the Special Political and Decolonization Committee in
paragraph 7 of its report.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

A/57/PV.73

In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Bolivia,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada,
Cape Verde, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and
Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tonga,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu,
Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu,
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
None
Abstaining:
France, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Palau, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
The draft resolution was adopted by 156 votes to
none, with 8 abstentions (resolution 57/131).

[Subsequently the delegation of Nepal informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 80?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 81 and agenda item 19 (continued)
Economic and other activities which affect the
interests of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing
Territories
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/57/525)
The Acting President: The Assembly will take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee in
paragraph 9 of its report and on the draft decision
recommended by the Committee in paragraph 10 of the
same report.
We turn first to the draft resolution, entitled
“Economic and other activities which affect the
interests of the peoples of the Non-Self-Governing
Territories”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Bolivia,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada,
Cape Verde, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana,

19

A/57/PV.73

Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and
Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tonga,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu,
Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu,
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, United States of America
Abstaining:
France, Micronesia (Federated States of), United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
The draft resolution was adopted by 156 votes to
3, with 3 abstentions (resolution 57/132).
[Subsequently the delegation of Nepal informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The Acting President: We now turn to the draft
decision, entitled “Military activities and arrangements
by colonial Powers in Territories under their
administration”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,

20

Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Bolivia, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Ghana,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome
and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
Canada, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan,
Latvia,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Palau, Poland, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Yugoslavia
Abstaining:
Tonga
The draft decision was adopted by 106 votes to
53, with 1 abstention (decision 57/525).

A/57/PV.73

The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 81?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
19.
Agenda item 82 and agenda item 12 (continued)
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
by the specialized agencies and the international
institutions associated with the United Nations
Report of the Economic and Social Council
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/57/526)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by
the Special Political and Decolonization Committee in
paragraph 7 of its report.
The draft resolution is entitled “Implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized
agencies and the international institutions associated
with the United Nations”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Australia, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,

Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nauru, New Zealand, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome
and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Tonga,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Tuvalu, Uganda,
United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
None
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan,
Kazakhstan,
Latvia,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Yugoslavia
The draft resolution was adopted by 111 votes to
none, with 51 abstentions (resolution 57/133).
[Subsequently the delegation of Nepal informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 82?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The Assembly has
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
12.

21

A/57/PV.73

Agenda item 83
Offers by Member States of study and training
facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing
Territories
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/57/527)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by
the Special Political and Decolonization Committee in
paragraph 6 of its report.
The Special Political and Decolonization
Committee adopted the draft resolution without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
57/134).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 83?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 19 (continued)
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/57/528)
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of Argentina who wishes to speak in
explanation of position before action is taken on the
draft resolutions recommended by the Special Political
and Decolonization Committee in paragraph 25 of its
report.
Mr. Estremé (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to explain the position of the Argentine
delegation on draft resolution IV, contained in
document A/57/528, with regard to the questions of
American Samoa, Anguilla, Bermuda, the British
Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, Guam, Montserrat,
Pitcairn, Saint Helena, the Turks and Caicos Islands
and the United States Virgin Islands.

22

With regard to paragraph 3 of the general part of
the draft resolution, the Argentine Government wishes
to recall its full support, in accordance with General
Assembly resolutions 1514 (XV) and 2625 (XXV), for
the right to self-determination of peoples that continue
to be subjected to colonial domination and foreign
occupation.
At the same time, my delegation wishes to recall
that, in the particular colonial situation presented by
the question of the Malvinas Islands, the principle of
territorial integrity applies in order to prevent any
attempt to disrupt the national unity and the territorial
integrity of the Argentine Republic, in conformity with
resolutions 1514 (XV) and 2625 (XXV) and with the
subsequent resolutions of the Assembly and of the
Special Committee on decolonization on that question.
Accordingly, the Argentine Republic reaffirms its
rights of sovereignty over the Malvinas, South Georgia
and South Sandwich Islands and the surrounding
maritime areas, which are part of its national territory.
Likewise, the Argentine Government reiterates its
rejection of the White Paper entitled “Partnership for
Peace and Prosperity: Britain and the Overseas
Territories”, which is mentioned in draft resolution IV
and is annexed to document A/AC.109/1999/1 and
Corr.1, in the same terms as those of its letters of 29
October 2001 (A/56/515) and of 8 October 2002
(A/57/461).
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on the four draft resolutions
recommended by the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee in paragraph 25 of its report
and on the draft decision recommended by the
Committee in paragraph 26 of the same report.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Question of Western
Sahara”.
The Special Political and Decolonization
Committee adopted draft resolution I without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution
57/135).
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is
entitled “Question of New Caledonia”.

A/57/PV.73

The Special Political and Decolonization
Committee adopted draft resolution II without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
57/136).
The Acting President: Draft resolution III is
entitled “Question of Tokelau”.
The Special Political and Decolonization
Committee adopted draft resolution III without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
57/137).
The Acting President: Draft resolution IV is
entitled “Questions of American Samoa, Anguilla,
Bermuda, the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman
Islands, Guam, Montserrat, Pitcairn, St. Helena, the
Turks and Caicos Islands and the United States Virgin
Islands”.
The Special Political and Decolonization
Committee adopted draft resolution IV without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution
57/138).
The Acting President: The draft decision is
entitled “Question of Gibraltar”.
The Special Political and Decolonization
Committee adopted the draft decision without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 57/526).
The Acting President: I call on the
representative of the United Kingdom, who wishes to
speak in exercise of the right of reply.
Mr. Harrison (United Kingdom): I am taking the
floor to respond to the remarks made by the
representative of Argentina on the sovereignty of the
Falkland Islands. The United Kingdom’s position on
that issue is well known; it was last set out in detail by
the representative of the United Kingdom in his
statement in exercise of the right of reply to the
statement made by the Foreign Minister of Argentina
during the general debate, on 17 September this year
(see A/57/PV.13). I should also like to refer to the
United Kingdom’s reply (A/56/777) to the Argentine
letter of 29 October 2001. The United Kingdom will

reply to the Argentine letter of 8 October 2002 in due
course.
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
19.
The Assembly has thus concluded its
consideration of all the reports of the Special Political
and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
before it.
Agenda item 19 (continued)
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
Draft resolutions (A/57/23 (Part III), chapter
XIII, section G, para. 7; A/57/L.52)
The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider the draft resolution contained in Part III,
chapter XIII, section G, paragraph 7, of document
A/57/23 and draft resolution A/57/L.52.
I now call on the representative of the United
States, who wishes to speak in explanation of vote
before the voting. May I remind delegations that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Marsh (United States of America):
Unfortunately, the United States cannot support draft
resolution A/57/L.52, on the implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples. By adopting a narrow
definition of decolonization, the draft resolution fails to
take into account the complex reality of Non-SelfGoverning Territories. For the United States, the very
term “non-self-governing” seems inappropriate for
those who can establish their own constitution, elect
their own public officers, have representation in
Washington and choose their own economic path. One
of the territories under our administration, for example,
held elections just last month.
In particular, the United States disagrees with the
draft resolution’s request for studies on the
implications of each of the options of selfdetermination for the Non-Self-Governing Territories.
We believe that United Nations funding would be
better allocated elsewhere. The United States also
disagrees with the draft resolution’s contention that the

23

A/57/PV.73

mere presence of military activities and bases in the
Non-Self-Governing Territories is harmful to the rights
and interests of the peoples of the territories. We do not
support the notion that administering Powers do not
have the right to take actions in accordance with their
national security interests.
Furthermore, with regard to the draft resolution
recommended in Part III, chapter XIII, section G of
document A/57/23, on dissemination of information on
decolonization, I should like to say that the United
States finds that it burdens the Secretariat of the United
Nations and its resources unreasonably.
The United States fully supports countries that
choose independence, and we are proud to welcome
them as equal and sovereign partners. Not all territories
choose independence, however, and we equally support
their right to a full measure of self-government,
including the rights to integration and to free
association. The world encompasses a variety of
peoples, places and political circumstances.
That richness does not allow for just one path.
The United States believes that a single standard
should not be applied to every territory, and we call
upon all Member States to respect the choices made by
residents of Non-Self-Governing Territories.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of vote before the voting.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft resolution entitled “Dissemination of information
on decolonization”, contained in Part III, chapter XIII,
section G, paragraph 7 of the report of the Special
Committee (A/57/23).
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Bolivia,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada,
Cape Verde, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,

24

Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome
and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu,
Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu,
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, Micronesia (Federated States of), United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
Abstaining:
France, Netherlands
The draft resolution was adopted by 154 votes to
4, with 2 abstentions (resolution 57/139).
[Subsequently the delegations of Jamaica and the
Netherlands informed the Secretariat that they
had intended to vote in favour.]
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/57/L.52, entitled
“Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples”.
Before proceeding to take action on the draft
resolution, I should like to announce that since the
introduction of draft resolution A/57/L.52, South
Africa has become a sponsor of the draft resolution.

A/57/PV.73

A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina,
Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Bolivia, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark,
Djibouti,
Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Ireland, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Mongolia,
Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, New
Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Qatar, Republic of Moldova,
Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and
Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sudan,
Suriname,
Swaziland,
Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Tuvalu, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet
Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Micronesia (Federated States of), United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Belgium, Bulgaria, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Hungary, Israel, Italy, Latvia,

Lithuania, Monaco, Netherlands, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Romania, Slovenia, Turkey
Draft resolution A/57/L.52 was adopted by 139
votes to 3, with 19 abstentions (resolution
57/140).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in explanation of vote on the resolutions just
adopted, may I remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to ten minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Harrison (United Kingdom): I should like to
explain the United Kingdom’s votes on the resolutions
on the dissemination of information on decolonization
and on the implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples. As Members will have seen, the United
Kingdom voted against both those resolutions.
With regard to the resolution on the dissemination
of information on decolonization, the United Kingdom
remains of the view that the obligation that this text
places on the Secretariat to publicize decolonization
issues represents an unwarranted drain on the scarce
resources of the United Nations. The resolution is
therefore unacceptable to the United Kingdom.
The United Kingdom continues to find some
elements of the text of the resolution on the
implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples to be
unacceptable. Those elements include, but are not
limited to, paragraph 12, which calls on the
Administering Powers to eliminate the remaining
military bases in the Non-Self-Governing Territories.
This language is drawn from decision 57/525, on
military activities, which we also voted against this
year.
Despite our negative votes on those resolutions,
the United Kingdom delegation remains sincerely
committed to furthering the process of informal
dialogue with the Special Committee of 24 over the
coming year.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of vote.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 19.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

25
