26

General Assembly -

Tenth Session

-----------------------'-----------------------

ment referred to in Chapter XI of the Charter of the
United Nations,
1. Takes note of the documentation submitted, and
of the explanations provided, to the effect that the peoples of the Netherlands Antilles and Surinam have
expressed, through their freely elected representative
bodies, their approval of the new constitutional order,
and takes note also of the opinion of the Government
of the Netherlands;
2. Expresses the opinion that, without prejudice to
the position of the United Nations as affirmed in General
Assembly resolution 742 (VIII) of 27 November 1953,
and to such provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations as may be relevant, on the basis of the information before it as presented by the Government of the
Netherlands, and as desired by the Government of the
Netherlands, cessation of the transmission of information under Article 73 e of the Charter in respect of the
Netherlands Antilles and Surinam is appropriate.

557th plenary meeting,
15 December 1955.
946 (X). Attainment by the Trust Territories of
the objective of self-government or independence

The Genera! Assembly,
Recalling that, by its resolutions 558 (VI) of 18 January 1952, 752 (VIII) of 9 December 1953 and 858
(IX) of 14 December 1954, it invited the Administering
Authority of each Trust Territory, other than Somaliland under Italian administration, to include in each
annual report information concerning measures taken or
contemplated towards self-government or independence,
and estimates of the periods of time required for such
measures, and requested the Trusteeship Council to include in each of its reports to the General Assembly a
separate section dealing with the subject and stating in
each case its conclusions and recommendations,
Noting with regret the omission from the report 30 of
the Council covering the period from 17 July 1954 to
22 July 1955 of the separate section envisaged by the
above-mentioned resolutions,
Noting further that the Council, by its resolution 1254
(XVI) of 19 July 1955, decided to instruct each of its
drafting committees on the annual reports concerned, beginning from its seventeenth session, to prepare, in the
course of its regular functions and in the light of General
Assembly resolutions 752 (VIII) and 858 (IX), appropriate draft conclusions and recommendations concerning the question of the attainment by the Territory of
self-government or independence,
1. Draws the attention of the Trusteeship Council to
the importance which the General Assembly continues to
attach to the question of the attainment by the Trust
Territories of the objective of self-government or independence;

2. Requests the Council to ensure that the procedure
devised by it for dealing in future with this question will
enable it to comply fully with the terms of the relevant
General Assembly resolutions and, accordingly, to include in its next and succeeding reports to .the Assembly
a separate section containing the information indicated
so Ibid., Supplement No. 4

(A/2933).

in those resolutions and the conclusions and recommendations of the Council thereon.

557th plenary meeting,
15 December 1955.
947 (X). Question of the frontier between the
Trust Territory of Somaliland under Italian
administration and Ethiopia

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 392 (V) of 15 December 1950,
recommending that the portion of the boundary between
the Trust Territory of Somaliland under Italian administration and Ethiopia not already delimited by international agreement be delimited by bilateral negotiations
between the Government of Ethiopia and the Administer·
ing Authority,
- Recalling further its resolution 854 (IX) of 14 December 1954 in which the Governments of Ethiopia and
Italy were urged to exert their utmost efforts to achieve
a final settlement of the frontier question by direct
negotiations,
Having noted the encouraging views expressed durin~
its tenth session by the representatives of the Governments of Ethiopia and Italy,
Having heard the statements of the representative of
the Somali Youth J ,~ague before the Fourth Committee,
Considering the progress made in the discussions between the Governments of the two countries since July
1955,
Confident in the good faith and willingness of the two
Governments to pursue vigorously direct negotiations
for an early delimitation of the frontier,
Mindful of the patent urgency of establishing a delimitation of the frontier between Ethiopia and the Trust
Territory as soon as possible,

1. Recommends that the Governments of Ethiopia
and Italy expedite their current direct negotiations so
that the question of the frontier between the Trust Territory of Somaliland under Italian administration and
Ethiopia may be settled as soon as possible;
2. Requests the Governments of Ethiopia ancf Italy
to report on the progress of these direct negotiations to
the General Assembly at its eleventh session.

557th plenary meeting,
15 December 1955.
948 (X). Report of the Trusteeship Council covering the period from 17 July 1954 to 22 July
1955

The General Assembly
1. Takes note ·of the report 80 of the Trusteeship
Council covering the period from 17 July 1954 to 22
July 1955;

2. Recommends that the Trusteeship Council, in its
future deliberations, take into account the comments and
suggestions made in the course of the discussion of its
report at the tenth session of the General Assembly.

557th plenary meeting,
15 December 1955.
