A/RES/76/120

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
17 December 2021

Seventy-sixth session
Agenda item 88
Strengthening and promoting the international
treaty framework

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 9 December 2021
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/76/496, para. 8)]

76/120.

Strengthening and promoting the international treaty framework
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 23 (I) of 10 February 1946, 97 (I) of 14 December
1946, 364 B (IV) of 1 December 1949, 482 (V) of 12 December 1950, 32/144 of
16 December 1977, 33/141 A of 19 December 1978, 51/158 of 16 December 1996,
73/210 of 20 December 2018 and 75/144 of 15 December 2020,
Recalling also its resolutions 71/328 of 11 September 2017 and 73/346 of
16 September 2019, which reaffirm that multilingualism is a core value of the
Organization that contributes to the achievement of the goals of the United Nations,
and requesting the Secretary-General to continue to make efforts to ensure that
multilingualism is not undermined by the measures taken in response to the liquidity
situation and the coronavirus disease (COVID-19),
Conscious of the obligations resulting from Article 102 of the Charter of the
United Nations and the importance of treaties in the development of international law
and the international legal order,
Noting with appreciation the role of the Secretariat, in particular the Treaty
Section of the Office of Legal Affairs, in the implementation of Article 102 of the
Charter,
Noting that the considerable increase in the number of treaties submitted for
registration over the past years has led to the growth in the volume of work carried
out by the Treaty Section, contributing to the accumulation of unpublished treaties,
Noting also that, while the authentic texts of registered treaties are promptly
made available online through the electronic treaty database, there is currently a
significant backlog in the publication of the United Nations Treaty Series due to

21-18679 (E)

271221

*2118679*

A/RES/76/120

Strengthening and promoting the international treaty framework

growing delays in the translation of treaties related, inter alia, to the limited resources
available for the publication process,
Recognizing the importance of the expeditious processing, registration and
publication of treaties and treaty-related actions,
Supporting the efforts of the Secretary-General to increase the efficiency of the
registration and publication process within available resources and to enhance the role
played by the Treaty Section in assisting Member States in this area,
Welcoming the measures taken by the Treaty Section to expedite the publication
of the United Nations Treaty Series and to provide electronic access to all of its
publications on the website of the United Nations Treaty Collection, and recognizing
the role that new technology can play in the accessibility of the United Nations Treaty
Series,
Recognizing that practice and technology have developed considerably over the
past years, and acknowledging the importance of maintaining consistency with treaty making practice in the international community,
Bearing in mind the provisions of the Vienna Convention on the Law of
Treaties, 1 and considering its adoption on 22 May 1969 by the United Nations
Conference on the Law of Treaties,
Convinced of the need to further gather and exchange views on practice relating
to the strengthening and promoting of the international treaty framework,
1.
Recalls Article 102 of the Charter of the United Nations, reaffirms the
importance of the registration and publication of treaties, as well as their accessibility,
and stresses that the regulations to give effect to Article 102 should be useful and
relevant to Member States and should be kept updated to assist States in implementing
their obligations thereunder;
2.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General entitled “Review of the
regulations to give effect to Article 102 of the Charter of the United Nati ons”, 2
submitted pursuant to its resolution 73/210, and of the recommendations contained
therein for consideration by the General Assembly;
3.
Amends the regulations as detailed in the annex to the present resolution,
which, as amended, will apply as from 1 February 2022;
4.
Notes that some Member States continue to consider that there remain
outstanding issues where the regulations may need further consideration;
5.
Reaffirms its support for the annual treaty event organized by the
Secretary-General;
6.
Welcomes the organization of workshops on treaty law and practice by the
Treaty Section at Headquarters and at the national and regional levels as an important
capacity-building initiative, encourages the Treaty Section to continue to organize
these workshops as regularly as possible, including through the use of information
and communications technology when necessary owing to extraordinary
circumstances, and invites States and interested international organizations and
institutions to continue to support this activity;
7.
Notes that workshops on treaty law and practice at the national and
regional levels could not be organized since 2016, including owing to a lack of funds,
and invites States and interested organizations and institutions to make voluntary
__________________
1
2

2/8

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1155, No. 18232.
A/75/136.
21-18679

Strengthening and promoting the international treaty framework

A/RES/76/120

contributions to the trust fund established by the Secretary-General for the Office of
Legal Affairs to support the promotion of international law, towards the financing of
such workshops, or otherwise to assist in their implementation and possible
expansion, as a complement to workshops on treaty law and practice held at
Headquarters;
8.
Welcomes efforts to build the capacity of States in treaty law and practice,
and invites Member States to consider providing targeted technical assistance, upon
request, at the bilateral, regional and multilateral levels, in particular to developing
countries, in order to develop and enhance their treaty practice, including in the use
of information and communications technology;
9.
Also welcomes the efforts made to develop and enhance the United Nations
electronic treaty database, which provides online access to comprehensive
information on the depositary functions of the Secretary-General and the registration
and publication of treaties under Article 102 of the Charter, and encourages the
continuation of such efforts in the future, while bearing in mind the challenges that
many developing countries face in accessing information and communications
technology;
10. Notes that most submissions of treaties for registration are in electronic
format, and encourages the Secretary-General to develop, in consultation with and on
the basis of feedback from Member States and within existing resources, an online
treaty registration system to facilitate submissions of treaties for registration, as an
additional option to the existing ways of submission in electronic or hard-copy
format;
11. Recognizes the importance of the legal publications prepared by the Treaty
Section, and stresses the need to update the Summary of Practice of the SecretaryGeneral as Depositary of Multilateral Treaties in the light of new developments and
practices;
12. Acknowledges the efforts of the depositaries in the registration of treaties
under Article 102 of the Charter, and encourages the continuation of such efforts in
the future;
13. Calls upon the Secretary-General to ensure the expedited publication of
the United Nations Treaty Series, in accordance with the regulations, through the
prompt provision of editorial and translation services, to enable effective
dissemination of and access to treaties;
14. Decides to undertake a thematic debate in the Sixth Committee to foster a
technical exchange of views on practice relating to the strengthening and promoting
of the international treaty framework, and in that regard invites Member States to
focus their comments during the debate at the seventy-eighth session of the General
Assembly on the subtopic “Best practices of depositaries of multilateral treaties”;
15. Also decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-eighth
session the item entitled “Strengthening and promoting the international treaty
framework”.
49th plenary meeting
9 December 2021

21-18679

3/8

A/RES/76/120

Strengthening and promoting the international treaty framework

Annex
Regulations to give effect to Article 102 of the Charter of the
United Nations
Part One
Registration
Article 1
1.
Every treaty or international agreement, whatever its form and descriptive name,
entered into by one or more Members of the United Nations after 24 October 1945,
the date of the coming into force of the Charter, shall as soon as possible be registered
with the Secretariat in accordance with these regulations.
2.
Registration shall not take place until the treaty or international agreement has
come into force between two or more of the parties thereto. A treaty or international
agreement that is being provisionally applied prior to its entry into force may be
registered as provisionally applied.
3.
Such registration may be effected by any party or in accordance with article 4
of these regulations. Without prejudice to the right of a party to a treaty or
international agreement to submit it for registration, if a treaty or international
agreement designates one or more depositaries, any of the depositaries is encouraged
to effect registration unless otherwise provided in the treaty or international
agreement or agreed by its parties.
4.
The Secretariat shall record the treaties and international agreements so
registered in a register established for that purpose.
Article 2
1.
When a treaty or international agreement has been registered with the
Secretariat, a certified statement regarding any subsequent action which effects a
change in the parties thereto, or the terms, scope or application thereof, shall also be
registered with the Secretariat.
2.
The Secretariat shall record the certified statement so registered in the register
established under article 1 of these regulations.
Article 3
1.
Registration by a party, in accordance with article 1 of these regulations, relieves
all other parties of the obligation to register. Registration by a depositary, in
accordance with article 1 of these regulations, relieves all parties of the obligation to
register.
2.
Registration effected in accordance with article 4 of these regulations relieves
all parties of the obligation to register.
Article 4
1.
Every treaty or international agreement subject to article 1 of these regulations
shall be registered ex officio by the United Nations in the following cases:
(a) Where the United Nations is a party to the treaty or international
agreement;
(b) Where the United Nations has been authorized by the treaty or
international agreement to effect registration;
4/8

21-18679

Strengthening and promoting the international treaty framework

A/RES/76/120

(c) Where the United Nations is the depositary of a multilateral treaty or
international agreement.
2.
A treaty or international agreement subject to article 1 of these regulations may
be registered with the Secretariat by a specialized agency in the following cases:
(a) Where the constituent instrument of the specialized agency provides for
such registration;
(b) Where the treaty or international agreement has been registered with the
specialized agency pursuant to the terms of its constituent instrument;
(c) Where the specialized agency has been authorized by the treaty or
international agreement to effect registration.
Article 5
1.
Any submission for registration under article 1 or 4 of these regulations shall
include a certified copy of the treaty or international agreement, either in electronic
or hard-copy format, together with a statement certifying that the text is a true and
complete copy thereof.
2.
The certified copy shall reproduce the text in all the languages in which the
treaty or international agreement was concluded, including all annexes or attachments
constituting an integral part of the treaty or international agreement. In the case of
multilateral treaties or agreements, it shall also include the text of all reservations or
declarations made or confirmed by the parties at the time of deposit of their
instruments of consent to be bound, in all authentic languages in which these
reservations or declarations were made.
3.
In addition to a certified copy and the statement referred to, any submission may
also include, where available, courtesy translations of the text into any of the official
languages of the United Nations, in order to expedite translations into English and
French for the purpose of publication in accordance with article 12 of these
regulations.
4.

The certifying statement shall set forth:
(a)

The full title of the treaty or international agreement;

(b) The date(s) and place(s) of conclusion of the treaty or international
agreement;
(c)
force;

The date on which the treaty or international agreement has come into

(d) The method whereby it has come into force (for example: by signature, by
ratification, approval or acceptance, by accession, etcetera);
(e) The authentic languages in which it was concluded and, when applicable,
the language or languages in which courtesy translations are provided;
(f) When applicable, the names and official titles of the persons that have
signed the treaty or international agreement on behalf of each party.
5.
In the case of multilateral treaties or agreements, the certifying statement shall
include, in addition to the information described in paragraph 4 of this article :
(a) A list of all the parties to the treaty or international agreement, indicating
the date of deposit of each party’s instrument of consent to be bound, the nature of
such instrument (ratification, approval, acceptance, accession, etcetera) and the dat e
of entry into force of the treaty for each party; and

21-18679

5/8

A/RES/76/120

Strengthening and promoting the international treaty framework

(b) A certification that it includes all reservations or declarations made by
parties thereto.
6.
The requirements set forth in this article shall also apply to subsequent actions
submitted pursuant to article 2 of these regulations.
Article 6
The date of receipt by the Secretariat of the United Nations of the treaty or
international agreement registered shall be deemed to be the date of registration,
provided that the date of registration of a treaty or agreement registered ex officio by
the United Nations shall be the date on which the treaty or agreement first came into
force between two or more of the parties thereto.
Article 7
A certificate of registration signed by the Secretary-General, or his or her
representative, shall be issued to the registering party, or specialized agency or
depositary, and also, upon request, to any party to the treaty or international
agreement registered. Certificates of registration shall also be made public through
electronic means.
Article 8
1.
The register shall be kept in the English and French languages. The register shall
comprise in respect of each treaty or international agreement, a record of:
(a)

The serial number given in the order of registration;

(b)

The title given to the instrument by the parties;

(c)

The names of the parties between whom it was concluded;

(d) The dates of signature, ratification, approval or acceptance, exchange of
ratification, accession, and entry into force;
(e)

The duration, where appropriate;

(f)

The language or languages in which it was drawn up;

(g) The name of the party, specialized agency or depositary which registers
the instrument and the date of such registration;
(h)

Particulars of publication in the treaty series of the United Nations.

2.
Such information shall also be included in the register in regard to the statements
registered under article 2 of these regulations.
3.
The texts of registered treaties or international agreements, together with the
certifying statements, shall remain in the custody of the Secretariat.
Article 9
The Secretary-General, or his or her representative, shall ensure that the register
is publicly accessible, including through electronic means.

6/8

21-18679

Strengthening and promoting the international treaty framework

A/RES/76/120

Part Two
Filing and recording
Article 10
The Secretariat shall file and record treaties and international agreements, other
than those subject to registration under article 1 of these regulations, if they fall in
the following categories:
(a) Treaties or international agreements entered into by the United Nations or
by one or more of the specialized agencies;
(b) Treaties or international agreements transmitted by a Member of the
United Nations which were entered into before the coming into force of the Charter,
but which were not included in the treaty series of the League of Nations;
(c) Treaties or international agreements transmitted by a party not a member
of the United Nations which were entered into before or after the coming into force
of the Charter which were not included in the treaty series of the League of Nations.
Article 11
The provisions of articles 2, 5 and 8 of these regulations shall apply, mutatis
mutandis, to all treaties and international agreements filed and recorded unde r
article 10 of these regulations.
Part Three
Publication
Article 12
1.
The Secretariat shall publish as soon as possible in a single series every treaty
or international agreement which is registered or filed and recorded, in the original
language or languages, followed by a translation in English and in French. The
certified statements referred to in article 2 of these regulations shall be published in
the same manner.
2.
The Secretariat will, however, have the option not to publish in extenso a treaty
or international agreement, or a technical annex to a treaty or international agreement,
belonging to one of the following categories:
(a) Assistance and cooperation agreements of limited scope concerning
financial, commercial, administrative or technical matters;
(b) Agreements relating to the organization of conferences, seminars or
meetings;
(c) Agreements that are to be published otherwise than in the series mentioned
in paragraph 1 of this article by the United Nations Secretariat, or by a specialized or
related agency;
(d) Multilateral agreements that are to be published in a format similar to the
series mentioned in paragraph 1 of this article by their depositaries;
(e) Technical annexes to treaties or agreements where technical annexes are
frequently amended.
3.
In deciding whether or not to publish in extenso a treaty or international
agreement belonging to one of the categories mentioned in paragraph 2 of this article,
the Secretariat shall duly take into account, inter alia, the practical value that might
accrue from in extenso publication. Treaties and international agreements that the
Secretariat intends not to publish in extenso shall be identified as such in the register,
21-18679

7/8

A/RES/76/120

Strengthening and promoting the international treaty framework

it being understood that a decision not to publish in extenso may be reversed at any
time.
4.
Any State or intergovernmental organization may obtain from the SecretaryGeneral a copy of the text of any treaty or international agreement which it has been
decided, pursuant to paragraph 2 of this article, not to publish in extenso. The
Secretariat shall likewise make a copy of any such treaty or agreement available to
private persons against payment.
5.
In respect of each treaty or international agreement registered or filed and
recorded, the series referred to in paragraph 1 of this article shall include at least the
following information: the registration or recording number, the names of the parties,
the title, the date and place of conclusion, the date and method of entry into force, the
duration (where appropriate), the languages of conclusion, the name of the State or
organization that has registered it or transmitted it for filing and recording, and, if
appropriate, references to publications in which the complete text of the treaty or
international agreement is reproduced.
Article 13
The Secretariat shall make available the series referred to in article 12 of these
regulations through any electronic means that may be available. The text of a
registered treaty or international agreement, as submitted, and unofficial translations
into English and French prepared by the Secretariat shall also be made available
online, as soon as possible after registration and prior to publication in the series. The
Secretariat shall send printed copies of the series to Members of the United Nations,
upon request.

8/8

21-18679
