24

General Assembly-Thirteenth Session

------------------------------------------

( c) Raise family levels of living by, inter alia, avoiding an inequitable distribution of national income.
780th plenary meeting,
14 November 1958.
1259 (XW). Technical assistance to Afghanistan
The General Assembly,
Having considered Economic and Social Council resolution 689 H (XXVI) of 28 July 1958,
Welcoming the adoption by Afghanistan, which was
formerly an important opium-producing country, of the
law of Kaus 2, 1336 (24 November 1957) prohibiting
opium cultivation in Afghanistan,
Believing that technical assistance in the field of economic and social development is necessary for the full
execution of the policy incorporated in the above-mentioned law and for minimizing serious economic and
social consequences,
Recognizing that the success of Afghanistan in this
field requires international co-operation,
1. Expresses iis appreciation of the policy adopted by
Afghanistan ;
2. Requests the relevant techni~al assistance organs
of the United Nations and the specialized agencies concerned to pay due attention to requests from the Government of Afghanistan for technical assistance in this
field.
780th plenary meeting,
14 November 1958.
1260 (Xlll). Co-ordination of results of scientific
research
The General Assembly,
Noting the remarkable advances made in recent years
in the natural sciences, pure and applied,
Believing that the United Nations and the specialized
agencies should stimulate and encourage further the
general direction of scientific research toward the peaceful ends of economic progress and human welfare, and
in the interest of peace and international co-operation,
Recalling its resolution 1164 (XII) of 26 November
1957 on the development of international co-operation
in the fields of science, culture and education, and Economic and Social Council resolution 695 (XXVI) of
31 July 1958 on the survey which is to be prepared on
international relations and exchanges in the fields of
education, science and culture,
Recognizing the responsibility of the United Nations
for co-ordinating the activities of its organs and those
of the specialized agencies in accordance with Articles
58 and 63 of the Charter of the United Nations, and
noting that the Economic and Social Council has requested the United Nations and five of the specialized
agencies to undertake appraisals of their activities and
programmes for the period 1959 to 1964,
1. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization and the other specialized agencies
concerned with the peaceful application of science, as
well as the International Atomic Energy Agency, to
arrange for a survey to be made on the main trends of

inquiry in the field of the natural sciences and the dissemination and application for peaceful ends of such
scientific knowledge, and on the steps which might be
taken by the United Nations, the specialized agencies
and the International Atomic Energy Agency towards
encouraging the concentration of such efforts upon the
most urgent problems, having regard to the needs of the
various countries; and requests the Secretary-General,
in arranging for such a survey, to take into account the
report of the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization to be prepared in response
to Economic and Social Council resolution 695
(XXVI);
2. Invites the above-mentioned organizations to cooperate with the Secretary-General in this connexion;
3. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit
this survey to the Economic and Social Council at its
thirtieth session for comment and any appropriate recommendations ;
4. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
transmit this survey to the General Assembly, together
with its comments and recommendations.

780th plenary meeting,
14 November 1958.
1261 (Xlll). Advisory services in the field of
human rights
The General Assembly,
Taking note of chapter VII, section X, of the report
of the Economic and Social Council,1
Recalling its resolution 926 (X) of 14 December 1955
requesting the Economic and Social Council to submit
to the General Assembly at its thirteenth session an
evaluation of the projects carried out under the programme of advisory services in the field of human rights
and recommendations concerning the future of the programme,
Recalling also its resolution 1163 (XII) of 26 November 1957, in which the General Assembly noted with
satisfaction the success of the seminar held in August
1957 at Bangkok (Thailand) and expressed the hope
that seminars on the status of women would be held as
frequently as possible in the future under the programme of advisory services in the field of human rights,
Noting with satisfaction the important results
achieved at the two seminars held during 1958 under
the programme of advisory services in the field of human
rights,
Having considered the plan presented by the Secretary-General to the Economic and Social Council for
holding seminars in the year 1959,2 and Council resolution 684 (XXVI) of 21 July 1958 approving this plan,
l. Expresses its satisfaction at the manner in which
the projects have been carried out under the programme
of advisory services in the field of human rights;
2. Approves the plan presented by the SecretaryGeneral to the Economic and Social Council for holding
seminars in the year 1959 and recommends that, if
possible, three seminars should be held in 1959, taking
• Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, Twenty-sixth Session, Annexes, agenda item 12, document E/3075/
Add.l.
