S/2021/48

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 January 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 14 January 2021 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefings provided by
Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, Under-Secretary-General, United Nations Office of
Counter-Terrorism; Ms. Michèle Coninsx, Executive Director, Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate; and Ms. Fatima Akilu, Executive Director
of Neem Foundation, as well as the statements delivered by Their Excellencies
Mr. Othman Jerandi, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Tunisia; Mr. Subrahmanyam
Jaishankar, Minister for External Affairs of India; Mr. Simon Coveney, Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Defence of Ireland; Ms. Raychelle Omamo, Cabinet Secretary
for Foreign Affairs of Kenya; Mr. Jüri Luik, Minister of Defence of Estonia;
Ms. Monica Mæland, Minister of Justice and Public Security of Norway; Ms. Keisal
Peters, Minister of State with responsibility for Foreign Affairs of Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines; Mr. James Cleverly, Minister of State for the Middle East and
North Africa of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland; and by
the representatives of China, France, Mexico, the Niger, the Russian Federation, the
United States of America and Viet Nam, in connection with the video-teleconference
on “Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts: international
cooperation in combating terrorism 20 years after the adoption of resolution 1373
(2001)”, convened on Tuesday, 12 January 2021.
In accordance with the understanding reached among Council members for
this video-teleconference, the following delegations and entities submitted written
statements, copies of which are also enclosed: Afghanistan, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belgium, Brazil, Canada,
Colombia, Cuba, Denmark, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, the European Union,
Georgia, Guatemala, Hungary, Indonesia, the International Committee of the Red
Cross, the International Criminal Police Organization, the Islamic Republic of
Iran, Israel, Japan, Jordan, Libya, Malaysia, Morocco, Myanmar, Nigeria, Pakistan,
Peru, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Saudi Arabia, South
Africa, Switzerland, the Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey, Ukraine and the United
Arab Emirates.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from
the President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives
of the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light
of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic,

21-00482 (E) 190121 190221

*2100482*

S/2021/48

the enclosed briefings and statements will be issued as an official document of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Tarek Ladeb
President of the Security Council

2/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

Annex 1

Briefing by the Under-Secretary-General, United Nations Office of
Counter-Terrorism, Vladimir Voronkov
Allow me to begin by commending Tunisia on its leadership role as Chair of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee and salute the convening of today’s meeting as an
important initiative of the Tunisian presidency of the Security Council.
Twenty years ago, the Council took a momentous step to bolster the fight
against the threat to international peace and security posed by terrorism. One can
hardly overstate the importance of the Council’s rapid action in the aftermath of the
11 September terrorist attacks in adopting resolution 1373 (2001) and establishing the
Counter-Terrorism Committee. I wish to pay tribute to the victims of those heinous
attacks — almost 3,000 people, from 90 countries — as well as to all those around
the world whose lives have been shattered by the scourge of terrorism over the years.
Throughout the last two decades, the threat of terrorism has persisted, evolved
and spread, causing unspeakable human suffering and loss. Al-Qaida has proven
resilient despite losing numerous leaders. It has pioneered a dangerous transnational
model of regional franchises that exploit local fragilities and conflicts. The socalled Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), was able to harness social media
to mobilize and recruit followers worldwide, creating a foreign-terrorist-fighter
phenomenon of an unprecedented scale.
In the face of these threats, the Security Council has provided critical impetus
and guidance for States Members of the United Nations to demonstrate unity of
purpose and action and step up national efforts and international cooperation. That
has led to important successes and helped Member States to bring terrorists to justice
and disrupt additional attacks.
Although ISIL’s territorial aspirations in Iraq and Syria were defeated, it
remains a threat in the region, conducting attacks and seeking to reconstitute an
external operations capability. Urgent challenges persist, particularly to ensuring
accountability for the crimes perpetrated by ISIL and repatriating the thousands of
associated foreign nationals, mostly women and children, who remain in limbo.
Terrorist activity has shown that we must remain extremely vigilant; the
threat remains real and even direct for many States. Terrorists have sought to exploit
disruptions arising from the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). They have sought to
benefit from the setbacks to the development and human rights agendas, riding on
the waves of polarization and hate speech amplified by the pandemic. The threat
has become even more difficult to prevent, with a resurgence of low-cost, low-tech
attacks against soft targets by so-called lone wolves.
Terrorists are adapting quickly, as they are keen to exploit cyberspace and new
technologies, linkages with organized crime, and regulatory, human and technical
gaps in national capacities. Their tactics are appealing to new groups across the
ideological spectrum, including violent extremist groups that are racially, ethnically
and politically motivated.
The COVID-19 crisis has magnified these trends, just as it has been a stress test
for international cooperation and solidarity. Saving lives from terrorism, like saving
lives from viral diseases, requires reinvigorated and inclusive multilateralism, as has
been called for by Secretary-General Guterres. The Security Council’s leadership
remains critical to ensuring a united front against terrorism that is anchored in the
Charter of the United Nations and international law, with human rights and gender
equality at its heart.

21-004823/129

S/2021/48

I would like to raise three fundamental points as the Council reflects on a
multilateral way forward to effectively prevent and defeat terrorism.
First, international solidarity is increasingly imperative in our interdependent
world, including through practical collaboration and high-impact capacity-building.
Law enforcement and criminal justice responses mandated by the Security Council
are indispensable to detecting, deterring and bringing terrorists to justice. They are
also increasingly complex and resource-intensive. Even the better-equipped States are
challenged to keep pace with evolving and emerging threats, both offline and online.
We must therefore urgently bolster international counter-terrorism cooperation.
Secondly, we need a renewed commitment to looking beyond terrorism as a
tactic and addressing the underlying conditions and drivers that sustain and spread
it. A strategic investment in building resilience is necessary to effectively countering
the violent extremism that is conducive to terrorism. The Security Council’s voice
is crucial in emphasizing that preventing and countering terrorism is necessary to
facilitating decisive progress on the interlinkages between the peace and security,
sustainable development and human rights agendas.
Thirdly, engaging more and better with youth, civil society, the private sector
and the scientific community in the fight against terrorism is key to being responsive
to the social and technological realities of the twenty-first century. Public-private
partnerships are a critical tool to effectively address terrorism. Since 2001, the
Security Council has built upon resolution 1373 (2001) to develop a comprehensive
set of measures and guidance for Member States to prevent and counter terrorism,
taking on new issues and strengthening attention to international human rights,
humanitarian and refugee law. Concurrently, support for Member States’ efforts
to implement those requirements has grown as a matter of priority for the United
Nations system, guided also, since 2006, by the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy.
Today we are more coherent and coordinated than ever in providing that
support, thanks to the reform of the counter-terrorism architecture initiated by the
Secretary-General in 2017.
The close collaboration between my Office and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) is at the heart of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact, which brings together 43 United
Nations and non-United Nations entities. We have made steady progress through that
partnership, in line with resolution 2395 (2017), ensuring that our capacity-building
support builds on the assessments conducted by CTED and the recommendations
adopted by the Counter-Terrorism Committee.
Our flagship programmes on countering terrorist travel and terrorism
financing and on prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration are a few concrete
examples of that approach. We will continue working to consolidate and expand the
gains from those reforms, further integrating and sharpening our assistance.
As we mark the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations, the twentieth
anniversary of 9/11 and resolution 1373 (2001), and the fifteenth anniversary of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, the time could not be more right
for the Council and all Member States to reaffirm the imperative of multilateral
action against terrorism.
It is essential to reinvigorate international counter-terrorism cooperation
during and after the pandemic, with a focus on emerging threats and challenges. We
need an inclusive approach and a strategic investment in building resilience.
4/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

The United Nations, working through the Global Counter-Terrorism
Coordination Compact, stands ready to continue supporting Member States in those
efforts and looks forward to their guidance.

21-004825/129

S/2021/48

Annex 2
Briefing by the Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, Michèle Coninsx
It is an honour to address the Security Council at today’s event marking the
twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001). The adoption of
that resolution, in the wake of the terrorist attacks of 11 September 2001 against
the United States, was a seminal moment at which the Council and the international
community acknowledged the severity of the threat posed by transnational terrorism.
Over the subsequent two decades, the United Nations has been at the centre of
multilateral efforts to combat terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. We must
continue to remember and honour all victims and survivors of terrorism, promote
their rights and needs and provide them with avenues for healing through justice and
support in order to ensure that they obtain truth, justice and dignity.
In adopting resolution 1373 (2001), the Council also established the CounterTerrorism Committee to monitor, promote and facilitate States’ implementation of
its provisions. The Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED)
was established by the Council in its resolution 1535 (2004) as a special political
mission to assist the Committee in its work.
CTED’s mandate includes the following main elements: assessing the
implementation of counter-terrorism measures by Member States and recommending
ways to address identified implementation gaps, facilitating the delivery of technical
assistance and expertise to States as needed with a view to strengthening their
counter-terrorism capacities, analysing counter-terrorism trends and developments
at the national and global levels as well as promoting effective practices to address
new and emerging challenges.
CTED’s unique mandate is underpinned by a human-rights-compliant
and gender-sensitive framework. Within the framework of our ongoing dialogue
with Member States, we also work to enhance international cooperation in
countering terrorism.
Our numerous partners — including the United Nations Office of CounterTerrorism and other United Nations entities, international and regional organizations,
civil society and the private sector — inform our facilitation of technical assistance
delivery, as well as our understanding of trends and developments. Close engagement
with the member entities of our Global Research Network enables us to incorporate
the latest evidence-based research into our work and publications.
Since CTED’s establishment, its mandate has been further expanded and
developed by more than 20 additional Security Council resolutions. As we look back
over the past two decades, we see evidence of considerable evolution in the terrorist
threat. We have witnessed the dramatic rise of the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant — ISIL, also known as Da’esh — and its subsequent defeat as a territoryholding entity.
But we remain aware that ISIL’s destructive legacy will continue to pose
challenges as we continue to seek truth and justice for its victims and survivors and
address the situation of thousands of ISIL-associated foreign terrorist fighters and
their family members.
In recent years, ISIL affiliates have emerged, including in South Asia, SouthEast Asia, the Sahel, the Lake Chad basin and Southern and Eastern Africa.
The proliferation of extreme right-wing, or racially and ethnically motivated,
terrorism is also a cause of increasing concern. Countering the use of the Internet
6/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

and other virtual platforms by terrorist groups for recruitment, financing and
planning purposes will also remain a priority, as will continued efforts to counter
terrorism financing.
As emphasized in two recent CTED analytical reports, the coronavirus disease
pandemic has further complicated an already challenging threat landscape.
As we continue to address existing and emerging challenges, we must also
reflect on lessons learned and areas where we can further strengthen our responses.
Some States have introduced overly broad domestic counter-terrorism legislation,
leading to overreach by State authorities, human rights violations and suppression of
dissent. We must ensure that future counter-terrorism policies respect the rule of law
and are both human-rights-compliant and gender-sensitive.
States should also engage all sections of society — including religious,
community and women leaders, educators, youth and social workers — in their
development of counter-terrorism strategies that are comprehensive and integrated.
They must also ensure the effective implementation of their respective national plans
and seek to address underlying grievances, including by focusing on the inclusion of
vulnerable communities.
Despite the many challenges that it faces, the international community has
made significant progress in its efforts to counter and prevent terrorism. CTED
has gathered a considerable amount of information from Member States about their
implementation endeavours, including their progress, their strengths, shortfalls
and needs, their capacity to provide assistance to other States in need, and useful
experiences to be shared with other States.
The Council and the Committee have continued to promote multilateralism and
international cooperation as a means to strengthen national-level institutional capacity.
We must continue to pursue a comprehensive, coordinated, One United
Nations approach aimed at assisting States to develop and implement effective
counter-terrorism measures while also addressing conditions conducive to terrorism
and violent extremism.
CTED will continue to assist the Committee in its efforts to fulfil the mandates
set forth in the relevant Council resolutions and to work closely with States in their
implementation efforts, including by promoting the sharing of the best practices and
lessons learned over the 20 years since the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001).

21-004827/129

S/2021/48

Annex 3
Briefing by the Executive Director of the Neem Foundation,
Fatima Akilu
I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for your invitation to address this especially
important meeting on the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1373 (2001), which led
to the establishment of counter-terrorism infrastructure within the United Nations,
to give a civil-society perspective.
For the best part of the last decade, I have been involved in counter-terrorism
and countering violent extremism, first as part of Government and now as part
of civil society. That has given me perhaps a unique vantage point to survey the
landscape that we now find ourselves in.
In 2015, having set up a complementary soft approach to Nigeria’s counterterrorism infrastructure that included our first deradicalization programme and a
counter-radicalization programme focusing on peace studies, values and critical
thinking as well as setting up the first network, called Pave, between Nigeria’s
security sector and civil society, I left Government to join civil society.
In 2016, I set up the Neem Foundation, and we designed and implemented
several programmes. They included a comprehensive reintegration programme
for people coming out of Boko Haram, a trauma-based programme to address the
psychological impact of the insurgency, early-warning mechanisms to spot signs of
radicalization and a reintegration programme for defectors. In implementing this,
we realized that we would need a generational capacity in multiple fields to counter
terrorism, from psychology and research to criminal justice as well as peace studies.
However, to truly combat terrorism, we need both Member States and civil
society to come together in a spirit of cooperation. Working in Government, I was
acutely aware of the gaps that only robust civil-society partnerships could fill, and
similarly, as a member of civil society, each day I am more aware of the limitations
that I face.
While the United Nations recognizes the importance of partnership with civilsociety organizations and its impact on advancing mutual goals, that approach has
not always been applied consistently by Member States. When Member States and
civil society come together, we have the very best chance of combating terrorism in
the long term. I would like to briefly give four examples of such partnerships that I
am involved in.
The first is that my organization, along with multiple civil-society
organizations, is working with the Multinational Joint Task Force — a military
outfit supporting four countries — in the Lake Chad basin and the Lake Chad Basin
Commission with the political leadership to devise a strategic action plan with a
robust communications strategy to counter Boko Harm, on the premise that counterterrorism is a shared responsibility.
Secondly, the African Union and the Regional Stabilization, Recovery and
Resilience Strategy for Areas Affected by Boko Haram in the Lake Chad Basin
Region focuses on the screening, prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration of
terrorist suspects. A result of this greater harmonization with civil society is that
organizations such as mine now work with Governments in designated rehabilitation
and reintegration centres. My organization, Neem, has been doing psychological
testing and risk assessments on behalf of the military for their detainees.
Thirdly, the Lake Chad Basin Commission, in partnership with the United
Nations Development Programme, has set up the first regional civil-society platform,
8/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

to be led by the Neem Foundation, to work with all member States of the region in
order to come up collectively with comprehensive rehabilitation and reintegration
plans. Those plans will then be implemented with direct support from the member
States and provide an opportunity for joint learning and the documentation of
best practice.
Fourthly, women and girls have been disproportionately affected by insurgency
and conflict. They have been subjected to gender-based violence, both at the hands of
insurgents and within their communities, some at the hands of caregivers, including
security-service members, and a large number face reduced or lack of access to
reproductive health services. For a lot of those women, especially in rural or poor
urban communities, where there is often an absence of governance, the only services
they receive are from civil-society organizations. Governments can work with those
organizations to identify victims and ensure that their human rights are protected
and that access to services is expanded for them.
As a current member of civil society, I believe that we are a critical source of
expertise, capacity-building and local knowledge and could be a veritable bridge to
build trust between victims of terrorism and Governments’ counter-terrorism efforts.
We are in a unique position to advise Governments while providing an
evidence base for their policies, based on the research that we are able to carry out.
If invited, we can help build the capacity of States to prevent terrorism, especially in
the areas of negotiation, rehabilitation, reintegration, services for women and girls
and adherence to human rights norms.
In conclusion, we would like to see far greater involvement among the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate, Governments and civil society. Unless
we work together in a holistic, all-of-society approach, we will forever be unable to
fill the many gaps that exist in our counter-terrorism response.

21-004829/129

S/2021/48

Annex 4
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Migration and
Tunisians Abroad of Tunisia, Othman Jerandi
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, allow me to thank Vladimir Voronkov, Under-SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism, and Michèle
Coninsx, Assistant Secretary-General and Executive Director of Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED), for their valuable briefings to the
Security Council. I also thank Ms. Fatima Akilo, representative of civil society, for
her important statement.
We have chosen to hold this open meeting on international cooperation in
combating terrorism at the beginning of this year, which marks 20 years after the
establishment of the international counter-terrorism system following the Council’s
unanimous adoption of resolution 1373 (2001) and the establishment of the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC). It provides us with an opportunity to begin assessing
two decades of national and international efforts and activities and to draw, share and
build on lessons learned. That choice reflects the special attention that my country
attaches to this issue among its national, regional and international priorities, as
well as the central importance of the resolution, which marked a historic turning
point in international engagement with the phenomenon of terrorism. Tunisia, and
I personally, had the privilege of taking part in the drafting and adoption of that
resolution.
Our commemoration of that event takes on special significance when we
recall the considerable efforts made by Security Council members in 2001 to adopt
the resolution, which today has become the international reference for multilateral
efforts to combat all forms of terrorism. Our thanks goes to the Security Council
Committee created by the resolution, which was initially chaired by Sir Jeremy
Greenstock, then the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom, which has
made great efforts to explain the requirements of resolution 1373 (2001) and how it
should be complied with by the international community.
Resolution 1373 (2001) reflected the collective awareness by the international
community of the serious threat posed by terrorism to international peace and
security. It was the first building block of international efforts to counter terrorism
in its various forms and established the foundations of the United Nations counterterrorism system by creating the CTC, which, together with CTED, has actively
contributed over the past two decades to the ability of States to confront this complex
international criminal phenomenon and keep pace with its ever-changing forms.
In the years following its Freedom and Dignity Revolution, as part of its
commitment to improving its implementation of international conventions, Tunisia
has sought to harmonize its legislation with the international counter-terrorism
legal framework. In 2015, it enacted a new law that conforms to all the international
instruments and Security Council counter-terrorism resolutions, while respecting
human rights through strict procedural provisions and precise definitions of
terrorist crimes.
Tunisia received support from CTED to develop its initial vision for a national
strategy to combat terrorism and violent extremism, which it adopted in 2016. Tunisia
has also been keen to actively engage with various global and regional mechanisms and
alliances to combat this phenomenon, including security cooperation and exchange
of information and data, such as the global coalition to counter the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant, the mechanisms of the African Union, the Sahel-Sahara group
10/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

and the Trans-Saharan Counter-Terrorism Partnership, which aims to strengthen
regional capabilities and increase cooperation between among countries and North
Africa in combating this scourge.
Despite all those United Nations, international, regional and national efforts,
terrorism risks and threats persist around the world. Terrorist organizations
are even trying to exploit the political, social and economic repercussions of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic to step up their destructive activities,
spread their destructive ideology and attract more marginalized and vulnerable
groups, particularly through modern means of communication and social media
websites. To that end, resolution 2532 (2020), which was adopted unanimously by
the Security Council on 1 July 2020 following a Tunisian-French initiative, provides
that the general and immediate cessation of hostilities and the humanitarian pause
that it called for in the light of the COVID-19 pandemic should not apply to military
operations against terrorism.
Against that backdrop, we present to the Council the following ideas and
recommendations as a contribution from Tunisia to the international community’s
efforts to learn the lessons of the past and meet emerging challenges.
First, it is imperative that mobilization of financial and human resources at the
national and international levels to counter the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic not
cause a decline in the resources allocated to combating terrorism. On the contrary,
the latter must be upgraded to prevent terrorist groups from using the pandemic
to their advantage. We must keep counter-terrorism at the top of international and
national priorities despite the challenges posed by the pandemic.
Secondly, we must adopt a comprehensive approach based on strengthening
the preventive dimension and addressing the conditions and factors that fuel the
fires of violent extremism and terrorism. That includes accelerating the peaceful
settlement of conflicts, especially long-standing ones, and supporting a culture
of dialogue, tolerance and moderation. We must push sustainable development
forward, realize gender equality, eliminate corruption and all manifestations of
marginalization and exclusion and enshrine the rule of law and the protection and
promotion of human rights.
Thirdly, we must explicitly abandon politicized discourse and the practice
of linking terrorism and extremism to any religious, ethnic or national affiliation,
because that is devoid of truth and perpetuates grievances among certain segments
of humankind that provide terrorist ideology and terrorist groups with fertile ground
for growth and polarization.
Fourthly, we must admit that Governments by themselves do not have the
capacity to respond to terrorist rhetoric and movements on the Internet and social
media. They need effective and practical partnerships with the private sector and
civil society organizations nationally, regionally and internationally.
Fifthly, the fight against terrorism must be made into a major national issue
that mobilizes all the energies of society in support the efforts of Government
agencies while maintaining full respect for human rights, so that the struggle against
terrorist movements will appear as what it really is, a conflict between the terrorists
and society as a whole.
Sixthly, we must help Governments to respond to the basic needs of their
citizens and provide the requirements of a decent life so as to deprive terrorist and
extremist groups of opportunities for polarization.
In conclusion, allow me to reiterate that Tunisia is determined to continue
to work within the framework of its membership in the Security Council and its
21-0048211/129

S/2021/48

chairmanship of CTC to further strengthen cooperation between CTED, UNOCT
and the other relevant United Nations agencies, particularly through the events
coming up this year, including the review of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy and the renewal of the CTED mandate. We will also continue
to actively engage with all frameworks for joint action, both bilaterally and within
CTC, to further support and strengthen international efforts to confront terrorism
and violent extremism.

12/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

Annex 5
Statement by the Minister for External Affairs of the Republic of
India, Subrahmanyam Jaishankar
At the outset, I would like to thank His Excellency the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Tunisia, Mr. Othman Jerandi, for inviting me to address today’s Security
Council meeting. Let me congratulate the Tunisian delegation for organizing this
important meeting on the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1373 (2001) — a
landmark resolution in the global fight against terrorism. We recognize Tunisia’s
contribution, as the Chair of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, in steering the
Security Council discourse on this critical issue. I would also like to thank Mr.
Vladimir Voronkov, Under-Secretary-General, United Nations Counter-Terrorism
Office; Ms. Michèle Coninsx, Executive Director, Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate; and Ms. Fatima Akilu, Executive Director of the Neem Foundation, for
their briefings.
Resolution 1373 (2001), adopted in the wake of the 11 September terrorist
attacks, reminds us that terrorism continues to be the gravest threat to humankind.
It not only grievously impacts human life but also uproots the very foundation of
humankind. By adopting that resolution, the Council conveyed its unequivocal
determination to address the menace of terrorism.
India has always been at the forefront of global counter-terrorism efforts. In
1996, long before the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001), India took the initiative
to pilot the draft Comprehensive Convention on International Terrorism with the
objective of providing a comprehensive legal framework for combating terrorism. We
have signed and ratified all the major conventions and protocols on terrorism adopted
by the United Nations and are part of all major global initiatives in that regard.
Resolution 1373 (2001) and the Counter-Terrorism Committee are important
pillars of the global architecture against terrorism. Other United Nations mechanisms,
including the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, also play an
important part in augmenting the capabilities of Member States and extending
technical and capacity-building assistance. The United Nations sanctions regime has
also been an effective tool in the fight against terrorism.
In recent years, terrorist groups and lone-wolf attackers have significantly
enhanced their capabilities by gaining access to new and emerging technologies,
including drones, virtual currencies and encrypted communications. Social media
networks have contributed to the radicalization and recruitment of young people. The
coronavirus disease pandemic has only further aggravated the situation. The relative
isolation and extended disruption due to the lockdowns and the associated distress
and economic uncertainty have made the world more susceptible to radicalizing
narratives and extremist propaganda.
Preventing terrorists from accessing financial resources is crucial to
successfully countering the threat of terrorism. Over the years, terrorist groups have
developed a diversified funding portfolio through a range of criminal activities,
including extortion, kidnapping, money-laundering, drug smuggling and trafficking
in natural resources, humans and antiquities. Terrorist organizations have also
begun to exploit the anonymity afforded by block chain technology for fundraising
and finances.
Some States lack the legal and operational frameworks and technical expertise
needed to detect, investigate and prosecute terrorist financing cases. However, there
are also other States that are clearly guilty of aiding and supporting terrorism and
wilfully providing financial assistance and safe havens. While we must enhance the
21-0048213/129

S/2021/48

capacities of the former, the international community must collectively call out the
latter and hold them accountable.
For the United Nations system to credibly address the menace of terrorism
and ensure effective action, I would like to propose eight points that could in a way
be an action plan.
First, we must all summon the political will to combat terrorism. There must
be no ifs or buts in that fight, and neither should we allow terrorism to be justified
and terrorists glorified. All Member States must fulfil their obligations as enshrined
in international counter-terrorism instruments and conventions.
Second, we must not countenance double standards in this battle. Terrorists
are terrorists; there are no good and bad ones. Those who propagate that distinction
have an agenda, and those who cover up for them are just as culpable.
Third, we must reform accordingly the working methods of the committees
dealing with sanctions and counter-terrorism. Transparency, accountability and
effectiveness are the need of the day. The practice of placing blocks and holds
on listing requests without any rhyme or reason must end. That only erodes our
collective credibility.
Fourth, we must firmly discourage exclusivist thinking that divides the
world and harms our social fabric. Such approaches facilitate radicalization and
recruitment by breeding fear, mistrust and hatred among different communities. The
Council should be on guard against new terminologies and false priorities that can
diffuse our focus.
Fifth, listing and delisting individuals and entities under United Nations
sanctions regimes must be done objectively, not for political or religious
considerations. Proposals in that regard merit due examination before circulation.
Sixth, the linkages between terrorism and transnational organized crime
must be fully recognized and addressed vigorously. We in India have seen the
crime syndicate responsible for the 1993 Mumbai bomb blasts not just given State
protection but also enjoying five-star hospitality.
Seventh, combating terrorist financing will be only as effective as the weakest
jurisdiction. The Financial Action Task Force (FATF) should continue to identify
and remedy weaknesses in anti-money-laundering and counter-terrorism financing
frameworks. Enhanced United Nations coordination with the FATF can make a
big difference.
Eighth, adequate funding for United Nations counter-terrorism bodies from
the United Nations regular budget requires immediate attention. The forthcoming
seventh review of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy offers an
important occasion to strengthen measures to prevent and combat terrorism and
build the capacities of Member States.
I sincerely hope that those eight suggestions merit serious consideration by
the Council. While India has been itself battling terrorism for many decades with
great resolve, those proposals have been framed with the interests of the entire
international community in mind. It is time that all nations walk the talk and commit
their actions to the goal of zero tolerance for terrorism.

14/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

Annex 6
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Defence of
Ireland, Simon Coveney
I would like to thank Minister Jerandi and the Tunisian presidency for
convening this debate. My thanks also to Under-Secretary-General Voronkov and
Executive Director Coninsx for their briefings today, and also, of course, to Fatima
Akilu of the Neem Foundation.
This is my first time addressing the Security Council since Ireland assumed
its seat on 1 January. We take the responsibility entrusted to us very seriously. We
want to be a constructive and thoughtful partner at the Security Council for the next
two years. I look forward to working closely with you, Mr. President, and with fellow
Council members over the coming two years to support the Council in fulfilling our
shared goal of promoting international peace and security.
Ireland aligns itself with the statement submitted on behalf of the European
Union (annex 36).
Ireland also supports presidential statement S/PRST/2021/1, adopted today.
Terrorism remains one of the gravest threats to international peace and
security. The Counter-Terrorism Committee was established two decades ago. Ireland
was a Security Council member at that time, as was your country, Mr. President.
The weeks following the 11 September terrorist attacks, as we worked on resolution
1373 (2001), were momentous ones. Our work on that resolution and establishing the
Committee has certainly paid dividends in countering terrorism in the intervening
two decades.
Today the United Nations counter-terrorism framework is wide and deep
and encompasses resolutions on issues ranging from addressing the financing of
terrorism to foreign terrorist fighters, with the Counter-Terrorism Committee at its
core. But we have seen too many terrorist attacks in the years since the Committee
began its valuable work. Civilians are most often the victims of such attacks.
Today I want to express our deep sympathy and support for all victims of
terrorism. I want to emphasize that this includes the victims of sexual and genderbased violence committed by terrorist groups. As a Council member, we will work
so that the Council brings a new momentum to supporting the victims of terrorism
and, of course, holding perpetrators to account.
In resolving together to combat terrorism, we must use every opportunity to
deliver on our commitment to international peace and security, a key priority for
Ireland’s Security Council term. From our own lived experience of conflict on the
island of Ireland, we know that building peace is not easy, an neither is it quick —
but it is possible. The United Nations has a critical role to play.
We must also work together to provide a stronger framework for multilateral
cooperation and a forum for dialogue, support and engagement. Regional and
international cooperation remains vital.
Strengthening prevention is also a core priority for Ireland.
We know that poverty and discrimination both contribute to terrorism, and
indeed that they are exacerbated by terrorism.
The United Nations is uniquely placed to bring coherent approaches to issues
including poverty, inequality and climate change, as well as to work in support of
effective governance, including through capacity-building. Those tasks are key to
countering terrorism, as well as many others.
21-0048215/129

S/2021/48

The current pandemic has demonstrated how terrorists adapt to finding new
audiences and opportunities online to spread hate, radicalize and recruit new members
and, of course, raise funds. We welcome the Counter-Terrorism Committee’s efforts
to assess the impact of the pandemic, including in areas where the terrorist threat has
increased as a result of it. We urge the Committee to complete its work with urgency
and to support affected States in identifying and tackling terrorism.
Addressing the evolving threat from politically motivated violent extremism
and terrorism, especially the growing number of far-right attacks, is part of our
responsibility too.
In adapting to deal with new threats, we must not lose sight of our core values
and principles. Ireland has consistently argued that measures to combat terrorism
must comply with international law, including international human rights law,
international humanitarian law and international refugee law. I say that because we
know any other response will be ineffective, and indeed at times counterproductive.
Put simply, violations of human rights can contribute to radicalization and the growth
of terrorism itself.
Today I want to emphasize that I see the engagement of women and young
people as fundamental to combating terrorism. The full, equal and meaningful
participation of women in the creation and development of policy is critical to
building resilience and countering terrorism. We will champion work within the
Council on women and peace and security.
It is also vital that we engage civil society and other stakeholders in order to
prevent and counter violent extremism and terrorism. I am aware of the best practices
that are being followed by Tunisia in that regard, and I welcome the contribution of
Ms. Fatima Akilu at this meeting.
The sustained engagement of the Counter-Terrorism Committee with civil
society and other key stakeholders is essential to the success of our common mission
to tackle terrorism. Ensuring that counter-terrorism measures, including sanctions,
do not have an unintended or negative impact on those who most need our support
will remain a guiding objective for my country during our tenure. We will apply
that particularly to the critical work of humanitarian and civil society actors. We
support the United Nations Office of the Ombudsperson in promoting transparency
to sanctions regimes.
I thank you, Mr. President, for shining a light on this critical issue. We stand
by your side. I salute what has been achieved by the Counter-Terrorism Committee
over the past two decades, but leave Member States with the thought that, as the
threats posed by terrorism continue to evolve, so do fear and mistrust. All of that
is deeply damaging to our aspiration for global peace. It divides and weakens our
societies. Guided by our core principles and values, let us resolve today that we will
all start 2021 looking forward and working closely and collaboratively on the Council
and across the United Nations to counter the threat of terrorism and, importantly, to
address the factors that are fuelling that scourge.

16/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

Annex 7
Statement by the Cabinet Secretary for Foreign Affairs of Kenya,
Rachelle Omamo
The Kenya delegation thanks the delegation of Tunisia for the invitation and
for convening this important debate. As I address the Security Council for the first
time, I commend Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, Ms. Michèle Coninsx and Ms. Fatima
Akilu for their informative briefings.
Terrorism, in all its forms, remains a leading challenge to the global order and
human security on every continent. Kenya stands in solidarity with all countries,
communities and families that have been attacked by terrorists.
This meeting comes at a time when the jihadist terrorist threat in Africa is
acute. The Islamic State in Iraq and the Shams (ISIS) is regrouping and seeking safe
havens in Africa’s conflict zones. In addition, Al-Qaida has dedicated affiliates and
an extensive transnational network in Africa. The recent horrific attack in the Niger
illustrates that.
The existential threat of terrorism in Africa is rapidly evolving. Terrorism
exacerbates State fragility and increases the vulnerability of communities, since
terrorism conflates with other pervasive challenges, such as poverty, climate change,
youth unemployment, forced migration and arms trafficking, as well as growing
cybercrime and transnational organized crime. That toxic cocktail of insecurity not
only threatens global peace and stability but also can potentially reverse the hardwon development gains made on the continent, to the detriment of our people.
In Somalia, Al-Shabaab, a declared and compliant affiliate of Al-Qaida,
remains a grave threat not only within that country and the Horn of Africa region
but also beyond the African continent. For instance, this past 16 December, a New
York court indicted an Al-Shabaab operative for conspiring to conduct an egregious
attack in the United States. That indictment is a potent reminder to States that
Al-Qaida affiliates remain a threat to global peace and security. They should be
met with the full force of resolution 1373 (2001) and associated instruments, such as
resolution 1267 (1999).
The surge in terrorism this past decade is testament to what happens when
we, as members of the Security Council, underestimate the ambitions of terrorists.
That is why Kenya supports the full utilization of sanctions against Al-Qaida and
its affiliates wherever they are found. As a front-line State in the global war against
terrorist groups, Kenya is taking decisive action. Last September, the Government
froze the assets of nine individuals associated with financing Al-Shabaab operations.
That was our most recent effort towards the implementation of every measure
called for in resolution 1373 (2001). We continue to strengthen our compliance with
resolution 1373 (2001) by including its operative elements in our national counterterrorism strategy.
Kenya believes that the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) is a minimum
requirement to be a member of the international community in good standing. We
urge all States, particularly those where Al-Qaida, ISIS affiliates or splinter groups
are based in their territories, to prioritize implementing resolution 1373 (2001). We
also urge the Counter-Terrorism Committee to take stringent action to ensure that
countries that have terrorist groups operating out of their territories are in compliance
with resolution 1373 (2001).
These measures should include the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate and the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism (UNOCT) closely
monitoring progress and assisting in capacity-building. With regard to the latter
21-0048217/129

S/2021/48

aim, Kenya commends UNOCT for establishing a programme in Nairobi to serve
as a regional hub to enhance counter-terrorism and terrorism prevention through
capacity-building, as well as enhanced intelligence- and information-sharing.
In conclusion, I urge all of us to honestly acknowledge that the global consensus
against terrorism is not as strong today as it was at the time of the adoption of
resolution 1373 (2001) and that this places Africa at great risk. Counter-terrorism
is increasingly held hostage to geopolitics, even as citizens in many countries are
subjected to brutal attacks. The terrorists, particularly those affiliated with Al-Qaida
or ISIS, seem to be encouraged by our flagging unity.
Let us use this anniversary to close ranks for the sake of our citizens, our
economies and global peace and security. We can start by taking tough united
measures against terrorist groups that reflect the spirit and letter of resolution 1373
(2001). We should intensify capacity-building worldwide, particularly in front-line
States in Africa.
We should aggressively tackle the kinetic threat of terrorist groups, while
also ensuring that they do not permeate and dislocate the social fabric of our
societies through the radicalization and recruitment of a new generation of militants,
particularly through the exploitation of the opportunities availed by technology and
the Internet. Indeed, the challenge of cyber-driven radicalization should be a matter
of grave concern to the Counter-Terrorism Committee.
I end by reaffirming Kenya’s resolve to do its utmost, in concert with the other
members of the Security Council, to combat the threat of terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations.

18/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

Annex 8
Statement by the Minister of Defence of Estonia, Jüri Luik
Estonia commends Under-Secretary-General Voronkov, Executive Director
Coninsx and Ms. Fatima Akilu for their briefings and their outstanding work.
Let me thank Tunisia for having organized today´s debate, which
commemorates the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001)
and the establishment of the Counter-Terrorism Committee. We welcome the
discussion, as our efforts in the field of preventing and countering terrorism need to
be further consolidated.
In the light of the constantly evolving nature of the threat, we must continue
to work together to adjust the tools required to overcome the phenomenon, whether
in responding to the misuse of the Internet for terrorist purposes, strengthening the
countering of terrorist financing or working together to overcome the challenges
posed by foreign terrorist fighters.
Estonia acknowledges the central role of the United Nations in leading global
efforts to prevent and counter terrorism by setting standards through relevant Security
Council resolutions and monitoring Member States’ implementation thereof.
We commend the work of the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism,
the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001),
concerning counter-terrorism, also known as the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
and the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) and encourage
stronger coordination in building expertise, identifying needs on the ground and
assisting Member States.
Furthermore, it is important that all United Nations agencies continue to build
their efforts for greater engagement with different civil society groups and actors —
young people, women, the private sector, community and religious leaders, humanrights defenders and victims of terrorism — so as to be successful in designing
counter-terrorism policies and tools.
Estonia appreciates the increasing cooperation between the United Nation and
the European Union, Europol and Eurojust. The European Union (EU) is one of the
major contributors to the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism. I would like
to underline the United Nations-EU counter-terrorism partnership in the Sudan and
joint projects aimed at preventing acts of nuclear terrorism and expanding dialogue
with CTED.
Estonia condemns terrorism and violent radicalization in all their forms and
manifestations. Terrorism is a global threat, and for years Estonia has therefore
actively contributed to tackling it through international forums and is committed to
continuing to do so in future.
We face new and complex security challenges, including cyberthreats and
hybrid threats and capabilities such as drones, which increase the real threat from
terrorists to the well-being of civilian populations and our men and women in
operations and missions across the world.
My country is convinced that the fight against terrorism can be successful
only if we focus on the following principles.
First, States must ensure that all counter-terrorism measures comply with
their obligations under international law, in particular international human rights
law, international refugee law and international humanitarian law. Ignoring
those principles can undermine counter-terrorism activities and lead to increased
21-0048219/129

S/2021/48

radicalization fuelled by violence and a sense of impunity. Therefore, we also
condemn all attempts to misuse the counter-terrorism agenda as a pretext for human
rights violations.
Secondly, we need a comprehensive approach to address the root causes of
terrorism and radicalization. Improving the socioeconomic situation and ensuring
access to public services, in particular in the field of education and health care,
reduces the space for violent extremist groups to act. That is more important than
ever as we face the economic decline caused by the coronavirus disease.
Estonia contributes to addressing the causes of instability, in particular to
reducing poverty and the marginalization of certain groups and to promoting gender
equality — for example, by supporting Syrian refugees in Lebanon, Jordan and
Turkey by increasing their information-technology and entrepreneurship skills and
offering psychological support.
Thirdly, to tackle terrorism, we have to be able to disrupt the immediate threat
of direct attacks, break up terrorist networks and stay technologically ahead of their
capabilities. Estonia continues to contribute to many multilateral counter-terrorism
operations in different regions of the world. Our troops are in Mali, Afghanistan and
the Middle East, where the terrorist threat is the highest in the world.
Fourthly, the question of accountability and denying impunity to the
perpetrators of crimes against civilians is an essential part of preventing and
countering terrorism. It is also a vital part of a comprehensive approach to restoring
trust and creating the conditions for a sustainable peace.
Respecting human rights, promoting inclusion and comprehensive action
and fighting impunity are all key factors in making societies more cohesive and
preventing the success of ideologies that preach violence. As we look ahead to the
next 20 years, we should turn our collective efforts towards those principles instead
of only dealing with the consequences.
Finally, let us honour the women and men in the field who stand on the front
lines of fighting terrorism, sometimes even at the cost of their lives — members of
the armed forces, law enforcement, social and humanitarian workers and community
and religious leaders. Their dedication makes a difference.

20/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

Annex 9
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Norway to the United Nations
I would like to thank His Excellency Minister Othman Jerandi for convening
this important meeting and including a civil society briefer — that perspective and
experience provides a valuable contribution to our work. I would also like to thank
Assistant Secretary-General Michèle Coninsx, Under-Secretary-General Vladimir
Voronkov and Ms. Fatima Akilu for their insightful interventions.
When Norway last sat on the Security Council, 20 years ago, we took part
in the establishment of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001), concerning counter-terrorism, also known as the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC), through the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001). We are
proud to continue that work today.
We commend the CTC for its efforts since its establishment. Together with
the Committee’s Executive Directorate (CTED), the CTC has made a significant
contribution to global efforts against international terrorism. Many lessons have
been learned since the establishment of the CTC, but we would like to take this
opportunity to express our support for three suggested further steps that could be
taken to strengthen our work going forward.
First, while the implementation of measures under Security Council resolutions
have been effective, CTED country assessments have shown that several countries
are still in need of technical and infrastructural support in order to fully comply.
Greater efforts and better coordination are needed to ensure that support is provided.
Secondly, the Committee must work and coordinate closely with the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism as well as the subsidiary bodies of the Council,
especially the Security Council Committees pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999),
1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and entities,
and to resolution 1540 (2004). That is essential for the implementation of a One
United Nations approach.
Thirdly, the whole counter-terrorism architecture must ensure that each part
includes and coordinates with all others, including on all cross-cutting issues.
Taking a broader perspective on today’s topic, there can be no doubt that
violent extremism and terrorism pose a threat to global peace and security. We,
too, feel that threat. Like too many other countries, Norway has also experienced
terrorist attacks. This year marks 10 years since the 22 July attacks, when a rightwing extremist took the lives of 77 people in Norway, most of them young people, and
in 2019 a young man attacked a mosque, seeking to frighten and kill Muslims. Those
experiences had a significant impact on Norway as a nation. Still, it is difficult for
us to comprehend what it must be like for countries and societies that face terrorism
on a regular basis. There can be no greater driving force than for us to combat that
threat together.
Norway advances a counter-terrorism policy focusing on prevention and a
whole-of-society approach. Women, young people, civil society, local communities
and Governments all play important roles in preventing terrorism.
In order to fight the root causes of terrorism globally, it is essential to combat
poverty and marginalization, as well as to support critical thinking and education.
Evidence also shows that empowered women help create peaceful and stable
communities, which in turn lead to better prevention of violent extremism.
21-0048221/129

S/2021/48

We cannot overemphasize the importance of a human rights-based approach.
All aspects of States’ national security practices must comply with international
law and uphold human rights, even when dealing with the most serious crimes.
We are deeply concerned about the increasing global misuse of counter-terrorism
measures to silence human rights defenders, political opponents and religious or
ethnic minorities.
Neither must counter-terrorism measures prevent legitimate and principled
humanitarian action. There is no contradiction between effective counter-terrorism
efforts and a humanitarian response.
In the fight against terrorism, we must consider potential future trends.
CTED trend reports and country assessments are essential in that regard. A recent
policy brief by the United Nations Development Programme also included scenarios
in which the impacts of climate change had aggravated the root causes of violent
extremism. We need to be aware of what could happen in future and focus not only
on preparedness but also on prevention.
In the Sahel, we have seen growing linkages between terrorism, organized
crime and intercommunal violence. Terror groups exploit interethnic tensions and
the absence of the State in some areas to advance their agendas.
Looking at other trends, we see that conspiracy theories and extremist ideas
continue to be easily shared online. We have seen how the Internet can accelerate
radicalization, and we know that extremists are also exploiting the coronavirus
disease pandemic to expand those activities and networks. We note with concern the
continued references to the 2011 terrorist attack in Norway in online forums. Sadly,
it has also been a motivation for terrorist actors in other countries, including the
attack in Christchurch, New Zealand.
In addition, terrorist networks continue to depend on external financing to
run their organizations. Such financing must be cut off. We must disrupt the links
between organized crime and terrorism. Norway supports the work of the Financial
Action Task Force to prevent the misuse of virtual assets for money-laundering and
terrorist financing.
By tackling those issues and others outlined by colleagues today, we will
continue to see progress in global efforts against terrorism. In that regard and in
conclusion, Norway emphasizes our firm view that, in order to successfully combat
terrorism in all its manifestations, we also need to take a preventive, integrated
approach to counter-terrorism.

22/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

Annex 10
Statement by the Minister of State in the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs and Foreign Trade of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Keisal Peters
I thank you, Mr. President, for convening today’s ministerial open debate on
the important issue of countering terrorism and violent extremism. I would also
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Vladimir Voronkov of the United Nations
Office for Counter-Terrorism, Executive Director Michèle Coninsx of the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) and Executive Director Fatima
Akilu of the Neem Foundation for their invaluable and informative briefings.
Two decades ago, the Security Council’s adoption of resolution 1373 (2001)
directed all States to take a range of measures against terrorism. Today terrorism and
violent extremism — in all their forms and manifestations — continue to threaten
international peace and security. The recent attacks carried out on 2 January 2021
that claimed over 100 lives in the Niger serve as a painful reminder of the devastating
impact of terrorism.
Today I will focus my remarks on the approach needed to combat violent
extremism and terrorism, the importance of our responsible cooperation as Member
States to that end and the crucial role of existing counter-terrorism frameworks.
First, to successfully mitigate the threat of terrorism, we must look far beyond
the domain of military strategy. While offensive operations can be required at times
to protect civilian populations, long-term developmental solutions that enhance the
capacities of States to address poverty, social inequality, political exclusion and
radicalization provide the surest pathway to promote stability and counter terrorism.
As we highlighted at last week’s open debate on the challenges of maintaining
peace and security in fragile contexts (see S/2021/24), greater efforts are needed
to address the root causes of fragility, which leave States and their populations
vulnerable to a range of security threats, including terrorism.
All States have a duty to take sensible actions to combat terrorism and violent
extremism. Irresponsible arms sales, persistent conflicts fuelled by geopolitical
rivalries and other counterproductive actions should be avoided by all Member
States. Selective condemnation of terrorist acts, depending on which side of the
border they are committed on or by whom, only undermines our collective efforts to
address that scourge.
In addition, we must all ensure that any measures taken to combat terrorism
comply with obligations under international law, in particular international human
rights law, international refugee law and international humanitarian law. Further
initiatives to combat the financing of terrorism must be designed to bolster rather
than undermine legitimate socioeconomic activity.
As countries today work to counter terrorism, the coronavirus disease
pandemic presents additional challenges. In that context, we welcome the measures
adopted by the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001), concerning counter-terrorism, also known as the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, to continue the implementation of its mandates.
Equally, strong coordination and collaboration among the Committee, CTED
and the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism must continue, and we encourage
the Committee to enhance collaboration, information-sharing and coordination with
Member States.
21-0048223/129

S/2021/48

Indeed, international, regional and subregional cooperation remain vital for
combating terrorism and bringing terrorists to justice. The United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy is a useful tool to further such cooperation among States.
Building capacity and enabling technical cooperation among all countries to counter
the terrorist threat must be a top priority of the international community.
In conclusion, I would like to welcome the adoption of presidential statement
S/PRST/2021/1 as an outcome of our deliberations today. Not only does it provide an
important basis for reinforcing the Council’s engagement in countering terrorism,
but it also builds on the Council’s consistent, unequivocal and strong condemnation
of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
joins all other responsible States in condemning that scourge, and we reaffirm our
commitment to the fight against terrorism and violent extremism.

24/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

Annex 11
Statement by the Minister of State for the Middle East and North
Africa of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, James Cleverly
I would like to thank the Tunisian presidency for hosting this important debate
today, as well as Under-Secretary-General Voronkov, Executive Director Coninsx
and Ms. Akilu for their informative and important briefings.
It has been 20 years since the Security Council established the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC) with the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001). Our work
has strengthened the cooperation we need to protect all our citizens and counter
the scourge of terrorism. Subsequent Security Council resolutions have built an
effective toolkit for guidance and measures for States to respond to the evolving
threat. They now cover everything from international legal cooperation to counterterrorist financing, from specific challenges like aviation security to broad issues
like human rights, gender and civil society.
With the support of the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate, the CTC
has helped assess States’ implementation of the resolutions and identified emerging
challenges, examples of best practices and opportunities for technical assistance.
Of course, the Council and the CTC have not been acting alone. In 2014, the Global
Coalition against Da’esh brought together 83 partners, including the United Kingdom,
to combat Da’esh and liberate 8 million people from its control. Such organizations
as the Global Countererrorism Forum, of which the United Kingdom is a founding
member, have bolstered international cooperation. Other parts of the United Nations
system, most importantly the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism, have also
played an important role.
Through this work, and through the leadership of the Security Council, we
have built a shared understanding of the terrorism threat and developed the tools to
counter it. As a result of our collective efforts, Al-Qaida has been degraded. Da’esh
was defeated on the battlefields of Iraq and Syria.
But sadly, the threat has evolved and remains with us. Terrorist groups,
including Al-Qaida and Da’esh affiliates, continue to operate around the world.
Terrorist narratives continue to radicalize individuals in diffuse and unpredictable
ways. New threats from extremist right-wing groups have increased.
The work of the Council and of the CTC remains vital. Looking forward, I
want to stress four key priorities.
First, the Council should continue to learn and adapt to the latest threats
and emerging trends. I mentioned extremist right-wing groups. Terrorist misuse
of social media and other new technologies needs greater attention. We also need
to tune in to how longer-term effects of coronavirus disease might influence the
terrorism dynamic.
Secondly, the Council should reaffirm the obligation of States under
international law to protect and promote human rights while countering terrorism.
The threats posed by terrorism sometimes require States to take extraordinary
measures. However, counter-terrorism is too often used to justify egregious
human rights violations and oppression. States must act within the boundaries of
international law. Otherwise, we undermine the very rights and freedoms that the
United Nations was established to promote.
While it is not the only instance around the world, a case in point is the
situation in Xinjiang, where the Uighur and other ethnic-minority communities
21-0048225/129

S/2021/48

face severe and disproportionate measures, with up to 1.8 million people having
been detained without trial. These well-documented measures are inconsistent with
China’s obligations under international human rights law, including the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination. They run
counter to the Security Council’s long-standing requirement that counter-terrorism
measures comply with States’ obligations under international law, including
international human rights law.
Thirdly, the Council should reaffirm the importance of inclusion and
partnerships. Effective counter-terrorism requires more than the cooperation of
Governments; it requires whole societies. That means promoting the leadership
of women, young people and minorities, building effective partnerships with the
private sector and religious leaders and ensuring that we listen to all the voices of
our peoples.
Fourthly, the Council should push for coherence within the United Nations
system. We welcome the existing close cooperation between the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate and the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism, as well
as the Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee Monitoring Team and other United Nations
agencies. It is vital that this continues, especially in the area of capacity-building, so
that resources are deployed effectively and to places they can have the greatest impact.
As the terrorist threat endures and evolves, so too must our resolve to fight
it remain firm. The Security Council’s counter-terrorism architecture has been an
integral part of that fight over the last 20 years, and the United Kingdom will work
to ensure it remains relevant, efficient and effective in the years ahead.

26/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

Annex 12
Statement by the Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Zhang Jun
China thanks Tunisia for the initiative of holding this open debate and is
pleased to see Foreign Minister Othman Jerandi presiding over today’s meeting.
The many valuable insights offered by Under-Secretary-General Voronkov
and Executive Director Coninsx in their briefings are worthy of our special attention.
I express my appreciation for them.
The 11 September terrorist attacks that took place in this city 20 years
ago shocked the world and turned a new page in international counter-terrorism
cooperation. In the aftermath of the attacks, the Security Council took swift action
to adopt resolution 1373 (2001) and mandated the establishment of the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC), putting on full display the joint will and determination
of the international community to fight terrorism.
For 20 years now, the CTC, with the assistance of Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED), has scrupulously played its role in
monitoring the implementation of relevant Council resolutions on counter-terrorism,
including resolutions 1373 (2001), 1624 (2005), 2396 (2017), 2462 (2019) and 2482
(2019), and all the while has coordinated technical assistance for Member States.
Since its inception, the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism (UNOCT), under
the stewardship of Under-Secretary-General Voronkov, has worked effectively in
support of national counter-terrorism capacity-building and the implementation of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, gaining broad acknowledgment
among Member States. Member States, in turn, have made a series of efforts to
implement resolution 1373 (2001) and carried out practical cooperation in such areas
as legislation, law enforcement, finance, border control and international judicial
cooperation, and achieved positive progress along the way.
However, at the same time, one must not lose sight of the fact that the
international counter-terrorism landscape remains grim and complex. Last year,
several serious terrorist attacks took place, including in Europe. At the start of
2021, terrorists unleashed fresh attacks in the Niger and Pakistan. China strongly
condemns those heinous acts and expresses its deepest sympathy to the families of
the victims and to the Governments and the people of the affected countries.
Facts show that terrorism remains a real threat to the international community
in its entirety. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has accentuated
economic and social challenges that may worsen the vicious cycle of uncertainty,
instability and violence and lead to a resurgence of international terrorism. In the
light of this, the international community must remain highly vigilant, foster a sense
of community with a shared future for humankind and take a holistic approach to
jointly fighting terrorism in all its forms. China wishes to emphasize the following.
First, we must deepen consensus and consolidate the broadest united front
to fight terrorism. Terrorism is the common enemy of humankind, and fighting
terrorism is the shared responsibility of the international community. Unity is
our most powerful weapon in defeating terrorism, which is demonstrated by the
implementation that has taken place of resolution 1373 (2001) since its adoption
20 years ago. Under the leadership of the United Nations, we must work to build
consensus and send a unified message to terrorists through our coordinated actions.
It is important for the CTC, CTED and the UNOCT to work in concert to promote
and consolidate the legal framework at international, regional and national levels.
21-0048227/129

S/2021/48

At the same time, they should step up their efforts and enhance intelligencesharing and judicial cooperation. China is in favour of concluding negotiations at
the earliest date possible on the draft comprehensive convention on international
terrorism and hopes that the relevant outstanding issues will be properly resolved so
as to further enhance the international counter-terrorism legal framework.
At present, terrorism in parts of Africa is on the rise. The international
community must increase its input to help the African countries concerned with
their counter-terrorism capacity-building and, through concrete actions, support the
efforts of African countries to join forces in fighting terrorism and seeking peace
and security.
Secondly, we must abide by a unified standard and reject selectivity in
counter-terrorism. There are no good or bad terrorists. Any terrorist act, wherever,
whenever, by whomever committed for whatever reason, must be condemned and
cracked down upon by us all. There must not be double standards, and neither should
there be selectivity in counter-terrorism.
For the Security Council-designated terrorist organizations and individuals,
all countries are duty-bound to implement Council resolutions and strictly enforce
the relevant sanctions. However, it is a matter of concern that a certain Council
member, practising unilateralism and bullying, has politicized and instrumentalized
counter-terrorism in an attempt to whitewash the scourge. Its action has seriously
hampered international cooperation in counter-terrorism and is the main obstacle
to the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). Seeking geopolitical advantage
by leveraging terrorist networks not only constitutes a betrayal of all victims of
terrorism but it will also lead to a situation of self-harm where one lifts a stone only
to drop it on one’s own foot.
Thirdly, our efforts must be better focused to respond effectively to new
terrorist trends. In response to new and evolving terrorist challenges, we need new
and flexible tools that produce results. We must give special attention to the economic
and social fallout of COVID-19 and guard against and prevent terrorists from
taking advantage of pandemic-induced opportunities and disruptions to incite and
preach terrorism. The spread of COVID-19 also serves as a reminder that biological
terrorism will bring disastrous consequences starkly belied by its low cost.
The Internet is a major counter-terrorism battlefield. Terrorist groups have
used the Internet to spread extremist ideology, instigate terrorist activities, recruit
personnel and engage in financing. All those illegal activities continue unabated
even as we speak. The international community should step up cooperation and
make sure that the Internet does not become a free haven for terrorists.
The issue of foreign terrorist fighters in detention in Syria and Iraq must not
be left in limbo indefinitely. The Council needs to decide on how to approach it
politically and formulate without delay a legal framework to resolve this issue.
Fourthly, we must make greater efforts in prevention to eliminate the root
causes of terrorism. It is necessary to take a holistic approach with a combination
of political, economic, legal and social measures to eradicate the breeding ground
for terrorism and extremism. We must uphold the principles of equality, respect and
tolerance, promote dialogue among different civilizations and reject the narrative of
the so-called clash of civilizations.
Promoting economic and social development and poverty reduction are of
critical importance in fighting terrorism. There must be a greater sense of urgency
in addressing development issues, especially as they relate to youth, education and
employment. We call upon countries to enhance experience-sharing and adopt
28/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

preventive counter-terrorism and deradicalization measures, such as vocational
training and community-based correctional programmes, in order to help fragile
countries to strengthen their counter-terrorism capacity-building.
Before concluding my statement, I want to respond to the comment made by
the representative of the United Kingdom, who, deviating from the theme of today’s
debate, launched groundless attacks against China that we firmly reject and wish to
refute. As a victim of terrorism, China has taken resolute measures to firmly fight
terrorism and extremism. Our action is reasonable and based on law, and it conforms
to the prevailing practices in countries across the world. Our action has offered
strong safeguards for the fundamental interests and legitimate rights of different
ethnicities in our country, which has produced visible results that are well received
by our population.
The various narratives on Xinjiang are purely politically motivated. They are
devoid of any facts and are a sham political game through and through. We urge the
relevant countries to stop fabricating lies, refrain from practising double standards
when it comes to counter-terrorism and cease interfering in China’s internal affairs.

21-0048229/129

S/2021/48

Annex 13

Statement by the Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations, Nicolas de Rivière
[Original: French]
I would like to thank the Tunisian presidency for organizing today’s debate. I
would also thank the various briefers for their briefings.
Since the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001), 20 years ago, the Security
Council has continuously strengthened the normative framework for the fight
against terrorism. We must continue to implement it rigorously, and to modify it if
necessary, as long as terrorism continues to kill. France has more than once had the
painful experience of terrorism and its effects. I would like to express our solidarity
with the victims of terrorism, for whom justice must be done. Those responsible for
terrorist acts must be judged as close as possible to the places where they committed
their crimes. I would like to stress four points.
First of all, the fight against terrorism cannot be conducted without the support
of civil society. I welcome the briefing by Ms. Fatima Akilu and, through her, the
role of women, young people and non-governmental organizations in the fight
against the barbaric ideologies of terrorist groups. In conflict zones, and in Nigeria
in particular, France, in partnership with UNICEF and civil society, will continue
to support projects aimed at protecting children and combating the stigmatization
of victims.
Secondly, we must increasingly engage in fighting the use by terrorist groups
of the Internet and social networks. The current pandemic has further increased the
influence of these tools. France has worked to bring about a European regulation
on online terrorist content to prevent the appearance of this content or remove it
within an hour if it does appear. But the effectiveness of these tools depends on their
application by everyone. In this respect, we call on States to join the Christchurch
Appeal, launched by France and New Zealand with Internet companies and civil
society organizations. We need a common framework for regulating terrorist
content online.
Thirdly, the fight against the financing of terrorism is an absolute necessity
because, even if it takes little money to kill at random in the street, means are required
to sustain a terrorist action. Resolution 2462 (2019) was an important step for the
Security Council, but we must go further, given the risk of new technologies being
misused for terrorist purposes, in particular the increasing use of cryptocurrency.
Of course, the fight against the financing of terrorism cannot be carried out to the
detriment of humanitarian action, which must be safeguarded. In this respect, we
call on all States to join the humanitarian appeal for action launched in 2019 by
France and Germany.
The United Nations must continue to offer a coordinated approach and
strengthen the capacity of States to counter the terrorist threat, particularly in Africa.
Peacekeeping operations have adapted to the terrorist threat by strengthening their
intelligence capabilities. In Mali, for example, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali supports the Specialized Judicial Unit in
the fight against terrorism and transnational organized crime and in the prevention
of violent extremism in prisons. United Nations support must go beyond the security
and judicial response. This is the aim of the Coalition for the Sahel. Furthermore, we
welcome the appointment of a United Nations development coordinator for the Sahel.
I would like to conclude by recalling the importance of respect for the rule of
law, human rights and international humanitarian law in the fight against terrorism.
This imperative will guide our engagement in the review of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in June next year.

30/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

Annex 14
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Mexico to the
United Nations, Juan Ramón de la Fuente Ramirez
[Original: Spanish]
We thank your delegation, Mr. President, for having opened up this space for
reflection on the occasion of the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1373 (2001). We are also grateful for the valuable information provided by the
Under-Secretary-General, Mr. Vladimir Voronkov; the Executive Director of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED), Michèle Coninsx;
and in particular Ms. Fatima Akilu, who has brought the voice of civil society into
this discussion.
Resolution 1373 (2001), together with the establishment of the CounterTerrorism Committee, set the standard for the development of what we now refer to
as counter-terrorism law. It is the Council’s decisions that over time have built up a
normative body of the greatest importance in that respect.
Any legislative process on such an evolving phenomenon, which does not
have internationally agreed definitions, and which has had various facets, clearly
faces multiple challenges. Some are of a long-standing character while others have
emerged in the light of new developments. I will limit myself to highlighting five of
them in which we have identified some areas of opportunity.
First, it is essential that the fight against terrorism be carried out by legal
means, in full adherence to international law, without affecting human rights and
based on Article 1 Common to the Geneva Conventions, which stresses the need to
respect and to ensure respect for international humanitarian law. Recently, however,
we have noted with concern that certain measures taken to combat terrorism
make humanitarian assistance more difficult. The Council must ensure that, in
taking measures to prevent the financing of terrorism, the work of humanitarian
organizations on the ground is not impeded.
Secondly, the fight against terrorism will not be won on the battlefield;
its outcome will depend on the success of the prevention strategies undertaken
to address its root causes. That implies giving pride of place to the reweaving of
the social fabric so as to prevent radicalization-related phenomena. According to
the most recent CTED Trends Alert report, in the past five years attacks linked to
persons affiliated with supremacist movements and terrorist organizations with farright ideologies have increased by 320 per cent. What is lacking is a more effective
preventive strategy focusing on the individual, which should be one of the axes of
international cooperation.
Thirdly, greater control over transfers of small arms and light weapons is
essential to implementing the provisions of paragraphs 2 (a) and 3 (a) of resolution
1373 (2001). So long as there continues to be free access to firearms, cycles of
violence will continue.
Fourthly, counter-terrorism strategies must be comprehensive and include a
gender dimension. That implies both devoting the necessary attention to the situation
of women and girls as victims and the use of their potential to effect social change,
recognizing that the concept of new masculinities can promote a group’s espousing
of a philosophy of brotherhood, which frequently underlies the ideologies of terrorist
cells and supremacist groups.
Fifthly, the international community must make better use of the available
multilateral instruments and mechanisms in order to address the ever-changing
21-0048231/129

S/2021/48

transnational threat posed by terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. In that
regard, there is also concern about the overreach involved in invoking, out of context,
Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations in the fight against terrorism.
We reiterate that only full respect for the rule of law, both nationally and
internationally, will allow us to confront that terrible scourge more effectively.

32/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

Annex 15
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Niger to the
United Nations, Abdou Abarry
[Original: French]
I would like to thank the Tunisian presidency for having organized this debate
on such an important and pressing topic.
I would also like to thank Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, Under-Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism, and Ms. Michèle
Coninsx, Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate, for their particularly thorough presentations. My thanks also go to
Ms. Fatima Akilu for the perspective that she has just shared with us on the subject.
Cognizant of the threat posed by terrorism to international peace and security,
on 28 September 2001 the Security Council adopted resolution 1373 (2001), inviting
States Members of the United Nations to put in place adequate legal instruments for
preventing and suppressing, by all lawful means, the financing and preparation of
any terrorist act on their territories.
As a Member State that is concerned with respect for international law and
its international commitments, my country, the Niger, has taken several steps in that
direction and has tirelessly cooperated with the competent United Nations entities,
including the Executive Directorate of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, which is
responsible for following up with Member States on the implementation of resolution
1373 (2001) and other relevant Council resolutions.
It is in that context that the Nigerien Government has hosted several visits
to that body, the last of which took place from 9 to 11 July 2018. Cooperation with
various United Nations bodies has enabled my country to significantly improve its
counter-terrorism mechanisms and strategy in accordance with international law.
Within the framework of that cooperation, the Niger has benefited from a
number of forms of capacity-building support for its actors involved in the fight
against terrorism, particularly in the areas of border management, investigation
and prosecution and the fight against so-called gateway crimes to terrorism and
transnational organized crime, such as corruption and money laundering.
With regard to the measures taken by the Nigerien Government in order to
comply with the relevant recommendations of the Council, in particular resolution
1373 (2001), let me cite as an example the ratification of the 14 universal instruments
in the fight against terrorism; the incorporation of those instruments into domestic
law; the incorporation of the provisions of resolution 1373 (2001) into domestic law;
the establishment of structures responsible for monitoring decisions, including the
Coordination Committee for the fight against terrorism, the specialized judicial
centre, the Central Service for the fight against terrorism, the National Financial
Intelligence and Processing Unit of the Niger, the National Commission for the
Collection and Control of Illicit Weapons, the National Commission against
Trafficking in Persons and the Smuggling of Migrants, and the National Commission
for Human Rights.
Finally, let me cite adherence to bilateral and multilateral agreements, without
which no fight against this scourge would be effective. I would like to emphasize the
relevance of the cooperation agreement signed on 2 May 2019 in Niamey between
the Government of the Niger and the United Nations investigative team, with the
goal of helping to hold Da’esh/the Islamic State accountable for its crimes.
21-0048233/129

S/2021/48

I am also pleased to announce that very soon the Niger will have a national
strategy to prevent radicalization and violent extremism. That strategy has already
been substantiated by a national workshop that brought together representatives of
the State, civil society and the private and religious sectors on 14 October 2020 in
Niamey. The adoption of that strategy will also comply with a recommendation from
the Executive Directorate made during its visit in 2018.
In the 20 years since the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001), military
successes have certainly been recorded in the fight against terrorist organizations in
Afghanistan, Iraq and Syria. But those criminals’ capacity to harm remains very real,
and the challenges are even more numerous in several regions of the world, especially
less developed ones such as the Sahel region, as evidenced by the recent armed
attacks carried out in my country on 2 January in the villages of Tchombangou and
Zaroumdareye, near the border with Mali, which caused the deaths of 100 civilians
and injured many others.
With regard to the challenges that we will have to meet, I would like to mention
those relating to foreign terrorist fighters, whose presence continues to increase in
the Sahel; the use by terrorists of new information and communication technologies
to promote their ideologies and recruit new fighters; the collusion between terrorist
groups and transnational organized crime; the instrumentalization of intercommunal
or ethnic conflicts by terrorists; radicalization in prisons; and the reintegration,
particularly the social reintegration, of former terrorist prisoners.
To address all those challenges, the States affected, such as the Niger, need the
know-how and expertise of the relevant organs of the United Nations.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm that the transnational threat of terrorism
requires States to cooperate unreservedly in that fight, in accordance with their
obligations under the Charter of the United Nations. For our fight to be effective,
it must combine both preventive and suppressive measures while ensuring that the
needs of peoples are met by means of development activities.
In that regard, I call for greater international solidarity to support the States
most affected by this scourge in their efforts to tackle the sources of its funding
as well as the root causes that promote the emergence and acceptance of its
ideologies, including corruption, money laundering, extreme poverty, hunger, youth
unemployment and ignorance.

34/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

Annex 16
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Vassily Nebenzia
[Original: Russian]
At the outset, let me thank you, Mr. President, for the initiative of convening
this high-level meeting on issues related to the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001), on countering terrorism, which turns 20 this year. We are grateful to Tunisia
for having prepared a balanced presidential statement (S/PRST/2021/1) that once
again confirms the relevance of the resolution and the Council’s counter-terrorist
measures, which were based on it. We welcome the Head of the United Nations Office
of Counter-Terrorism (UNOCT), Vladimir Voronkov, and the Head of the Executive
Directorate of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, Michèle Coninsx. Russia deeply
appreciates their contributions to the practical implementation of Security Council
decisions and to today’s discussion. We also welcome Ms. Fatima Akilu.
The counter-terrorism priorities set out in resolution 1373 (2001) were built
upon independently in subsequent Council decisions. As the terrorist threat evolved,
we steadily strengthened the mechanisms for the criminal prosecution of terrorists
and for combating the financing of terrorism and the spread of violent propaganda.
To that end, bilateral and multilateral channels of cooperation have been established,
and the exchange of information has been streamlined.
Without a doubt, the establishment of the Counter-Terrorism Committee and
its Executive Directorate (CTED) was a turning point. It was given responsibility for
oversight of the implementation of the relevant Council decisions. The monitoring
and impartial evaluation of States remain the primary tasks of CTED experts; no
other body of the United Nations system has, or could have, the same mandate.
The United Nations has established a contemporary counter-terrorism
architecture, which is coordinated by UNOCT. Russia is in favour of the steady
strengthening of cooperation between UNOCT and CTED, with a focus on
supporting the implementation of the Security Council’s counter-terrorism decisions,
including resolution 1373 (2001). It is also important that technical assistance for
interested States be provided on the basis of Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC)
recommendations and, it goes without saying, with the consent of the host country.
At present, projects that are aimed at fostering border security to combat
foreign terrorist fighters, countering the use of the Internet by terrorists and shutting
down the illicit supply of arms are particularly important. Our country supports
those efforts, including in financial terms.
Unfortunately, the threat of terrorism is not abating but remains one of the
major challenges of the modern age. The global community must pool its efforts to
respond to that challenge, deploying much greater efforts than those that are used to
establish the relations among countries.
Even during the global pandemic, terrorists are continuing to take advantage
of the situation, accusing States of failing to deal successfully with the crisis. The
risk also remains that new hotbeds of instability could be created, chiefly owing to
the actions of foreign terrorist fighters who are returning to their countries of origin
from combat zones.
The implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) today is just as relevant as it
was 20 years ago. The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, Al-Qaida and related
structures are inspiring attacks in countries that were until recently considered islands
of security. The situation is compounded by the fact that those who commission or
21-0048235/129

S/2021/48

carry out terrorist attacks can be physically located on a different continent. And even
given this level of uncertainty, some States continue to neglect their obligations to
prosecute terrorists and refuse to cooperate with foreign partners. Sometimes this is
done with reference to human rights. The use of this pretext in such an unscrupulous
way is unacceptable.
The effectiveness of the work of the United Nations largely depends on
whether its organs adhere to their mandates. At the moment, the Security Council
and its subsidiary bodies sometimes pay too much attention to the human rights
aspects of counter-terrorism, which is the focus of other parts of the Organization,
and this to the detriment of their primary mission to ensure security.
We are pleased to note Tunisia’s contribution to the work of the CTC as its
Chair. The year 2021 promises to be a busy one in terms of activities that are directly
related to resolution 1373 (2001). We will have to update the tools for evaluating States,
launch the new format of hybrid monitoring visits and, at the end of the year, renew
the CTC’s mandate. We hope that these efforts will result in a further improvement
in the effectiveness of United Nations counter-terrorism efforts, including through
good-faith cooperation among States, as enshrined in resolution 1373 (2001).

36/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

Annex 17
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the United
States of America to the United Nations, Richard Mills
I wish to thank you, Mr. Minister, and the Tunisian delegation for having
organized this important meeting. I also want to thank our three briefers for their
useful and insightful presentations, especially Executive Director Akilu, whose
comments on the relationship between civil society and Government in countering
terrorism were very interesting and very important. I also just want to say how
much I have gained from that and that my delegation appreciates the comments, the
recommendations and the actions that have been recommended by the colleagues
that have spoken before us. Those principles, actions and recommendations will
certainly inform my delegation’s work with all present in the coming months and
years on this issue.
Finally, it is hard to believe that it has been 20 years since the horrific events
of 9/11, but I just want to begin by remembering the innocent lives lost that day — all
victims of terrorism — as well as remember with gratitude the heroic actions of the
first responders who saved so many lives on 9/11.
As we have all heard, in the aftermath of that horrific day the United States
penned resolution 1373 (2001), and the Council swiftly united to adopt that pivotal
resolution in order to prevent such devastating attacks and help the international
community fight terrorism globally.
Our view is that the resolution has been successful. It drove all Member States
to adequately criminalize terrorism and provided a useful road map for building the
necessary national, regional and international capabilities to counter terrorism.
Weaknesses in all our bureaucracies and all our security practices were brought
to light. All Member States, including the United States, used that information to
strengthen their counter-terrorism infrastructures. We learned that we needed new
tools to fight terrorism, and we learned the hard way that we needed to change the
way in which our Governments shared terrorist information internally and externally
with partners.
I think what is most important is that, at the time, we committed to addressing
that transnational threat together, with whole-of-Government, whole-of-society
approaches, hand in hand with partner Governments, civil society, international
partners, private sector partners and with the full and equal participation of women
and youth.
The Council, as we have heard, also established the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), to monitor and assist Member States. Then in 2004, the Council
created the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED), to
support the Committee and assist all Member States of the United Nations in fully
implementing resolution 1373 (2001) and other counter-terrorism resolutions.
Today the United States Government’s view is that those investments have
paid off. CTED has been instrumental in that process. Its visits and the resulting
reports from those visits provide Member States with a path to enhance their ability
to implement the Council’s resolutions and, we believe, comprehensively prevent and
counter terrorism and violent extremism.
That is why the CTC must continue to play an important role in protecting
CTED’s independent reporting process and ensuring that the Council’s credibility is
not eroded by politicized censorship. The Council and its CTC must further support
CTED in its efforts to assist Member States and to ensure no one is left behind.
21-0048237/129

S/2021/48

Twenty years into this global fight we have made tremendous progress,
but there is still much to do. As many of my colleagues have just commented, the
terrorism threat continues, it continues to morph and evolve, and we must adjust and
redouble our efforts to prevent future attacks.
While our coalition destroyed the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant on the
battlefield in Syria and Iraq, tens of thousands of foreign terrorist fighters and their
families, including children living in untenable conditions, remain in camps and
have not been repatriated. The United States has repatriated a total of 28 Americans
from Syria and Iraq — 12 adults and 16 children, with six of those adults now facing
criminal charges. We believe repatriating foreign terrorist fighters to their countries
of origin is the most reasonable solution to prevent them from returning to the
battlefield. It is not only the right thing to do from a security standpoint, but also
from a humanitarian standpoint. The current situation in those camps is untenable,
and we believe we can all, all of us, do better.
Let me also say in response to comments from colleagues, the United States
takes the threat from racially or ethnically motivated terrorist attacks very seriously,
and we continue to take action to combat that particular form of terrorism. Last year,
for the first time, the State Department designated a white supremacist group as a
Specially Designated Global Terrorist.
As colleagues have mentioned, history has also shown us over and over again
that measures to prevent and counter-terrorism that come at the expense of human
rights and the rule of law are counterproductive. That is why the United States
will continue to object to certain countries’ actions to engage in mass detention
of religious minorities and members of other minorities, engage in repressive
surveillance and mass data collection, and to use coercive population control, such
as forced sterilization and abortion. Governments, including Governments sadly
represented in the Council, must not use counter-terrorism as a pretext for stifling
freedom of religion or belief and other human rights and fundamental freedoms.
Let me end by saying again, we thank Tunisia for its able chairmanship of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee. We look forward to working closely with the Council
as we prepare for the review of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
and the CTED mandate renewal later this year. We have made so much progress
since the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001), but much remains to be done, as we
have heard, and we must continue adapting to keep our communities safe.

38/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

Annex 18
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to
the United Nations, Tra Phuong Nguyen
I would like to start by thanking Under-Secretary-General Voronkov, Assistant
Secretary-General Coninsx and Ms. Akilu for their informative briefings.
Since the unanimous adoption of resolution 1373 (2001), the Security Council
and the international community have implemented many important measures to
combat the scourge of terrorism. The counter-terrorism institutional framework has
been strengthened by several resolutions and presidential statements on a wide range
of topics, such as the financing of terrorism, judicial cooperation, foreign terrorist
fighters and the protection of critical infrastructure against terrorist attacks.
The Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), its Executive Directorate (CTED)
and the Office of Counter-Terrorism (UNOCT), in coordination with relevant
agencies, have played instrumental roles in furthering international cooperation and
building national capacity to combat terrorism. On the ground, the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh) has suffered major territorial defeats.
However, the threats posed by international terrorism keep evolving.
International terrorism has manoeuvred continuously to expand its network and
deploy new strategies and tactics. The risk of weapons of mass destructions falling
into the hands of terrorists remains high.
There is great concern at the trend of terrorists abusing information and
communication technologies to spread their propaganda and recruit new members,
especially in the time of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). Inequalities and other
underlying drivers of violent extremism and terrorism, which have been aggravated
by the economic and political toll of the COVID-19 pandemic, are likely to increase
in the long term and remain at risk of exploitation by terrorists.
Against that background, it is essential to maintain our vigilance and strong
unity in the fight against terrorism. My delegation stresses the importance of
international and regional cooperation, since no country is safe until all are safe.
That is especially true when States have to stretch their resources domestically to
meet other priorities.
As a developing country, we see the value of sharing intelligence and analyses
among States and international organizations with respect to terrorists’ movement,
imminent attacks, recruitment, financing and online propaganda, as well new trends
and developments. Of equal importance is the need to provide technical assistance to
strengthen national and regional capacities to prevent and combat terrorism.
In monitoring and facilitating the implementation of Security Council
resolutions, the CTC has made use of various tools, such as country visits and
detailed implementation assessments, that allow for constructive dialogue between
the CTC and Member States to identify achievements, challenges and areas for
further cooperation and technical assistance.
We fully support the CTC, through CTED, in continuing its assessments by
resuming country visits, and we call on Member States to support the CTC and
CTED mandates. Cooperation between CTED and UNOCT and between the CTC
and relevant committees on counter-terrorism and non-proliferation should be
further strengthened.
My delegation believes that sustaining success in the fight against terrorism
requires a holistic approach. The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
21-0048239/129

S/2021/48

should represent a comprehensive and effective framework for our joint efforts, with
the United Nations playing a central coordinating role.
Counter-terrorism measures must be undertaken in compliance with the Charter
of the United Nations, including its principles on sovereignty, non-interference and
political independence. We must respect the need to ensure the unimpeded delivery
of humanitarian assistance by neutral, impartial, independent humanitarian agencies,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of international law.
The Security Council must remain united and firmly committed to preventing
and resolving conflicts and sustaining peace. Comprehensive strategies should be
advanced to promote sustainable economic development and national reconciliation
and build balanced and cohesive societies that are resilient to terrorism and
radicalization. No effort should be spared in undertaking measures to address the
conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism, in accordance with pillar I of the
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
At the national level, it is critical to adopt a whole-of-society approach
by involving all actors, especially women, young people, non-governmental
organizations, the private sector and academia.
Much has been achieved in advancing the course of counter-terrorism. Unity
has proved to be our greatest strength and most effective response. My delegation
reaffirms its commitment to working closely with all partners to combat terrorism
on the basis of the Charter of the United Nations and international law, in the interest
of peace and security for all countries.

40/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

Annex 19
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan to the
United Nations, Adela Raz
Allow me first to congratulate you, Mr. President, and your delegation on
Tunisia’s steady leadership during this busy and productive start of the year. I also
welcome the new non-permanent members of the Security Council and wish them
success in fulfilling their mandates.
I would also like to thank Under-Secretary-General Vladimir Voronkov of the
United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism and Executive Director Michèle Coninsx
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate for their informative and
thorough briefings, as well as Ms. Fatima Akilu, Executive Director of the Neem
Foundation, for sharing her incisive perspective.
The twentieth anniversary of resolution 1373 (2001) and the establishment of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee provide us with an opportunity for reflection on
past achievements and the many challenges ahead. We started this journey together
at a very difficult time in Afghanistan’s history, when the terrorist forces that had
threatened our country for years launched an attack on 11 September 2001. That
heinous act of terrorism urged all of us to work together to fight for the safety and
protection of people everywhere.
During the past 20 years, many important steps have been taken, including
through the building of a more robust and responsive counter-terrorism architecture
and the mobilization of resources to defeat terrorism.
In Afghanistan, we have seen a complete transformation in the establishment
of a Government committed to the fight against international terrorism and the
protection and promotion of the rights of all its citizens. The Islamic Republic of
Afghanistan makes no distinction among terrorist groups and sees them exclusively
for what they are — a direct threat to the livelihood and freedom that our people have
fought to attain.
Despite our best efforts, the past 20 years have also shown us how complex
and ever-changing terrorism can be. We have seen the emergence of new terrorist
groups that consistently employ new tactics to inhumanely attack the most vulnerable
populations. That new reality and the challenges posed by modern terrorism serve to
reiterate the need for the international community to adapt and take decisive action
through more cohesive, collaborative and joint efforts at the regional and multilateral
levels that truly embody the spirit of resolution 1373 (2001).
Today it remains even more evident that terrorism will never be defeated
unless we efficiently target its root causes. We must be able to counter extremist
narratives, while also identifying and neutralizing elements that allow for their
continued operations, including sources of financial support and safe havens, which
will allow us to shift the focus from fighting terrorism to actually defeating it in
its entirety.
The great thing about today’s meeting is that it gives us a platform to share best
practices and lessons learned, while acknowledging our challenges and what needs
to change to reinvigorate our efforts in future. The Afghan Defence and Security
Forces are valiantly fighting on the front lines of the war against international
terrorism, which continues to claim countless innocent lives. Those are lives of
students working hard for a better future and mothers experiencing the miracle of
birth. Their loss really emphasizes the urgency of firmly addressing this threat.
21-0048241/129

S/2021/48

While we continue to release statements and express our condemnation for
such heinous actions, our international strategy to fight this menace has not even
been able to define what terrorism is. It is time to take the next step, build on the
progress of the past 20 years and design an outcome-oriented strategy that can help
the United Nations and Member States better work towards ensuring the right of
all people to live without fear. The upcoming review of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy provides a timely opportunity to achieve that, and we
must rise to the urgency of the situation.
Throughout the review, we must also acknowledge the important voice
of victims of terrorism as stakeholders in designing effective counter-terrorism
strategies. We cannot speak about defeating terrorism without ensuring that the
needs of those affected by it are addressed and that victims can return to society
and live the rest of their lives without fear of a second attack. We welcome efforts
by the United Nations to further the cause of the Group of Friends of Victims of
Terrorism and reiterate the importance that victims occupy a central role in our
counter-terrorism agenda.
Despite our achievements in our fight against terrorism, we cannot in any way
let our guard down and let the enemy evolve into deadlier and more inhumane forces.
Now is the time for the boldness, leadership and vision that ensure the framework we
have built is translated into firm international and regional actions that address the
root causes of terrorism and defeat this threat once and for all. It is what our people
demand and what we, as representatives of the United Nations, should deliver.

42/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

Annex 20
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Argentina to the
United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
Argentina is grateful for the convening of this open debate on such an
important topic on the international agenda. It is also grateful for the briefings
by Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, Under-Secretary-General for Counter-Terrorism, and
Ms. Michelle Coninsx, Assistant Secretary-General and Executive Director of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate.
Terrorism constitutes a serious threat to States and to international peace and
security, human dignity, peaceful coexistence, the strengthening of democracy and
the economic and social development of nations. Argentina has suffered directly
from international terrorism, having been the victim of two very serious attacks in
Buenos Aires: against the Israeli Embassy in 1992 and against the Argentine Jewish
Mutual Association in 1994.
That scourge must be addressed through an integrated multidimensional
approach, taking into account the particular circumstances, based on the rule of
law, respect for fundamental guarantees and compliance with international law,
international humanitarian law, international human rights law, international refugee
law and the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
At the recent session of the General Assembly, President Alberto Fernández
stated that
“Argentina condemns terrorism in all its forms and manifestations and is
in favour of addressing it within the framework of multilateral forums and
always in accordance with the rule of law and respect for human rights”
(see A/75/PV.5).
Twenty years after the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001), Argentina’s
commitment and the strengthening of its counter-terrorism capabilities contribute
to national, regional and global security against that scourge. Argentina has ratified
14 universal counter-terrorism instruments and is in the process of ratifying another
two. It is also party to the Inter-American Convention against Terrorism, as well as
coordinating efforts against that scourge within the Southern Common Market.
In the Ministry of Justice and Human Rights, a review of criminal legislation
was initiated to bring it into line with the relevant international commitments. The
capacity of the Public Prosecutor’s Office to undertake a comprehensive analysis of
terrorism and that of the Financial Intelligence Unit against Money Laundering and
Terrorist Financing were strengthened.
Argentina recognizes the Security Council sanctions committees’ lists of
individuals and entities associated with terrorism and its financing and is fully capable
of enforcing the sanctions provided for therein within its legislative framework
through its administrative and judicial institutions. Argentina has also sought to
ensure the balanced implementation of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. To
that end, it has strengthened legislation on rights and guarantees to protect victims
of terrorism and to provide them with advice, assistance, legal representation and
access to justice.
Argentina also prioritizes adopting a gender perspective in all national and
international strategies to address the specific needs of women and girls affected
by terrorism.
21-0048243/129

S/2021/48

International cooperation among States in coordination with international
organizations is fundamental to the fight against global terrorism. Argentina
believes that it is important to increase South-South and triangular cooperation. In
that regard, we encourage the strengthening of United Nations platforms for the
exchange of good practices, such as that aimed at promoting South-South cooperation
on countering terrorism and preventing violent extremism, as and when conducive
to terrorism.
Likewise, Argentina values effective coordination between the initiatives of
the United Nations counter-terrorism agencies and Member States in the focus and
range of actions to be developed and implemented.
Through its specialized agencies, in particular the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, the United Nations is in an excellent position to facilitate the exchange of
information and best practices with regard to developments in international terrorism,
which provides important inputs for Member States to assess their vulnerability to
that threat and to prepare risk analysis and appropriate contingency plans.
Argentina therefore reaffirms the central role of the United Nations in the
fight against terrorism as a pillar of the multilateral system and an organization
with universal membership and the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. Multilateral action through the United Nations, in
accordance with its principles, will enable us to confront the threat of terrorism and
achieve a safer world for all.

44/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

Annex 21
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Armenia to the
United Nations, Mher Margaryan
I would like to thank the presidency of Tunisia for prioritizing in its agenda
the topic of countering terrorism and for organizing an open debate on this pertinent
topic. We thank Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, Under-Secretary-General of the Office
of Counter-Terrorism, and Ms. Michèle Coninsx, Assistant Secretary-General and
Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, for
leading the activities of the respective United Nations bodies in providing coordinated
and integrated response to the scourge of terrorism and assisting Member States
in the implementation of their obligations under resolution 1373 (2001) and other
relevant Security Council resolutions.
The adoption of resolution 1373 (2001) following the terrorist attacks on
11 September 2001 and the establishment of the Counter-Terrorism Committee were
a turning point in streamlining international efforts against terrorism. The twentieth
anniversary of resolution 1373 (2001) is an important opportunity to identify
challenges and gaps and recommit to efficient cooperation in countering terrorism.
Since no country is immune to terrorism, the international community should stand
united and work hand in hand to counter terrorism in all its manifestations.
Preventing and countering terrorism require a holistic and cross-dimensional
approach and entail aspects such as border control and management, money laundering
and financing of terrorism, countering intolerance, violent extremism, radicalization
and hate crimes and protection of human rights while countering terrorism. While
terrorism cannot be associated with any particular religion, nationality or ethnic
group, we have to acknowledge that terrorists have exploited religious solidarity to
commit heinous crimes against humanity targeting religious and ethnic groups.
Armenia remains firmly committed to the global fight against terrorism and is
actively engaged in international and regional activities aimed at the implementation
of the counter-terrorism conventions and their additional protocols, as well as the
relevant resolutions adopted by the Security Council. We highly value the cooperation
in the context of regional organizations, particularly within the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and the Collective Security Treaty Organization,
in promoting and facilitating cooperation, sharing best practices and building
stronger capacities to effectively address the threats of terrorism.
Indeed, the mobilization of foreign terrorist fighters in conflicts represents
a new, alarming trend. The spread of the coronavirus disease pandemic and the
rise in intolerance and hate speech have created a conducive environment for the
revival of activities of terrorist organizations. The violent ideology of terrorists finds
a breeding ground in situations of State-led and State-sponsored radicalization of
society, aimed at the consolidation of power and identity-building by scapegoating
and demonizing certain ethnicities and nations.
Our region is not immune to the scourge of terrorism and its radical ideology
and violent practices. Amid the outbreak of an unprecedented global pandemic, on
27 September 2020 Azerbaijan, with the direct support of Turkey, employed thousands
of foreign terrorist fighters in a large-scale military aggression against Nagorno
Karabakh, The large-scale military offensive led to massive loss of human life, the
displacement of tens of thousands of civilians, the destruction and desecration of
religious and cultural heritage and other gross violations of international human
rights law and international humanitarian law. Torture like that of the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant and the inhuman treatment and executions of prisoners of
21-0048245/129

S/2021/48

war and civilian hostages by the Azerbaijani forces was widely disseminated and
glorified in media outlets and on social networks.
The recruitment of foreign terrorist fighters from the Middle East by Turkey
and their transfer to Azerbaijan and the Nagorno Karabakh conflict zone is a wellestablished and well-documented fact, acknowledged by the law enforcement
agencies of several countries and extensively reported by independent observers.
The Working Group on the use of mercenaries of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, in its statement of 11 November
2020, referred to
“widespread reports that the Government of Azerbaijan, with Turkey’s
assistance, relied on Syrian fighters to shore up and sustain its military
operations in the Nagorno Karabakh conflict zone, including on the front line.
The fighters appeared to be motivated primarily by private gain, given the dire
economic situation in the Syrian Arab Republic. In case of death, their relatives
were reportedly promised financial compensation and Turkish nationality.
“[I]t is even more worrisome that the Syrian fighters deployed to Azerbaijan
are allegedly affiliated with armed groups and individuals that, in some cases,
have been accused of war crimes and serious human rights abuses during the
conflict in Syria, thus seemingly perpetuating a cycle of impunity and risking
further abuses of international law”.
We recognize the essential role that Security Council sanctions committees
play in ensuring accountability for terrorist entities and individuals and assessing
the evolving global terrorism threat and emerging trends in the activities of
terrorist organizations, while monitoring the compliance of Member States with the
sanctions regimes.
We also encourage stronger cooperation and coordination among the CounterTerrorism Committee, its Executive Directorate, the Office of Counter-Terrorism
and other relevant United Nations bodies in ensuring the efficient and integrated
response of the United Nations counter-terrorism architecture to the new threats and
assisting Member States in the implementation of their commitments to preventing
and countering terrorism.

46/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

Annex 22
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Australia to the
United Nations, Mitch Fifield
Australia commends the presidency of Tunisia and the Security Council
for organizing this virtual open debate on international cooperation in combating
terrorism 20 years after the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001).
This year, as we approach 20 years since the tragic events of 11 September
and the prompt response of the international community, including the Security
Council’s adoption of resolution 1373 (2001), it is important to reflect on the progress
that Member States have made in combating terrorism and to renew our commitment
to continuing to work together.
Sadly, terrorism continues to pose a threat to international peace and security,
and the methods and tactics of terrorist groups continue to evolve and present
new challenges.
The impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic on terrorism
is one such challenge, as terrorists and violent extremists have sought to exploit
the pandemic in their narratives and to assist in their mobilization in many places.
As Australia’s Foreign Minister noted, COVID-19 has highlighted the major role
of international institutions in addressing and coordinating a global response to a
global problem.
Twenty years on, the United Nations continues to play a key role in addressing
ongoing and evolving counter-terrorism challenges, and Australia remains pleased
to support the important work of the United Nations, the Security Council and
its Counter-Terrorism Committee, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate and other relevant entities.
The spirit of global solidarity encapsulated in resolution 1373 (2001) has
also inspired global, regional and bilateral cooperation to counter terrorism that
complements the United Nations work.
Australia is proud to be a founding member of the Global Counterterrorism
Forum (GCTF), which works with United Nations bodies, Member States and civil
society to develop international best practice, guidance and toolkits, supporting the
implementation of Security Council obligations, including resolutions 1373 (2001)
and 2178 (2014) and their successor resolutions.
The Global Counterterrorism Forum’s efforts to support the implementation
of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and the United Nations
counter-terrorism framework more broadly by States Members of the United Nations
have proved particularly effective, leading to a number of joint United NationsGCTF initiatives.
We have come a long way together as a global community since the adoption
of resolution 1373 (2001), and the institutions and initiatives built on the framework
of that resolution have proved resilient and flexible as the terrorist threat evolved
in the intervening years. Australia looks forward to continuing that vital work in
cooperation with the United Nations, relevant bodies and Member States.

21-0048247/129

S/2021/48

Annex 23
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Austria to the United Nations
Since the beginning of this century, international terrorism has increasingly
turned into one of the greatest scourges confronting peace, our open societies
and, indeed, the international community of States as a whole. We still painfully
remember the attacks of 11 September 2001 in the United States and the loss of
thousands of innocent lives. The attacks fundamentally changed our perception of
what terrorism is willing and able to cause. It seemed that, after the attacks, the
world was different from before.
To counter and prevent future attacks of this scale, the international community
showed remarkable empathy and resilience. Our perception of international
cooperation in matters of counter-terrorism and security changed fundamentally
and set in motion one of the most essential processes concerning this paramount
area, resulting in, among other things, the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001) and the
establishment by the Security Council of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC)
and the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED).
Twenty years later, we again commemorate the victims of the dreadful events
of 2001, but we also remember the essential moments when we moved together
to prevent such events in future. We reaffirm our determination, compassion and
unbroken will to work together in the fight against international terrorism and
celebrate the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001).
Only recently, on 2 November 2020, Austria suffered a hideous and repulsive
attack in the midst of our society, taking place in the heart of our capital, Vienna. The
Austrian Government took immediate action, reaffirming its strong determination to
combat terrorism. That attack clearly showed that multilateralism and international
cooperation cannot be taken for granted and must be actively practised and defended
every day.
We have to find global solutions in our efforts to provide our citizens with safer
environments, including with regard to modern phenomena such as cybersecurity
and the connected hybridization of terrorist threats. An important step forward in
that regard is the exchange of information under the Advanced Passenger Information
and Passenger Name Record systems.
To effectively counter modern international terrorism, we also need to think
outside of the box and cooperate more with the Financial Action Task Force on the
financing of terrorism and use the services of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime, with their expertise and broad platforms for international exchange. Their
expertise and exchanges are of fundamental importance, especially with regard to
the harmful cross-fertilization of terrorism and organized crime.
It cannot be stressed enough that we need to uphold human rights, and
the fundamental values of freedom, democracy and the rule of law in particular.
Cooperation and negotiation on an equal footing through multilateral forums are the
only way to find effective and lasting solutions to fulfil these ambitions.

48/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

Annex 24
Statement by the Prime Minister of Azerbaijan, Ali Hidayat oglu Asadov
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the Movement of NonAligned Countries.
First, we would like to welcome His Excellency Mr. Othman Jerandi, Minister
for Foreign Affairs, Migration and Tunisians Abroad, and to express our appreciation
to his delegation for convening this meeting on the twentieth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1373 (2001), the establishment of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and achievements in international cooperation, challenges and
opportunities, as well as for presenting the concept note (S/2020/1315, annex). We
also thank the briefers for their comprehensive overview on the matter.
The Non-Aligned Movement unequivocally condemns as criminal and rejects
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. We express our full solidarity with
those countries having suffered acts of terrorism, and especially with all victims.
At the eighteenth Summit of the Non-Aligned Movement, held in Baku on
25 and 26 October 2019, the Movement’s Heads of State and Government reiterated
their determination to strengthen its solidarity in combating terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations, wherever and by whomsoever committed, in accordance
with the principles of the Charter of the United Nations, international law and the
relevant international conventions. In this context, they also stressed that terrorism
should not be associated with any religion, nationality, civilization or ethnic group.
Terrorist acts constitute one of the most flagrant violations of international law,
including international humanitarian and international human rights law. Such acts
endanger the territorial integrity and stability of States, as well as national, regional
and international security, and destabilize legitimately constituted Governments or
the prevailing constitutional order and political unity of States, as well as affect the
stability of nations and the very basis of societies. Moreover, they create adverse
consequences for economic and social development and cause the destruction of the
physical and economic infrastructure of States.
The Movement opposes attempts to equate terrorism with the legitimate
struggle of peoples under colonial or alien domination and foreign occupation for
self-determination and national liberation in order to prolong the occupation and
oppression of innocent people with impunity.
The member States of the Movement are resolved to undertake all the necessary
measures to address the conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism — such as
prolonged, unresolved conflicts; the dehumanization of the victims of terrorism in
all its forms and manifestations; a lack of the rule of law; violations of human rights;
ethnic, national and religious discrimination; political exclusion, socioeconomic
marginalization and lack of good governance — while recognizing that none of these
conditions can excuse or justify acts of terrorism.
The Non-Aligned Movement expresses its resolve to take speedy and effective
measures to eliminate international terrorism. In this context, we urge all States,
consistent with the Charter of the United Nations, to fulfil their obligations under
international law and international humanitarian law in combating terrorism,
including by prosecuting or, where appropriate, extraditing the perpetrators of
terrorist acts; by preventing the organization, instigation or financing of terrorist
acts against other States from within or outside their territories or by organizations
based in their territories; by discouraging individuals and entities from engaging
in illegal economic activities in the territories of other States, proceeds of which
could be used for financing terrorism; by refraining from organizing, instigating,
21-0048249/129

S/2021/48

assisting, financing or participating in terrorist acts in the territories of other States;
by refraining from encouraging activities within their territories directed towards
the commission of such acts; as well as by refraining from allowing the use of their
territories for planning, training or financing for such acts; or by refraining from
supplying arms or other weapons that could be used for terrorist acts in other States.
In this context, the member States of the Movement note that the financing of
terrorism is a matter of grave concern. Hence, the Movement reiterates the obligation
of the international community to prevent and suppress the financing of terrorist
acts and to criminalize the wilful provision or collection, by any means, directly or
indirectly, of funds by their nationals or in their territories with the intention that
the funds be used, or with the knowledge that they are to be used, in order to carry
out terrorist acts.
We are convinced that multilateral cooperation under the auspices of the United
Nations is the most effective means to both prevent and combat international terrorism.
In this context, the Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms its readiness to continue
its support to national, regional and international efforts and arrangements that
seek to implement, where appropriate, the pertinent international legally binding
instruments, as well as the relevant United Nations resolutions, including resolution
1373 (2001), and regional arrangements and instruments relating to combating
terrorism. The member States of the Movement express their readiness to strengthen
cooperation with all States in this regard and emphasize that such cooperation should
be in conformity with the Charter of the United Nations, international law and
relevant international conventions. We therefore urge the relevant United Nations
organs to promote ways and means to support and strengthen such cooperation.
The Movement calls upon all States to respect all human rights and fundamental
freedoms while countering terrorism, and to reaffirm their commitment in this
respect to preventing human rights violations, consistent with the rule of law and
their obligations under international law, in particular international human rights
law, international refugee law and international humanitarian law, and in accordance
with relevant General Assembly resolutions.
In this context, we seize this opportunity to reiterate our rejection of the
politicization of the fight against terrorism, which is detrimental to international
efforts to that end, including through the unilateral preparation of lists accusing States
and their constitutionally established institutions of allegedly supporting terrorism.
In conclusion, the member States of the Movement reiterate the importance of
the conclusion of a comprehensive convention for combating international terrorism,
and, in this respect, note the negotiations in the Ad Hoc Committee on Terrorism,
established by General Assembly resolution 51/210, of 17 December 1996, on the
elaboration of a comprehensive convention on international terrorism, and the
continuing efforts to that end, and call upon all States to continue to cooperate in
resolving the outstanding issues.

Second statement by the
Ali Hidayat oglu Asadov

Prime

Minister

of

Azerbaijan,

Allow me now to make the following remarks in my national capacity.
The Republic of Azerbaijan has taken consistent and comprehensive measures
to implement its respective international obligations and to contribute to the global
fight against terrorism.

50/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

We know about the scourge of terrorism, and not from hearsay. Since the end
of the 1980s, as a means of realizing its groundless and unlawful territorial claims
and as a method of warfare, Armenia and various Armenian terrorist organizations
have perpetrated numerous terrorist acts against Azerbaijan, claiming the lives of
thousands of its citizens.
The occupied territories of Azerbaijan have been a graphic example of heavy
militarization and interpenetration of the occupying forces and the criminal puppet
regime set up by Armenia in those territories with international terrorism and
organized crime.
During the recent hostilities, which erupted as a result of Armenia’s large-scale
attacks against Azerbaijan, thousands of terrorists and mercenaries from various
countries in Europe and the Middle East were deployed to join the ranks of Armenian
armed formations in combat against Azerbaijan and its civilian population. These
actions, which clearly run counter to international law and relevant Security Council
resolutions, entail the State responsibility of Armenia and individual criminal
liability of those involved.
We recognize that significant efforts have been made by the United Nations
and other international, regional and subregional organizations to promote
cooperation and coordination and to strengthen the capacities of Member States in
combating international terrorism and organized crime. With an increase of terrorist
acts motivated by intolerance, extremism and racist ideology, comprehensive and
integrative approaches to combating this scourge through concerted and coordinated
international actions are vital.
The full implementation of international legal obligations by all States is
fundamentally important. It is critical that the Member States undertake consistent
measures to prevent their territories from being used for supporting or financing
terrorism and related activities.
In addition to efforts by States at the national level to assert criminal
jurisdiction over crimes perpetrated by their nationals overseas, international
cooperation in criminal matters, with mutual legal assistance as its component, is
the key to combating international terrorism and related offences. It is also important
that corporate liability and criminal responsibility function in tandem to ensure
prosecution for violations of international law.
We strongly support enhanced individual and collective counter-terrorism
measures, including in particular those aimed at degrading and ultimately defeating
terrorist organizations, their affiliates and networks. It is essential that these efforts
continue and expand.

21-0048251/129

S/2021/48

Annex 25
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Bahrain to the
United Nations Jamal Fares Alrowaiei
[Original: Arabic]
First of all, I should like to welcome His Excellency Mr. Othman Jerandi,
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Immigration and Tunisians abroad, who is presiding
over this meeting. I also thank the permanent delegation of our sister Republic
of Tunisia for holding this important meeting, which comes against the backdrop
of the continuing terrorist threats of all kinds around the world, despite the
exceptional circumstances associated with the challenges posed by the coronavirus
disease pandemic.
I should also like to thank Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, Under-SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism (UNOCT),
and Ms. Michèle Coninsx, Executive Director of Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED), and Ms. Fatima Akilo, Executive Director of the
Neem Foundation, for their valuable briefings.
The unanimous adoption of resolution 1373 (2001) came under exceptional
international circumstances that underscored the need to strengthen international
cooperation and coordinate efforts at all levels to combat and eliminate the threat
of terrorism. In addition to creating the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), the
resolution included a series of measures that States were required to take to address
that threat. That resolution was followed by the formation of CTED under resolution
1535 (2004), based on the report of the CTC on the revitalization of its work adopted
on 19 February 2004 (S/2004/124, annex). CTED has important responsibilities,
most notably providing technical assistance to Member States and coordinating
efforts and international cooperation among various stakeholders.
Since then, there have been successive steps taken by the Security Council
and the General Assembly to combat terrorism, included the adoption of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and the establishment of the UNOCT.
All those developments reflected the very real threat posed by terrorism and the need
to continue efforts in that regard. Terrorism is one of the serious challenges facing
the world, particularly the Middle East. It has implications for security, stability
and development that demand comprehensive and sustained cooperation from the
international community to confront this serious scourge and the various terrorist
groups that pursue all means possible for achieving their goals and interests at the
expense of the stability and security of States and peoples.
From this standpoint, the Kingdom of Bahrain has made assiduous efforts
in support of all counter-terrorism efforts that reinforce international peace and
security in the Middle East and the world. That is particularly the case when it comes
to drying up the sources of terrorist financing, which include, inter alia, exploitation
of non-government organizations and the non-profit and charitable sector, as well
as various forms of organized crime such as money-laundering and trafficking in
drugs, weapons, stolen antiquities and persons. That is in addition to direct means of
financing terrorist organizations, which we see clearly in the Middle East.
To follow up on the Kingdom’s compliance with Security Council resolutions,
Bahrain set up a national committee under Ministry for Foreign Affairs Decision
No. 26 (2018), as well as a committee to develop policies for prohibiting and
combating money-laundering and the financing of terrorism, under Ministry of
the Interior Decision No. 18 (2019). The national committee to follow up on the
Kingdom’s compliance with Security Council resolutions organized the third
52/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

national capacity-building workshop on safeguarding the non-profit sector from
terrorist abuse, via video tele-conference in August 2020, in partnership with the
UNOCT, the CTC and the Counter-Terrorism Task Force.
Efforts to combat terrorism and extremism will not bear fruit unless they
are carried out with cooperation and coordination and in accordance with a
comprehensive multidimensional vision that takes into account all the challenges
posed by terrorism, especially in the light of the spread of hate speech and terrorist
propaganda. For that reason, in August 2020, Bahrain created a committee to combat
extremism, terrorism, terrorist financing and money-laundering. It will undertake all
tasks relating to coordination and consolidation of national efforts, including periodic
reviews and updates, in the area of combating extremism and terrorism, in addition
to assessing threats posed by extremist ideology, terrorism and money-laundering.
In keeping with the vision of His Majesty King Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa, King
of Bahrain, may God preserve him, which is founded on tolerance and coexistence,
Bahrain has adopted many national and international initiatives aimed at spreading a
culture of equality, peaceful coexistence and rejection of violence, hatred and racism.
One of the most important initiatives has been the establishment of the King Hamad
Global Centre for Dialogue among Religions and Peaceful Coexistence. The Centre
seeks to highlight and spread awareness of the values that civilizations and cultures
hold in common and tries to enrich the path of tolerance and peaceful coexistence
and combat extremist ideologies that fuel violence, racism, hatred and terrorism.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of Bahrain reiterates its firm commitment to
implement all Security Council resolutions, especially those aimed at combating and
eliminating terrorism, and emphasizes the importance of strengthening international
cooperation and coordination, which will increase the effectiveness of actions taken
at all levels.

21-0048253/129

S/2021/48

Annex 26
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Bangladesh to the
United Nations, Rabab Fatima
I thank you, Mr. President, for convening today’s meeting to mark the twentieth
anniversary of resolution 1373 (2001). I also thank Under-Secretary-General
Voronkov and Assistant Secretary-General Coninsx for their useful briefings.
Terrorism is one of the gravest challenges to international peace and security.
The adoption of resolution 1373 (2001), in 2001, and the subsequent establishment of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee were important milestones in the United Nations
efforts to help Member States fight terrorism nationally and globally.
Over the past two decades, the nature and scale of terrorism have changed.
Vicious terrorist attacks against Government establishments, individuals and
communities have exposed the lurking threats in our midst and the growing ideological
networks of international terrorist groups. During that time, various initiatives —
such as the launching of the Secretary-General’s Plan of Action to Prevent Violent
Extremism, regular reviews of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy as well as
establishment of the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism, with a robust
mandate — have enabled the United Nations to provide strategic leadership in this
area. However, more needs to be done, especially in the areas of technical assistance
and capacity-building to countries in need.
Bangladesh maintains a zero-tolerance policy towards terrorism and violent
extremism. Our efforts are guided by global norms and standards set by the United
Nations, while we calibrate practical measures on the ground based on local
specificities. We are party to all international counter-terrorism instruments. We
have also joined a number of related regional initiatives. Our Government has made
it clear that it will not allow our territory to be used by any operatives to incite or
cause terrorist acts or harm to our neighbours. We also maintain an unequivocal
stand that a terrorist is a terrorist, who must not be identified by any belief, caste
or creed.
At the national level, we have put in place comprehensive laws, namely, the
Anti-Terrorism Act of 2009 and the Money-Laundering Prevention Act 2012. In
addition, we have been investing heavily in national capacity-building, including
awareness-raising, community engagement and resilience, in a whole-of-society
approach to combat terrorism. We are also in the process of drafting our first national
counter-terrorism strategy, in line with the 2006 United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy.
Terrorism does not respect national borders. Therefore, we have to act together
to eliminate the menace of international terrorism. The Security Council and other
United Nations entities established in that regard have important roles to play. Let
me briefly enumerate a few points.
First, the United Nations should lead and steer the global discourse and action
in a more robust and coordinated manner, while taking into account the local context
and the needs of Member States. As the apex global norm-setting body, we wish
to see the United Nations making definitive progress in the work of developing a
comprehensive convention on terrorism based on convergences on the underlying
causes of terrorism and violent extremism.
Secondly, global counter-terrorism efforts must be translated into
coordinated national, regional and international actions against money laundering,
terrorist financing and the supply of arms and other technologies to terrorist and
violent extremist groups. A seamless exchange of operational information and
54/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

intelligence-sharing among nations, especially regarding actions or movements of
terrorists, remain most critical.
Thirdly, capacity and technology gaps are one of the major obstacles faced by
many Member States in complying with the obligations set forth in resolution 1373
(2001) and the subsequent resolutions on terrorism. United Nations leadership in
forging partnerships in developing legal and policy frameworks in Member States,
as well as in implementing national and international regulations against terrorism,
is critical.
Fourthly, women and youth are disproportionately affected by terrorism. At the
same time, they could also be the most effective agents to challenge the ideological
threats posed by terrorist entities. The implementation of the Council’s women and
peace and security agenda and the youth, peace and security agenda could take the
United Nations work on counter-terrorism a long way.
Fifthly, there must be a demonstrable effort to establish lasting peace by
ending protracted conflicts, illegal foreign occupation and colonialism in order
to plug recurrent sources of grievance among certain groups of people, including
youth, whom terrorists mostly take advantage of. Similarly, attention must be paid
to systematic discrimination and persecution, which could ignite extremist thoughts
among impressionable young minds.
Sixthly, taking into account the impacts of the ongoing coronavirus disease
pandemic on people stuck in conflict situations, the Council should strengthen its
efforts to ensure compliance with resolution 2532 (2020), which underlined the
Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire.
Finally, the need for shared understating and cooperation among the actors
concerned, including the private sector and academia, is critical for developing
strategic communications against terrorist narratives and ideologies. Such initiatives,
however, have to be locally driven and based on the needs of individual societies.

21-0048255/129

S/2021/48

Annex 27

Statement by the Permanent Representative of Belgium to the
United Nations, Philippe Kridelka
Belgium thanks His Excellency Mr. Othman Jerandi, Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Migration and Tunisians Abroad, for the opportunity to discuss this
timely topic.
The twentieth anniversary of resolution 1373 (2001), unanimously adopted in
2001 in the wake of the 11 September attacks, is indeed a suitable moment to take
stock, both retrospectively and forward, of the counter-terrorism architecture of the
United Nations.
Twenty years have passed, but the terrorist threat has not gone away. On the
contrary, it has adapted and continues to constantly evolve, even more so in the current
pandemic context. No region of the world is spared. Belgium therefore encourages
all United Nations actors to continue to closely monitor these developments and to
identify good practices that allow for global, relevant and adequate responses. In that
regard, this debate is undoubtingly a step in the right direction.
In that context, Belgium would like to touch upon three priorities that it
considers essential in order to shape any effective multilateral action in future.
First, Belgium is convinced that only a holistic, cross-border and inclusive
approach can enable the United Nations and its States Members to effectively
fight this global and deadly threat. Such an approach must inspire the threefold
constitutive elements that are prevention, repression and the reintegration of men and
women suspected of terrorism. That is why Belgium continues to work to strengthen
coordination and cooperation within its borders, both with our European partners
and at the international level. During our two-year term as a non-permanent member
of the Security Council in 2019 and 2020, that holistic perspective strongly guided
our counter-terrorism action.
Secondly, in our global action, Belgium firmly underlines the importance
of respect for international law in general, and more particularly for international
humanitarian law, human rights law, children’s rights law and refugee law. We
continue to support the inclusion of those dimensions in all relevant areas, in particular
when facing the important challenge that is the fight against radicalization in prison.
At the level of the Security Council, my country was particularly active in fostering
respect for due process within the sanctions committees during its mandate on the
Council. Belgium therefore reiterates its support for the work of the Ombudsperson
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) as well as that of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, both of which
contribute to strengthening the legitimacy and effectiveness of our policies.
Thirdly, Belgium is of the view that it is crucial to find ways of ensuring
that counter-terrorism measures do not adversely affect humanitarian action. The
potentially harmful effects of the policies that we adopt on any humanitarian situation
must be efficiently assessed. Our focus must be on safeguarding humanitarian space
and ensuring that principled humanitarian organizations can serve people in need.
Identifying possible avenues for action at the level of the United Nations to better
safeguard the space for principled humanitarian action in counter-terrorist contexts
must remain a key common effort.
Taking those three priorities into account, Belgium will remain strongly
committed to the future revision of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and will continue to fully support multilateral efforts to fight all facets of
the terrorist threat.

56/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

Annex 28
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Brazil to the United Nations
Brazil thanks the Tunisian presidency for convening this open debate to
celebrate the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1373 (2001) and commends Tunisia
for its role in chairing the Counter-Terrorism Committee.
Brazil considers that today’s meeting represents a timely opportunity to
discuss strategies to prevent and counter terrorism and, more broadly, to reflect
upon the role of the Security Council in that regard. As rightfully pointed out in
the concept note (S/2020/1315, annex), resolution 1373 (2001) was a landmark that
drastically changed the United Nations approach to counter-terrorism. It was a swift
response to the shock following the heinous attacks of 11 September and, as such,
was designed with those types of terrorist acts in mind.
Much has changed since 2001, however. In the light of the ever-changing
nature of terrorist threats, we must now ask ourselves whether the current counterterrorism framework is still sufficiently up-to-date to address the new challenges that
have emerged in the past 20 years. For most of it, the answer is “yes”. The CounterTerrorism Committee and its Executive Directorate have done tremendous work in
advising on emerging threats and adapting to a quite different international arena.
At the same time, we need to think about how to improve the existing framework in
order to increase its efficiency and legitimacy. With that objective in mind, Brazil
would like to highlight two issues for further reflection.
The first one regards the legal framework to prevent and counter terrorism.
The Security Council has adopted a growing number of resolutions, many of which
have binding obligations beyond the mere imposition of sanctions. Added to the
current patchwork of sectoral conventions prohibiting certain terrorist acts, those
instruments lack the unity and coherence that a comprehensive convention against
international terrorism would provide. There is a need to overcome the stalemate
in the negotiating processes leading to the adoption of such a convention and to the
convening of a high-level conference under the auspices of the United Nations. That
would not only fill an unjustifiable legal gap but would also bring back to the General
Assembly a matter that is multifaceted and demands cross-sectoral responses.
That brings me to the second issue, that is, that the observed shift in decisionmaking power from the General Assembly to the Security Council on counterterrorism represents more than an institutional change. It has implications for the law
on the use of force and illustrates a change in the preferred responses to terrorism.
An excessive securitization of strategies might narrow the focus of the debate and
miss valuable opportunities to address the root causes of the phenomenon, not to
mention the risk of unilateral military action undermining the collective system
established under the Charter of the United Nations.
The repudiation of terrorism is enshrined in the Brazilian Constitution as a
guiding principle of our foreign policy. Terrorism defies our sense of humanity and
attempts to create an environment of indifference and chaos. To counter it, we must
not lower our standards to match those of the ones we are fighting against. Rather, we
must uphold the basic values of human dignity, while acting within the parameters
of international law, including human rights law, humanitarian law and refugee law.
Brazil remains committed to actively contribute to those efforts and determined
to work with all partners against terrorism, including through the investigation of,
and the fight against, possible connections between terrorism and transnational
organized crime.

21-0048257/129

S/2021/48

Annex 29
Statement by the
United Nations

Permanent

Mission

of

Canada

to

the

[Original: English and French]
Canada would first like to thank the Republic of Tunisia for organizing
this open debate, which provides a timely opportunity to reflect on the important
developments since resolution 1373 (2001) was adopted. It also enables us to identify
challenges, consider emerging trends and assess opportunities to shape future
multilateral action to counter terrorism as we approach the review of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy this summer.
Since 2001, the international community has made great efforts to combat
the global threat of terrorism. While we have achieved significant progress, the
threat continues to evolve and adapt to our concerted action. The coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic has had an impact on almost every aspect of our
lives, including the security landscape. It is not only a public health crisis — it is
also an economic, social and gendered crisis that has deepened existing inequalities
and plunged tens of millions of people into extreme poverty. Increased poverty and
inequality, coupled with the marked increases in Internet use, has provided terrorists
and violent extremist groups with new opportunities to manipulate individuals and
generate fear and confusion. That has enabled them to increase recruitment, raise
money, propagate hateful messages and spread damaging misinformation. Moreover,
the international community is witnessing increasing instances of ideologically
motivated violent extremism that are incited by narratives of violent misogyny,
nationalist or racial supremacy. Those varied movements and complex, emerging
forms of violent extremism present grave challenges to the international community.
They are a threat to our democratic institutions and values and to the safety, security
and stability of our communities and must be vigorously opposed.
Destabilizing threats to democracy, the rule of law, human rights, social
and economic development, peace and security demand an urgent response. In
the current and post-COVID-19 environment, we need to become as creative
as our adversaries if we are to stem that trend. We must also stand up for human
rights and ensure adequate safeguards are in place so that our counter-terrorism
efforts do not inadvertently exacerbate vulnerabilities, including of minority or
marginalized communities.
In the lead-up to the seventh biennial review of the Global CounterTerrorism Strategy, Canada is committed to ensuring that our United Nations
counter-terrorism efforts are responsive to the rapidly evolving counter-terrorism
environment and practically support the work of front-line practitioners, who are
at the core of preventing and countering violent extremism and terrorism in their
local communities.
To ensure effective and sustainable approaches, it is vital that our global
counter-terrorism interventions respect human rights consistent with international
law, are victim and trauma-informed, age and gender sensitive and responsive to the
diverse needs and experiences of the individual and community.
The voices of women’s groups and civil society organizations must be at
the table and meaningfully integrated in all of our peace and security efforts. In
particular, a gender-informed approach that recognizes the varied experiences and
roles men and women play in terrorist and violent extremist organizations is crucial
to our global efforts. Terrorist groups exploit and reinforce harmful gender norms
and dynamics in order to recruit, radicalize and retain membership. By recognizing
58/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

and understanding those dynamics, we can more effectively combat terrorism and
violent extremism.
A civilian-led, evidence-based approach that respects human rights will
lead to better, more effective impacts that are sustainable, long-term and foster
community resilience. In sum, the human rights pillar of the United Nations
counter-terrorism architecture must be more fully rooted in all aspects of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
Despite its significance and many achievements, the Global CounterTerrorism Strategy must continue to evolve to achieve its full potential. As partners,
we can work together to promote, protect and support local-level actors to build
capacity to deal with radicalization to violence in their communities. The Global
Counterterrorism Forum (GCTF), which Canada co-chairs with the Kingdom of
Morocco, strengthens our coordinated response to terrorism by providing a platform
to share tools, best practices and lessons learned that are shared with the global
community. As we have seen, terrorists are creative and opportunistic. The GCTF’s
action-oriented, nimble and informal approach makes it particularly well-placed to
support the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact work
to counter terrorism and to prevent violent extremism.
Canada looks forward to continuing its constructive and cooperative
discussions during this year’s review of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.

21-0048259/129

S/2021/48

Annex 30
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Colombia to
the United Nations, Andrés José Rugeles
[Original: Spanish]
I welcome the convening of this Security Council debate on the twentieth
anniversary of resolution 1373 (2001).
For Colombia, the resolution and subsequent ones flowing from it are vitally
important instruments that reinforce and reiterate the obligations and commitments
of States in the fight against terrorism, including fundamental agreements such as
the Inter-American Convention against Terrorism, in the case of our region.
The resolution is also central to the adoption of measures to prevent the
financing of such organizations and to promote international cooperation. That
was precisely the spirit that motivated Colombia 20 years ago, as a member of the
Security Council, to be one of its sponsors, both in its drafting and adoption.
Today my Government once again reiterates its rejection and condemnation of
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. Terrorism must not be associated with
any religion, civilization, ethnicity or nationality, and for the same reason that its use
is not justifiable under any circumstance.
In that regard, Colombia calls for the full implementation of resolution 1373
(2001) and subsequent resolutions to reject the harbouring of terrorist organizations
on the territory of States and the actions of those groups.
In the current global context, international conflicts, migration crises and
the growing power of transnational criminal organizations provide a breeding
ground for terrorist organizations to diversify their methods, logistical channels
and sources of funding. From that perspective, the fight against terrorism faces six
fundamental challenges.
It must count on the unwavering commitment of the members of the international
community to combat that criminal activity and support regional and subregional
cooperation initiatives in that area. It must combat the strong and unavoidable
links that terrorist organizations have with transnational organized crime, which
relies on illicit activities for its financing. It must build adaptable institutions and
strategies to confront the permanent changes in criminal organizations’ methods. It
must strengthen cooperation in the design and implementation of counter-terrorism
policies and the adoption of effective measures to ensure compliance, while
respecting the rule of law. It must resolutely fight against corruption that facilitates
the financing and criminal activity of terrorist organizations. It must promote the
adoption of international counter-terrorism instruments and the implementation of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
The implementation of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
is a priority and should include a set of actions that require the coordination of
various strategies and actors.
We need to continue strengthening the capacities of our States in areas related
to judicial and procedural capacities, develop national strategies, improve measures
to prevent and suppress the financing of terrorism and improve channels for technical
assistance and international cooperation. All that must be done while maintaining a
balance between the need for more effective counter-terrorism measures and respect
for international obligations, in particular from the perspective of international
human rights law and international humanitarian law.
60/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

Currently, radicalized criminal and terrorist organizations are unfortunately
present in Latin America. An illegitimate regime in the region continues to tolerate
the presence of those groups on its territory, thereby affecting regional security. We
are concerned about the strong links they have with transnational organized crime,
such as drug trafficking, illegal mining, money laundering and arms trafficking,
among others.
Those organizations not only threaten the rule of law but also democratic
systems and the effective enjoyment of human rights. Those circumstances make it
important to analyse in depth the scope and magnitude of the terrorist phenomenon
and its financing in the region. It is therefore essential that the Office of CounterTerrorism and the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact
consider the possibility of strengthening their action in Latin America to improve
the response of the United Nations system to the threats of terrorism.
We believe it is important that, together with the Counter-Terrorism Committee
and its Executive Directorate, we can continue to develop important tools to monitor,
promote and facilitate the implementation of relevant counter-terrorism resolutions,
including resolution 1373 (2001).
A more comprehensive and multidimensional hemispheric vision is needed
to deepen cooperation in combating terrorism and terrorist organizations in the
Americas, as well as to identify new trends at an early stage and address possible
gaps arising from the cross-border operations of criminal organizations.
In conclusion, I would like to underscore that my country firmly believes that
international peace and security are based on the joint and transparent building of
cooperative relations in the fight against one of the most terrible scourges of today’s
reality. An effective fight requires greater determination by States and collective
action at the global level. We have a responsibility to work with greater solidarity in
the face of transnational crime in order to lay solid foundations for a new project of
modernity in which a renewed multilateralism and shared responsibility prevail over
isolated and individual visions and efforts.

21-0048261/129

S/2021/48

Annex 31
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Cuba to the
United Nations, Pedro Luis Pedroso Cuesta
[Original: Spanish]
Cuba welcomes this debate on a very important issue on the international
agenda. The facts confirm that terrorism remains a serious challenge that can be
tackled only through international cooperation. Our country strongly supports the
collective efforts of the United Nations in its fight against that scourge. It is up to
the United Nations, given its universal nature, to lead those efforts on the basis of
respect for the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
international law.
We reiterate our strong condemnation of all terrorist acts, methods and
practices in all their forms and manifestations, regardless of their motivations.
The Cuban Government is firmly committed to the prevention of, and the
fight against, terrorism, which was raised to the constitutional level in its Magna
Carta, adopted by referendum on 24 February 2019, following a process of broad
popular consultation. The Constitution of the Republic, in Chapter II, article 16 (l),
on international relations, reaffirms Cuba’s long-defended position and makes the
“repudiation and condemnation of terrorism in any of its forms and manifestations,
in particular State terrorism” one of the principles of its foreign policy.
Our country strictly complies with the obligations arising from the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council and the General Assembly. We note that, on 21
October 2020, the Republic of Cuba ratified the Protocol to amend the Convention
on Offences and Certain Other Acts Committed on Board Aircraft, becoming the
fifth country in the world to become a party to the 19 international instruments on
the subject.
Cuba, which has been the victim of terrorist acts that have cost the lives of
3,478 people and caused disabilities to 2,099 others, has never allowed, or will it
allow, its territory to be used for the organization of terrorist acts against any State.
On 13 May 2020, Cuba was arbitrarily included in the unilateral and spurious
list of the United States State Department as a country that supposedly does not fully
cooperate in the fight against terrorism. Similarly, and without any basis whatsoever,
an annual report by the State Department on international terrorism described our
country as a “safe haven” for terrorists.
We condemn the recently announced inclusion of Cuba in the State
Department’s unilateral list of State sponsors of terrorism, which has become a
personal campaign of the outgoing Secretary of State, Michael Pompeo, and his
discredited foreign policy. Meanwhile, the United States Government guarantees
refuge and impunity to terrorist groups acting against Cuba from its territory.
The United Nations should speak out against that type of unilateral lists
and labels, which are politically manipulated and contrary to international law
and which serve only to defame and coerce countries that refuse to obey the will
of the Government of the United States in their sovereign decisions. That was the
same Government that chose not to publicly condemn or reject the serious terrorist
shooting perpetrated against the Embassy of the Republic of Cuba in Washington,
D.C., on 30 April 2020, which endangered the lives and safety of the personnel of the
Cuban diplomatic mission and their families.
62/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

The history of violent and hostile acts against Cuban diplomatic headquarters
on United States territory is well known, including terrorist acts against Cuban
diplomatic officials, which have even claimed human lives, both at the Washington,
D.C., headquarters and at the Permanent Mission to the United Nations in New York.
We warn once again that the complicit silence of the United States Government may
encourage similar acts against our diplomatic missions in Washington, D.C., and
New York.
In the framework of the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1373 (2001), we recall that all countries must take the necessary measures to prevent
the commission of acts of terrorism, including through early warning and the
exchange of information between States, as well as cooperate, in particular through
bilateral and multilateral agreements and conventions, to prevent and suppress
terrorist attacks, and take measures against those who commit acts of that nature.
Global efforts to combat terrorism in all its forms and manifestations require
an integrated approach through direct engagement, prevention and concrete actions
to eradicate its root causes. It is essential to provide international assistance and
cooperation to build and strengthen the capacities of developing countries to confront
that scourge.
We urge that the negotiation of a comprehensive convention on international
terrorism be resumed as soon as possible, covering all aspects of that despicable
phenomenon, including acts in which States are directly or indirectly involved. We
strongly reject the use of the banner of a so-called fight against terrorism to commit
acts of aggression, undermine national sovereignty, interfere in the internal affairs
of other States and violate the human rights of their peoples.

21-0048263/129

S/2021/48

Annex 32
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Denmark to the
United Nations, Martin Bille Hermann
I have the pleasure to submit this statement on behalf of the Nordic countries,
namely, Finland, Iceland, Norway, Sweden and Denmark.
The Nordic countries wish to thank Tunisia for organizing today’s open
debate commemorating the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1373 (2001) and the
establishment of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC).
The evolving threat of terrorism and a changing terrorism landscape —
ranging from the globalization of the threat from Da’esh to right-wing and left-wing
violent extremism — call for even further multilateral collaboration on preventing
and countering that increasingly complex threat. The Nordic countries remain fully
committed to engaging constructively with all partners as we continue our joint
efforts to rid the world of the scourge of terrorism. Over the years, we have benefited
greatly from both formal and informal interactions with the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED), and we extend our appreciation to
Assistant Secretary-General Coninsx and her team for our excellent cooperation.
Increased efforts to enhance the transparency of the work of the CTC and other parts
of the counter-terrorism architecture will be important as we move ahead. In that
vein, we refer to Finland’s decision to make its country report publicly available.
We live in a time of multiple crises, exacerbated by the ongoing coronavirus
disease pandemic. That draws on already stretched financial resources, and we
therefore welcome further coordination within the United Nations family according
to each entity’s mandate, in particular on capacity-building and technical assistance
efforts across CTED, the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism (UNOCT)
and the Terrorism Prevention Branch of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, as well with as the wider global counter-terrorism architecture, including the
Global Counterterrorism Forum (GCTF) and the global coalition to defeat Da’esh.
In order to ensure the most effective impact of scarce resources, we caution against
developing new initiatives instead of leveraging already existing platforms within
and outside the United Nations system.
With regard to the GCTF, we welcome the ongoing efforts of the UNOCT
leadership and the co-Chairs of the Global Counterterrorism Forum, Canada
and Morocco, to further strengthen their ties and coordination. We would like to
highlight the important role of the GCTF in implementing United Nations-level
agreed principles and priorities through the International Institute for Justice and the
Rule of Law, the Global Community Engagement and Resilience Fund (GCERF) and
other GCTF-inspired initiatives, where we are fortunate to benefit from Tunisia’s
very constructive engagement.
We must work tirelessly to build the resilience of our local communities as the
first line of defence against those who instigate hate and discord. But community
resilience must never become an excuse to turn a blind eye to bad governance,
corruption, human rights violations and abuses, lack of inclusion, the persecution
of marginalized groups and other drivers of radicalization leading to terrorism.
As discussed in last week’s useful meeting on partnerships and challenges in
international counter-terrorism efforts, it is the responsibility of the national
authorities to develop the tools and allocate the necessary resources to prevent and
counter violent extremism in close cooperation with civil society, local communities
and other relevant actors.
64/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

In that regard, we value greatly our partnerships with GCERF, the Strong
Cities Network and its Young Cities programme. Across the globe, both initiatives
support local efforts and civil society, including human rights defenders and women
and youth-led organizations, to address the drivers of violent extremism and prevent
radicalization leading to terrorism, as well as to strengthen the social contract
between national Governments and communities. In the long run, we firmly believe
that this is the most effective way of preventing the threat from global terrorism. The
ongoing support of the Government of Kenya for both initiatives has been critical for
their success, and we encourage Kenya to use its visionary continental leadership to
promote a multifaceted, locally anchored approach to countering violent extremism
at the global level during its important tenure on the Security Council.
We must also expand, encourage and develop initiatives to deal more
effectively with the nexus between terrorism and organized crime. These global
security challenges are closely connected, and they must be addressed both within the
security pillar and as part of advancing 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Many of the areas where violent extremist groups are most active also suffer
from a high exposure to climate risks. A recent policy brief by the United Nations
Development Programme includes examples where the impacts of climate change can
aggravate the root causes of violent extremism, contribute to push-and-pull factors
for recruitment and alter the broader strategic environment in ways that strengthen
violent extremist groups. Climate change multiplies existing risks in some of the
most volatile regions of the world when it comes to terrorism and violent extremism,
and we need to better understand all their complex drivers in order to identify areas
and opportunities for cooperation on preventive measures.
While preventing people from radicalizing in the first place is the most
sustainable, long-term solution, it is equally important to ensure that our
relevant national agencies are fit for purpose and ahead of the curve when it
comes to countering individuals or groups who are plotting to commit attacks.
A gender-responsive approach to countering terrorism and preventing violent
extremism is necessary in order to achieve sustainable results, as is the continued
promotion of women’s active and meaningful participation in prevention and
counter-terrorism efforts.
Let us also use this opportunity to emphasize the need to ensure that counterterrorism initiatives do not negatively impact or restrict the humanitarian activities
and assistance upon which millions of people worldwide are dependent. Humanitarian
actors must always be allowed to carry out their impartial work without impediment.
We should constantly remind ourselves of the essential principles that we have
all signed up to, that all measures taken to combat terrorism must respect human rights
and that effective counter-terrorism measures and the protection of human rights are
not conflicting but mutually reinforcing goals. Those principles should guide any
kind of counter-terrorism intervention and must be front and centre as we embark on
the coming review of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. That
is not because such principles look good on paper but because a human rights-based
approach ensures good governance, builds trust with communities and reduces the
risk of driving vulnerable individuals or groups further into the arms of radicalizers
and facilitators. In other words, a human-rights and rule-of-law compliant response,
coupled with a strong focus on early prevention, with civil society, women and young
people as equal partners, is in the interest of our national security.

21-0048265/129

S/2021/48

Annex 33
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Ecuador to the
United Nations, Cristian Espinosa Cañizares
[Original: Spanish]
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this second open
debate for the month of January on a crucial issue for peace and security. That is
even more evident when we are only eight months away from commemorating the
twentieth anniversary of the regrettable attacks of 11 September 2001 in the United
States, in particular this city, New York, the Headquarters of our Organization.
Ecuador would like to take the opportunity of this debate to clearly reiterate
once again its strong condemnation of all acts of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, regardless of their purpose, origin or who carries them out.
Terrorism, in addition to undermining international peace and security,
affects human rights, democratic stability and the economic and social development
of States, thereby weakening the international community as a whole.
No State, no matter how powerful, is shielded from persistent terrorist threats
and neither can it overcome them on its own. On the contrary, the international fight
against terrorism is a task that must be undertaken in a cooperative manner through
the implementation of joint and coordinated measures and actions to counteract its
harmful and devastating effects.
In the light of resolution 1373 (2001), adopted by the Security Council
20 years ago, we must continue to strengthen our global efforts in the prevention
of terrorism, which is as important as its suppression. To that end, it is essential
to identify and eliminate the causes and factors that encourage or facilitate acts
of terrorism, including its financing and political, ethnic and religious intolerance,
among other things.
In that regard, Ecuador is developing and implementing measures for the
progressive implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) — for example, by criminalizing
the financing of terrorism and money-laundering and through preventive measures
and international judicial cooperation.
The Comprehensive Organic Criminal Code expressly criminalizes terrorism
and its financing, recognizing the direct relationship with the crime of moneylaundering. Likewise, the Law for the Prevention, Detection and Eradication of
Money-Laundering and Financing of Crimes aims to prevent, detect in a timely
manner, punish and eradicate money-laundering and the financing of crimes in its
various forms.
Ecuador has been and will continue to be a country of peace. But we also face
challenges. In 2018 we suffered acts of violence by irregular armed groups linked
to transnational organized crime. Terrorist attacks on the northern border resulted
in injuries, deaths and displaced persons, as well as affected State infrastructure.
As an immediate response, the Government of Ecuador established the National
Committee for Integrated Border Security to ensure the coordination and articulation
of policies, guidelines, procedures and actions in that area.
In order to effectively tackle transnational organized crime and terrorism in all
their dimensions, it is essential to build the capacities of all States. It is also essential
to take into account new threats that make all our countries more vulnerable, such as
the misuse of information and telecommunications technologies by terrorist groups
66/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

and transnational organized crime. We must therefore accelerate our efforts to make
cyberspace more secure.
The Council has acknowledged the United Nations as the global platform
called upon to lead the fight against terrorism and transnational organized crime.
Therefore, the best way for the United Nations to commemorate the twentieth
anniversary of resolution 1373 (2001), adopted on 28 September 2001, will be to
strengthen coordination among the various United Nations bodies and international
cooperation among all our countries.

21-0048267/129

S/2021/48

Annex 34
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Egypt to the United Nations
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, allow me to congratulate you, Sir, and our sister country
Tunisia on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
January 2021. I wish you every success in that task. We would also like to express
our deep appreciation for the outstanding job being done by our dear brother Tarek
Ladeb, Permanent Representative of Tunisia, as Chair of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC).
Egypt supports the statement submitted by the representative of Saudi Arabia
(annex 59) on behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
Today we celebrate the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1373 (2001), which
took the international fight against terrorism to a new level. Since that resolution was
adopted, several effective structures for international counter-terrorism cooperation
have been established at the United Nations level, notably, the CTC, the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate, the United Nations Counter-Terrorism
Centre and the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism. At the conceptual level,
the past two decades have seen the adoption of several important Security Council
resolutions that address particular dimensions of counter-terrorism, such as terrorist
financing, organized crime, foreign terrorist fighters and countering terrorist ideology.
The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, approved by the General
Assembly in 2006, with its six reviews, is also an important reference document that
provides direction and guidance to the international counter-terrorism system.
Despite those positive developments, which have reinforced international
and United Nations efforts to confront international terrorism, that pernicious
phenomenon has demonstrated its ability to continuously develop and create new
challenges and threats. Hence the importance of our meeting today, which is a
necessary pause to assess successes, but more importantly to identify the most
notable current and future challenges and come up with ideas and actions to address
them. Based on the experience of recent years, the three most significant challenges
in the fight against terrorism at this stage, and our views on how to deal with them,
are as follows.
First, centralized State authority has collapsed. In some cases, terrorist
organizations, chief among them the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, have
exploited the vacuum left by the collapse of central State authority and weakened
control to extend their control in an unprecedented manner. That highlights the
importance of supporting all efforts to restore security and stability in conflict zones
and providing all possible support to the central State authorities to enable them to
restore security, stability and the rule of law and bring a speedy end to the chaos and
vacuum being exploited by terrorist organizations.
Secondly, the open sponsorship of terrorist organizations by certain
Governments and the provision of material, moral and media support is another
serious challenge that undermines international efforts to combat terrorism and
threatens international peace and security. In that connection, the Security Council,
the CTC and the Council’s sanctions committees must assume their responsibilities
and hold accountable those States that violate Security Council counter-terrorism
resolutions and the various sanctions regimes. Such States use terrorist and
extremist organizations to foment sedition and threaten civil peace in other States.
That includes by transferring foreign terrorist fighters from some conflict zones to
68/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

others to support illegal interventions in the internal affairs of States and attempts to
violate their sovereignty to achieve narrow political objectives.
Thirdly, terrorist organizations use modern technology to support their
terrorist activities, using virtual space and social media to spread hate speech and
virtual encrypted currencies to obtain funding for their terrorist activities. We must
constantly be alert to these new methods, and legal frameworks must be developed to
combat their use, both through Security Council resolutions and the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy review process.
Egypt reiterates its stance calling for a comprehensive counter-terrorism
approach that includes the relevant security, economic, social and educational
dimensions, while stressing the need to devote the necessary attention to the
ideological confrontation of terrorism. Egypt also emphasizes that the main
responsibility in the fight against terrorism rests with Member States and their
relevant national institutions. Hence the need to fully respect the principles of
sovereignty and non-interference in internal affairs. Egypt also stresses the need to
intensify efforts to combat all terrorist organizations equally and reject any attempts
to make unjustified distinctions among them on the basis of degree of extremism or
violence. Egypt believes that agreement on a comprehensive international counterterrorism convention in the near future — which has long been sought — would
represent a significant positive step forward towards strengthening the international
confrontation of terrorism and addressing present and future challenges.

21-0048269/129

S/2021/48

Annex 35
Statement by the Permanent Mission of El Salvador to the
United Nations
As a founding Member of the United Nations and signatory State of its Charter,
El Salvador maintains its firm commitment to and unconditional support for the
fundamental principles set forth therein, including the maintenance of international
peace and security. Accordingly, El Salvador supports all initiatives to promote the
due fulfilment of those principles, in particular those that support compliance with
resolutions of the Security Council through effective measures to prevent, combat
and eradicate threats to peace, of which terrorism in all its aspects, including its
financing, is among the most serious.
At the international level, terrorism comes in many varieties, with complexities
that correspond to the geographical, regional and national contexts from which
they emerge. El Salvador adamantly condemns terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. Because of this variety and complexity, counter-terrorism efforts
must take these intricacies into account and develop common strategies to target and
tackle them effectively.
My delegation acknowledges the importance of promoting a culture of peace
at the global level, while maintaining the protection of and respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms as a priority. The Republic of El Salvador views with
concern the different threats to international peace and security that have emerged
recently, including the particular challenges resulting from the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, but we will always deeply regret the loss of human life
resulting from terrorist attacks in different parts of the world, especially when it
comes to such vulnerable groups as women and children.
The adoption of numerous Security Council resolutions related to terrorism,
the expansion of the mandate of the Counter-Terrorism Committee and the
coordinated work of the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism demonstrate
a strong will to strengthen and adapt international cooperation to the fight against
these threats. While there is a strong political and normative framework in place,
there remain a number of challenges related to emerging trends in terrorism that
need to be addressed.
In particular, El Salvador wishes to highlight the trend associated with the link
between organized crime and terrorism, including a range of such criminal activities
as trafficking in weapons, counterfeit goods, drugs, persons, cultural property and
antiquities, as well as kidnapping for ransom and exploitation of natural resources. It
is clear that these linkages are complex, fluid and constantly evolving.
With regard to El Salvador, my country’s social fabric has suffered considerable
damage despite the application of the 1992 Peace Agreements; indeed, social and
economic marginalization has created conditions for the emergence of a new form of
organized crime, namely, gangs. Over time, gangs have become organized structures
with diversified operations that include extortion, territorial control and exploitation
of local drug markets — all of which has increasingly threatened the rule of law
in the country. That is why, within the context of its national legal framework, El
Salvador adopted the Special Law Against Acts of Terrorism, which recognizes and
defines gangs, among other criminal organizations, as terrorist groups.
To counter the challenge of gangs, the Government of President Nayib
Armando Bukele has prioritized the Territorial Control Plan, a comprehensive and
firm response designed to protect our population from terrorist groups and the
various forms of organized crime. The principal goal is to mend the vulnerable
70/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

local social fabric, recover national territory and public spaces and empower youth.
A year after initiating the plan, El Salvador has recorded a historic drop in the
number of homicides; there have even been days where no incidents of homicide has
been recorded.
The fight against terrorist groups has not flagged even against the backdrop of
the COVID-19 pandemic. The Salvadoran Government’s tireless efforts have made
it possible not only to maintain the areas recovered but also to significantly reduce
cases of extortion, drug trafficking, femicide, forced disappearance and many
other crimes.
In conclusion, one of the foundations for strengthening multilateral cooperation
is the fight against terrorism, given its linkage with organized crime. El Salvador
acknowledges that the fight against terrorism transcends national boundaries, and
therefore considers it to be of paramount importance to keep working on regional
and international cooperation to prevent and fight terrorism, focusing on a fluid
exchange of information and good practices, standardizing legal frameworks and
using new technologies to combat organized crime. We look forward to a closer
partnership with the United Nations in undertaking efforts to that end.

21-0048271/129

S/2021/48

Annex 36
Statement by the Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations
The candidate countries the Republic of North Macedonia, Montenegro,
Serbia and Albania, the country of the Stabilization and Association Process and
potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with this statement.
The European Union (EU) and its member States express their full solidarity
with the victims of the recent terrorist attacks that have taken place throughout
the world. Countering terrorism is a priority we all share. Working together, we,
the United Nations, the European Union and its member States, remain tirelessly
committed to mitigating this scourge. Only together can we put a stop to terrorists
and their backers.
In the face of terrorist attacks, we, the European Union and its member States,
are upholding the common values that underpin our pluralist societies and are
continuing with determination to pursue efforts to defend them. In the light of the
constantly evolving nature of the threats from terrorism and violent extremism, we
must continue to work together to build upon progress achieved while prioritizing
better. We must adapt and improve the tools we need to address the threat, particularly
at a time when we are all working on a global response to the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic. In that regard, the European Union and its member States
continue to believe that multilateral efforts are essential and must continue to be
reinforced. That is why we thank Tunisia for convening today’s timely open debate
to commemorate of the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1373 (2001) and the
establishment of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC).
This statement covers two main sections, broadly reflecting the focus of
today’s open debate: first, emerging trends and common priorities that shape future
multilateral action, and secondly, progress made as well as gaps and challenges in
terms of international cooperation.
As to emerging trends and common priorities, key challenges related to
the prevention and countering of violent extremism and terrorism demand further
resolute action from all of us — the United Nations, the EU and all States Members
of the United Nations. The EU and its member States consider that further efforts
are required, particularly when it comes to mitigating the exploitation of rapid
technological developments, including the misuse of the Internet and social media
for terrorist purposes; addressing the increase in home-grown radicalization leading
to terrorism and anticipating the persistent threat posed by terrorist sleeper cells
and lone actors of all forms of terrorism; and adequately monitoring formerly
incarcerated individuals who, on the basis of a risk assessment, are deemed to pose
a continued threat after serving terrorism-related sentences.
We also consider that further efforts are required in adapting to the
developments in anti-money-laundering and anti-terrorism financing standards and
legislation, while addressing such key challenges as the exploitation of formal and
informal money or value transfers and new forms of payments and strengthening
measures to prevent those threats; tackling emerging and hybrid threats to aviation,
critical infrastructure and public spaces; and restricting access to weapons and
dangerous materials and substances, such as chemical and explosive precursors.
Increased efforts are also necessary for addressing the spread of violent
extremist ideologies, including the growing threat from politically motivated
violent extremism and terrorism, such as far-right and far-left violent extremism
72/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

and terrorism; bringing foreign terrorist fighters to justice and preventing their
movement, especially undetected crossings of borders; and meeting the need to
rehabilitate and reintegrate foreign terrorist fighters and their family members.
Furthermore, as the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic represents an unprecedented
challenge, with wide-ranging effects that will only fully unfold in the long term, a
specific effort should be made to assess its potential influence on terrorist activities
and on the prevention and countering of violent extremism and terrorism, as well as
to identify possible targeted action.
In all our efforts, we recall the need for a strong human-rights-based approach
to prevent and counter violent extremism and terrorism and reiterate that countering
terrorism must never serve as a pretext for human rights violations. We must respect
our values, norms and principles under all circumstances; it is fundamental for
successful and sustainable counter-terrorism efforts. The failure to respect human
rights and the marginalization of individuals and groups contribute to increased
radicalization and violence and foster a sense of impunity. We must work harder to
avoid any potential negative impact of counter-terrorism measures on humanitarian
activities, including medical activities, carried out by impartial humanitarian actors,
in full compliance with humanitarian principles and international humanitarian
law. We must therefore develop best practices and adopt appropriate mitigating
measures, including well-framed humanitarian exceptions adapted to the relevant
specific contexts.
We encourage the efforts of the United Nations to ensure a whole-of-society
approach to countering terrorism and preventing violent extremism, and we call
for strengthened collaboration and cooperation among Governments, academia, the
private sector and civil society. Our approach must be gender-responsive and provide
opportunities for young people to strengthen resilience against radicalization. We
must address the underlying conditions of terrorism and violent extremism and foster
means for addressing various political, social and other grievances. In addition, we
should pay specific attention to victims in the fight against terrorism and ensure that
their rights are protected and promoted.
Following recent attacks in States members of the European Union, in December
2020, the EU introduced a new counter-terrorism agenda, which establishes the way
forward in the fight against terrorism in the years to come. The agenda is built
around four pillars — anticipation, prevention, protection and response. International
engagement across all of these pillars is essential to improving security.
Internally, we are enhancing our efforts to combat incitement to hatred,
violence and intolerance; step up the fight against illegal content online, for example,
by seeking to reinforce the responsibilities of online platforms; support initiatives
to better understand the spread of extremist ideologies through comprehensive
exchanges of scientific knowledge, research and expertise; cut off resources of
terrorism financing and tackle non-transparent financing; and strengthen police
and judicial cooperation and coordination, for example, through strengthening the
mandate of the EU’s law enforcement agency, the European Union Agency for Law
Enforcement Cooperation, while respecting human rights and making every effort
to protect the humanitarian space.
Assistance to, and the protection of, victims of terrorism and their families
as well as their contribution to building the resilience of our society is an integral
part of EU legislation and other counter-terrorism efforts. In order to assist EU
member States in the implementation of EU rules on rights of victims of terrorism,
the European Commission has set up a centre of expertise for victims of terrorism.
The national contact points for victims of terrorism, nominated by the EU member
21-0048273/129

S/2021/48

States, are an essential step to further enhance cooperation and the provision of
information for victims in the event of terrorist attacks.
Outside our borders, we are working with countries in the Western Balkans,
in the Middle East, North Africa, the Sahel and the Horn of Africa, and we are also
increasing our efforts in Central, South and South-East Asia to help build capacity,
encourage mutual learning and find common areas of cooperation, including judicial
cooperation. We hold regular counter-terrorism dialogues with key partners and
have established a network of counter-terrorism/security experts in EU delegations
to support political dialogue and capacity-building efforts, as well as to provide for
stronger links with strategically important partner countries and regions.
As to the progress made as well as gaps and challenges in terms of international
cooperation, the EU and its member States want a strong and efficient United
Nations that drives the crucial global agenda on preventing and countering violent
extremism and terrorism. In that regard, we are encouraged by the United Nations
commitment to strengthening coordination with a view to implementing an all-ofUnited Nations approach to countering terrorism and preventing violent extremism.
Strong coordination and cooperation between the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED) and the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism
(UNOCT) is essential, as they work within their mandates and in their distinct roles
to ensure effective alignment of the United Nations technical and capacity-building
assistance with gaps in implementation and capacity as identified by CTED.
In addition, we consider that there is an urgent need to put in place human
rights checks and balances within the United Nations counter-terrorism institutional
structures, involving such key players as the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism,
in order to promote a human rights and democracy-based approach to counterterrorism. Furthermore, all United Nations agencies should meaningfully engage
with civil society as a vital partner in developing inclusive strategies to prevent
violent extremism, with input from, inter alia, youth, families, women and cultural
and educational leaders.
We wish to specifically welcome the efforts of the CTC and CTED to organize
more regular open briefings, such as the recent ones on emerging threats and on
civil aviation, which are proving to be good opportunities for detailed discussions
on specific topics, ensuring the dissemination of expert information and providing
an excellent opportunity for the sharing of best practices. We look forward to the
continuation of such efforts.
CTED’s recommendations in its country assessments are extremely helpful
in assisting countries to be prepared for emerging threats and trends, particularly
when it comes to their eventually requesting and receiving necessary assistance. In
that regard, we welcome the fact that those assessments are comprehensive and adapt
to the threat and the needs of the relevant countries. We also welcome the fact that
such elements as emerging threats, the effects of counter-terrorism measures on the
humanitarian space and respect for human rights are also being assessed.
We would refer in this context to Finland’s choice to make its CTC country
report publicly available. This type of effort aimed at enhancing transparency — upon
the decision of the relevant country — provides an opportunity for the assessments to
be used as a tool not just for United Nations entities beyond CTED and the UNOCT
but also counter-terrorism agencies of Member States of the Organization.
With regard to the United Nations sanctions regime against terrorist groups
and individuals, we reiterate our full support for the Office of the Ombudsperson to
74/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011). We welcome the
significant and much-needed contribution of the Office to fairness and transparency
and to ensuring due-process rights. We must ensure the implementation of relevant
resolutions and enhance our efforts aimed at strengthening due process and fair and
clear procedures in all sanctions regimes, in accordance with international law and
human rights instruments.
In these matters, the European Union seeks to do its part. We will steadfastly
continue to build and strengthen our strategic partnership with the United Nations.
Contacts with CTED are expanding, with the aim of strengthening our own
understanding of the regions and countries with which we work and better tailoring
EU programming to local needs. Moreover, we are major contributors to the
UNOCT and have started several new programmatic activities together, including
the United Nations-EU counter-terrorism partnership in the Sudan; the joint project
between the United Nations Centre for Counter-Terrorism and the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) aimed at preventing acts of nuclear terrorism
through the promotion of the universalization and effective implementation of the
International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism; and
engagement on preventing violent extremism in South-East Asia with the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) which complements the STRIVE Asia
initiative jointly launched by the UNOCT, UNDP and the UNODC.
In support of global efforts, we are also working closely with other international
partners such as the Global Counterterrorism Forum, NATO, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the Financial Action Task Force and the
international counter-ISIL coalition. We support all United Nations efforts aimed at
coordinating with these partners.

21-0048275/129

S/2021/48

Annex 37
Statement by the
United Nations

Permanent

Mission

of

Georgia

to

the

This year marks the twentieth anniversary of the terrorist attacks in New
York, Washington, D.C., and Pennsylvania on 11 September 2001, the subsequent
adoption of the landmark resolution 1373 (2001), on 28 September 2001, and the
establishment of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC).
Resolution 1373 (2001) has become the cornerstone of the counter-terrorism
architecture. A wide range of topics have been addressed by several consecutive
Security Council resolutions. The CTC and its Executive Directorate play a key role
in monitoring and facilitating the implementation of the relevant resolutions. With
all the necessary tools and mechanisms in place, the States Members of the United
Nations are actively cooperating, exchanging information and working together to
prevent and counter terrorism.
However, in recent years we have witnessed terrorist threats that have
evolved significantly and become more complex, which includes the expansion of
terrorist networks and their financial capacities, the use of sophisticated methods
for recruitment and the ability to adapt to existing counter-terrorism mechanisms.
Remarkable progress has been achieved in counter-terrorism but, given the everemerging threats, we need to identify possible gaps and challenges in terms of
international cooperation and future multilateral action. In that regard, let me share
the experience of my Government.
According to the Global Terrorism Index 2020 and other relevant reports,
Georgia is not one of the number of countries at a high risk of terrorist attack.
Nevertheless, considering the global security landscape, as in other countries
terrorism-related challenges still exist, as no country is immune from that serious
threat to international peace and security. Therefore, the Government of Georgia
has been actively working to detect threats in the continuously shifting landscape of
terrorism and to develop efficient, coherent and coordinated ways of responding to
them, in line with its international commitments.
At the national level, the Government of Georgia continues to take effective
and comprehensive counter-terrorism measures, including the upgrading of the
legislative framework, the carrying out of law-enforcement measures and active
domestic and international coordination and cooperation, as well as various
prevention-oriented projects and programmes with the aim of reducing the threat.
Georgia has substantially enhanced its counter-terrorism legislation over the
years, which has resulted in effective law-enforcement and criminal justice measures
to address and prosecute perpetrators connected with international terrorism.
Georgia pays due attention to strengthening rule-of-law-based and human-rightscompliant law enforcement along with enhancing international cooperation.
In 2019 the Government of Georgia approved the National Strategy of Georgia
on the Fight against Terrorism and its Action Plan for 2019-2021, which were elaborated
with the engagement of all relevant agencies. The recommendations of civil society
and experts as well as the best practices and experience of international partners were
taken into consideration during the elaboration process. The strategy is composed of
seven pillars that are the main directions of the fight against terrorism in Georgia,
namely, obtaining and analysing terrorism, extremism and radicalization-related
information; prevention; protection; preparedness; prosecution; the development
of a legislative framework; and international cooperation. The document is based
upon a whole-of-society approach, and various stakeholders, including central and
76/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

local authorities, public-private organizations and civil society, are engaged in the
implementation process.
Georgia has a sound legal framework for international cooperation and has
mechanisms in place to conduct it. Georgia is a party to the 14 United Nations antiterrorism conventions and continues to enhance the international legal framework in
the areas of law enforcement and security. Overall, Georgia has already concluded
more than 30 cooperation agreements with international organization/partner
countries in the field of the fight against crime, inter alia, addressing terrorism, as
well as the Agreement on Operational and Strategic Cooperation with the European
Union Agency for Law Enforcement Cooperation.
Furthermore, Georgia has concluded agreements on the exchange and mutual
protection of classified information with 24 partner countries, as well as with
NATO and the European Union. The State Security Service of Georgia is actively
cooperating and directly shares information on terrorism with the relevant authorities
of partner countries and international organizations.
Georgia has been an active member of the Global Coalition against
Da’esh since the very beginning and has been contributing significantly to the
maintenance of international peace and security through its participation in
multinational operations.
In 2018, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED)
visited Georgia, conducting a follow-up assessment visit to the country. The visit
aimed at enhancing monitoring and supporting the implementation by the country
of the relevant Security Council resolutions and recommendations, amplifying the
exchange of information on global terrorism threats as well as reviewing the activities
conducted by Georgia since the previous visit by the Committee and defining the
fields across which Georgia can share best practices with other countries.
Georgia is actively involved in international efforts and will continue to
pursue the fight against terrorism alongside the international community. We remain
committed to enhancing cooperation with all international and regional organizations
and their agencies, including being actively engaged, sharing experiences and
best practices and carrying out joint projects, training and measures in the fight
against terrorism.

21-0048277/129

S/2021/48

Annex 38
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Guatemala to the
United Nations
This open debate is of particular relevance because 20 years ago the world
witnessed with fear the appalling effects of terrorism in the attacks that occurred on
United States soil on 11 September 2001. Today the scourge of terrorism continues
to affect the international community in general, but during those 20 years we have
seen how the world has joined forces to combat terrorism and promote international
peace and security. We appreciate the interest that the Security Council and Tunisia,
in its capacity as President of the Council, are taking in continuing to address its
consequences and in identifying the challenges facing and opportunities available
to States in terms of prevention and, where appropriate, the punishment of those
responsible for the indiscriminate violence caused by terrorism.
My delegation reiterates that terrorism is a global phenomenon that, in
addition to causing anxiety, trauma and despair, must be addressed from its root
causes, but at the same time recognizes that this phenomenon cannot and should not
be specifically associated with any religion, nationality, civilization or ethnic group.
Terrorism is a form of violent struggle that indiscriminately victimizes the civilian
population in order to confuse, frighten and capture the attention of public opinion
for political, ideological or sectarian purposes, in addition to benefiting primarily
from the illicit trafficking of arms and drugs, which weaken democratic institutions,
randomly attacking the rule of law.
Twenty years after the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001), States must identify
the achievements of international cooperation in counteracting the injurious effects
of terrorism worldwide, as well as the good practices of States in that respect at
the national, regional and international levels, mainly, as stipulated in the eighth
preambular paragraph of the resolution, by
“taking additional measures to prevent and suppress, in their territories through
all lawful means, the financing and preparation of any acts of terrorism”.
In that respect, we would highlight the fact that one of the significant
advances in the fight against terrorism has been international cooperation to prevent
the financing of terrorism — for example, in the case of the Regional Cross-Border
Transportation Network of the Financial Action Task Force of Latin America
(GAFILAT) to combat illicit financial flows, within which we would stress the
efforts of the Ministry of the Interior and the Public Ministry of our nation for
their active participation in the GAFILAT Asset Recovery Network, which helps the
region to coordinate and unify its efforts towards the same goal.
Likewise, we emphasize the value of national action to prevent international
terrorism, and in that respect we congratulate ourselves on the progress made in this
matter in our country, as evidenced by the efforts of the Special Verification Office
of the Superintendency of Banks, which, together with national banks and in a spirit
of goodwill, has implemented the Money Laundering and Terrorist Financing Risk
Management Guide.
In addition, the banking sector actively participates in the National Money
Laundering and Terrorist Financing Risk Assessment process, an exercise at the
country level that seeks to identify national threats and vulnerabilities in order to
orient efforts and resources according to the risks identified.
In addition, we would highlight the work of the Presidential Commission for
the Coordination of Efforts against Money Laundering or other Assets, Terrorist
Financing and Financing of Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction, which was
78/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

created in 2010 and has established itself as a pillar for inter-institutional cooperation
against the financing of terrorism. It gave rise to the National Strategic Plan against
Money Laundering, Financing of Terrorism and Financing of the Proliferation of
Weapons of Mass Destruction, evidence of the commitment made at the country
level in the fight against that scourge.
It is also important to mention that the actions taken to prevent the financing
of terrorism are based on legislation that has been key in providing tools to the justice
system, which, through the criminal classification of terrorism-related activities,
helps to bring their offenders to justice.
At the international level, there exist valuable legal instruments to combat
terrorism, although the general perception of our people is that such regulations are
insufficient in the face of the devastating onslaught of terrorism and transnational
crime. As such, the United Nations and the Council must harmonize their efforts
to implement, in a balanced manner, the four pillars of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy and consider common actions to attack that scourge.
The Central American region, and my country in particular, is affected by
multiple illicit activities owing to its geographic position, including drug trafficking,
money laundering, contract killings, human trafficking and the indiscriminate
and illegal use and trafficking of weapons, which exacerbate the threat posed by
organized crime and can be used to facilitate terrorist groups’ achievement of
their objectives.
In that respect, we must recall that threats to international peace and security
are largely caused by the proliferation and possession of small arms and light
weapons. This is not to mention the threat of weapons of mass destruction falling
into the hands of non-State actors that could then make attempts against human
integrity and innocent peoples.
Therefore, the additional commitment of our countries is to ensure the
correct implementation of the various conventions and resolutions related to the
fight against terrorism and to urge States to adopt and implement effective laws
that criminalize the financing of terrorism and proscribe the supply or any kind of
support to non-State actors that attempt to develop, acquire, manufacture, possess,
transport, transfer or use small arms and light weapons or nuclear, chemical or
biological weapons. That will put us on the right path towards protecting life and
human dignity and contributing to efforts to promote global peace and security.

21-0048279/129

S/2021/48

Annex 39
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Hungary to the
United Nations
The date of 11 September constitutes a new milestone in the history of
terrorism. The pictures of the attacks against the World Trade Center shook the world
and will remain with us forever. The reaction of the international community was
clear: closer collaboration is of strategic importance in tackling terrorism, which is
one of the most comprehensive security challenges.
The threat has truly become multifaceted over the past 20 years and has
morphed into much more than a security problem. Its political and economic impacts
have reached new heights. Whether a terrorist act is committed physically or its
impact fuels online terrorist activity, it fundamentally challenges the values that we
hold dear. Terrorism nowadays is a truly global phenomenon with local implications.
In the past few years, it has become clear to my country that we are only as strong
as the nation States participating in the fight against terrorism. Therefore, as part
of making global cooperation more effective, it is high time to find appropriate
national responses. In our view, thinking and acting both globally and locally are
equally important.
The fight against terrorism is one of the cornerstones of Hungarian foreign
policy, and prevention is a key part of our strategy. Our overarching goal is to find
viable solutions to confront the challenges posed by terrorism. We are present in
international stabilization efforts, including numerous missions led by the United
Nations, the European Union (EU), NATO and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, and we are also a member of the Global Coalition against
Da’esh. We launched a comprehensive programme called Hungary Helps and have
spent more than $43 million to provide direct humanitarian and development
assistance to Christian communities in the Middle East and Africa, with the aim of
helping to restore adequate living conditions.
There was a clear need to strengthen the internal security of Hungary as well,
especially after we realized that terrorists could, unfortunately, take advantage
of uncontrolled, illegal migration flows to Europe. By protecting our borders and
adopting the necessary legal measures, our country protects the EU as well. In 2016,
reacting to the most pressing national security challenges, Hungary established the
Counter-Terrorism Information and Criminal Analysis Centre, which provides us
with the most comprehensive threat assessment. As an important part of its activities,
it examines transnational as well as national-level interactions between terrorism
and organized crime. Our capital, Budapest, is honoured to host several important
institutions promoting international cooperation against terrorism. The EU Agency
for Law Enforcement Training, the International Law Enforcement Academy and the
United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism Regional Programme Support Office
are all part of an important common learning process.
Today’s topic reminds us that we must remain committed in our fight against
terrorism even amid extremely adverse circumstances. I would like to thank the
United Nations for having convened today’s open debate, which takes stock of the
most pressing terrorism-related issues and the results achieved. Finally, let me
reiterate Hungary’s unwavering support in terms of assisting international counterterrorism efforts.

80/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

Annex 40
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Indonesia to the
United Nations, Dian Trian-syah Djani
We would like to thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Migration
and Tunisians Abroad, Mr. Othman Jerandi, for organizing and presiding
over this important open debate. We also wish to thank the briefers for their
insightful presentations.
We welcome the presidential statement (S/PRST/2021/1) just adopted on
this matter.
Indonesia wishes to associate itself with the written statements submitted by
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia (annex 59) and the Republic of Azerbaijan (annex 24),
submitted on behalf, respectively, of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
The adoption of the landmark resolution 1373 (2001) marked a change in the
global approach to counter-terrorism. Much has been achieved since its adoption,
but challenges and opportunities remain in the overall counter-terrorism landscape.
With that in mind, this statement will focus on three issues.
The first relates to the dynamic and complex challenges in the counterterrorism arena. There are numerous indications that terrorist threats and forms have
continued to evolve and are becoming more sophisticated. The downfall of some
terrorist groups and the decrease in their activities and resources evidently do not
mean their end outright. Those groups have continued to transform, and therefore
continue to pose huge challenges.
Moreover, more recently we also have witnessed the rise of another form of
terrorism, which is racially or ethnically motivated. Therefore, we feel it is only wise
not to go overboard and declare victory over terror just yet. We must continue to
be vigilant.
That leads to my second point, regarding adaptive capability in countering the
terrorist threats. Given the nature of the challenges of terrorism, not only do we need
to be decisive, consistent and firm in our policies; we must also be flexible in our
strategies, as well as innovative and practical in our approach.
To put it in today’s debate context, we rely on the Security Council, particularly
its Counter-Terrorism Committee, to undertake strategic thinking and take swift
action to fulfil its mandate and various tasks, including to assist Member States in
achieving the full and effective implementation of Council resolutions. We cannot
afford to have an evil opponent with rapidly changing forms of operation outpace
our international cooperation.
And that brings me to the last point, regarding international and regional
cooperation. Resolution 1373 (2001) called on States not only to implement a number
of internal measures but also to work together to prevent and counter terrorist
acts. The many recent challenges reflect the need for the effective implementation
of relevant international instruments, Security Council resolutions and, more
important, cooperation and collective action between and among States, relevant
regional organizations and mechanisms and civil society. It is important to mention
that several regional organizations and mechanisms, such as the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations, have done extensive work in this area, and therefore have
an abundance of experience to share. In addition, as first responders to threats in their
regions, they are continuously working on smart and innovative solutions to emerging
challenges. In that regard, more structured coordination and greater interaction
21-0048281/129

S/2021/48

among the Council, various United Nations bodies and relevant international and
regional partners would enable us to address these challenges in an effective way. If
the United Nations invests more in supporting the capacity of regional arrangements
to address the issue at the regional level, eventually the United Nations will reap the
benefit of their knowledge, perspectives and experience.
Terrorism remains a scourge upon humankind. We need to have a clear
strategy to address its root causes and ensure that this tragic cycle of violence will
not repeat itself. No justification is good enough, and, again, Indonesia condemns
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, no matter its origins or motivations.

82/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

Annex 41
Statement by the delegation of the International Committee of the
Red Cross to the United Nations
This year marks the twentieth anniversary of the attacks of 11 September
2001, the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001) and the establishment of the
Security Council’s Counter-Terrorism Committee. These anniversaries are a good
opportunity to assess counter-terrorism measures adopted by the Security Council
and elsewhere. The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) wishes to
contribute a humanitarian and legal perspective to today’s discussion and address
potential negative consequences, recent positive developments and what more needs
to be done to improve counter-terrorism measures.
International humanitarian law prohibits terrorist acts. As a humanitarian
actor, and as guardian of international humanitarian law, the ICRC condemns
such acts, irrespective of their perpetrators, and recognizes the need for States to
take measures to ensure the security of their people. However, if not adopted and
implemented carefully, such measures can have negative consequences on persons
most in need of humanitarian protection and assistance in armed conflicts. Certain
measures, most notably counter-terrorism legislation and sanctions, can criminalize
and restrict impartial humanitarian action, while counter-terrorism clauses in grant
contracts, banking de-risking measures and sanctions regimes collectively also lead
to a chilling effect, which disincentivizes or prevents front-line responders from
reaching populations in need. This particularly affects local-level humanitarian
actors and their partners.
Counter-terrorism measures compounded by coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
restrictions made access for impartial humanitarian organizations more difficult in
the past year. We estimate that over 60 million people live in areas where non-State
actors exercise control. With counter-terrorism measures and COVID-19 restrictions,
those populations and others affected by armed conflict and violence are harder to
reach. Impartial humanitarian actors such as the ICRC are hindered in their ability
to visit persons being detained by “the other side”, recover dead bodies, train armed
groups on international humanitarian law, restore damaged water supplies and other
services for the civilian population and facilitate mutual detainee releases and swaps.
In recent years, positive developments have included elements of resolutions
2462 (2019) and 2482 (2019), through which the Security Council recognized the
impact counter-terrorism measures can have on impartial humanitarian action
and required States to comply with international humanitarian law when acting
to prevent terrorism. Those resolutions also urged States to take into account the
potential effect of counter-terrorism measures on impartial humanitarian action. The
June 2020 report by the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) (S/2020/493, annex) shows
that most States may not yet be doing so. The September 2020 report by the Special
Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental
freedoms while countering terrorism (see A/75/337) has increased awareness on the
issue and highlights steps the Security Council could take.
There have been some other positive developments in protecting impartial
humanitarian action while countering terrorism. The last few years have seen the
adoption by some States of new legislation recognizing such impacts and taking
steps, including through humanitarian exemptions, such as those adopted recently
by Chad and Switzerland, to minimize such impacts. National cross-sector dialogues
among interested stakeholders — including non-governmental organizations,
humanitarian actors, Government regulators and the private sector — now exist in a
21-0048283/129

S/2021/48

small number of countries, and initiatives such as the recent Global Counterterrorism
Forum experts meetings can increase knowledge of, and best practices related to,
such forums.
More remains to be done, however. Further well-crafted humanitarian
exemptions could be adopted by more States and promoted by the Security Council.
These are best achieved through standing exemptions covering the exclusively
humanitarian activities carried out by impartial humanitarian organizations operating
in accordance with international humanitarian law, rather than ad hoc remedies,
which can be inefficient and require unwarranted time and resources. National
cross-sector dialogues could be established in more countries. Humanitarian-impact
assessments could be incorporated into the work of more sanctions regimes, as could
international humanitarian law compliance clauses. Banking overcompliance with
counter-terrorism provisions can be addressed through better regulation.
With regard to foreign fighters and their families, the ICRC is particularly
concerned with the situation of children. Children affected by such measures, even
those accused of crimes, are first and foremost victims. The ICRC encourages States
to find solutions that are in the best interests of these children, notably by seeking
to ensure that they are not separated from their parents and siblings, by repatriating
them, with their mothers and siblings, unless against their best interests, and by
refraining from prosecuting children for mere association with an armed group. That
is all the more important given the dire humanitarian situation these children face.
Reintegration will be key for these future generations.
The designation of persons as “foreign terrorist fighters,” or the terrorist nature
of the acts they may have committed, may in no way be invoked as a justification for
the non-observance of legal protections they are entitled to under international law,
notably international humanitarian law, when applicable. Independent and neutral
organizations, such as the ICRC, should be granted access to these individuals, so
they can assist detaining authorities in ensuring that detainees are treated humanely
and in conformity with applicable international law and standards.
This year’s important anniversaries provide a good opportunity to get the
balance right between international humanitarian law and humanitarian action on
the one hand, and counter-terrorism provisions adopted by the Security Council and
elsewhere on the other. We look forward to participating in these continuing efforts.

84/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

Annex 42
Statement by the Office of the Special Representative for the
International Criminal Police Organization to the United Nations
The international community continues to face an ever-changing set of capable,
mobile and resourceful non-State actors with intent to commit acts of terror against
civilians and law enforcement and Government stakeholders. As we enter a new
year, trends from past decades persist. Foreign terrorist fighters continue to move
around conflict zones, to third countries or back to their home countries, bringing
in tow expertise, experience and modus operandi unfamiliar to local authorities.
Through information and communication technologies, non-State actors transfer
knowledge to a global audience, often evading law-enforcement detection. The face
of international terrorism today brings into sharp focus the need for enhanced crossborder engagement and exchange of operational information and police data to build
a global threat picture and respond accordingly.
For many in the international community and INTERPOL’s 194 member
countries, countering terrorism remains a major priority. This central role is
evidenced in INTERPOL’s Global Policing Goals, designed to support the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and its Sustainable Development Goals.
Against this backdrop, in 2021 resolution 1373 (2001) and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, established pursuant to paragraph 6 thereof, remain core components
of the global counter-terrorism architecture. INTERPOL, in line with its mandate
and Constitution, has been and will remain a steadfast partner in efforts to
support member countries to implement resolution 1373 (2001), including through
our participation in the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate’s
national assessments.
The exchange of operational information foreseen in paragraph 3 (a) of the
resolution is essential to countering terrorism and conducting lawful investigations.
The exchange of operational information among law enforcement agencies is a
constant thread throughout effective counter-terrorism efforts at the national,
regional and international levels. INTERPOL is a vital resource in that regard as
it is uniquely mandated to facilitate the exchange of operational information and
police data among member countries through the National Central Bureaus network.
INTERPOL takes this opportunity to invite the international community to continue
to share operational information and police data with INTERPOL in the interest of
international police cooperation.
INTERPOL wishes to acknowledge the importance of cooperation among
international organizations on counter-terrorism. In that regard, the Global CounterTerrorism Coordination Compact and its eight working groups provide a valuable
space for enhanced cooperation and coordination among participating entities.
INTERPOL is a committed stakeholder, notably through its chairpersonship of the
Working Group on Emerging Threats and Critical Infrastructure Protection and
it vice-chairpersonship of the Working Group on Border Management and Law
Enforcement. INTERPOL acknowledges the leadership and support for the Compact
provided by the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism.
Resolution 1373 (2001) mandates meaningful and coordinated action and,
in important ways, law-enforcement agencies serve as key implementers of its
provisions at the national level. In order to conduct these specialized duties and
effectively contribute to national, regional and global counter-terrorism efforts, our
law-enforcement community requires sustained support. INTERPOL will continue
to play its clearly defined and globally acknowledged role.

21-0048285/129

S/2021/48

Annex 43
Statement by the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of the Islamic Republic of Iran to the United Nations,
Eshagh Al Habib
I would like to begin with thanking the Tunisian presidency of the Security
Council for organizing this open debate to assess the progress made in fighting
international terrorism and to identify related challenges.
Despite achievements in combating international terrorism, there remain a
number of challenges, and much needs to be done to avert the threats it poses to our
societies. Besides the low level of international cooperation, a major challenge to
international efforts in combating terrorism is the selective, imbalanced and partial
implementation of relevant international legally binding instruments.
Yet the greatest factor challenging the effectiveness of international efforts is
the action by certain States in politicizing counter-terrorism. The adoption of that
detrimental approach has already resulted in grave and far-reaching security and
legal consequences.
For instance, while all States must comply with international law in combating
terrorism, certain countries violate even the basic principles of international law
under the pretext of counter-terrorism efforts. The clear example is the violation of
the sovereignty, political independence, unity and territorial integrity of Syria by
the United States. While it claims that its military presence in Syria is for fighting
terrorism, it neither has obtained the consent of the Syrian Government to do so in
that country nor is it duly authorized by the Security Council.
Another manifestation of such irresponsible policies is the preparation
by the United States of the so-called list of terrorism-sponsoring States. The
mere function of that list, which is political in nature and lacks any conclusive
evidence to substantiate the allegations made, is to blackmail the adversaries of the
United States.
Most often, this illegitimate tool is used to justify the application of unlawful
unilateral sanctions on such States, which itself, by its nature and definition, is an
act of terrorism in which economic means replace weaponry. Unilateral sanctions of
the United States against Iran are clear examples of economic terrorism since they
cause death with the declared intention of compelling the Iranian Government to
do, or to abstain from doing, certain acts as defined by the United States. Through
hampering international cooperation, unilateral sanctions also seriously undermine
international efforts to combat terrorism.
A similar tool is the designation of entities or officials of the adversary States
as the so-called terrorist organizations or individuals. These unlawful designations
are often used to apparently justify the terrorist acts of the United States against such
organizations or persons, the living example of which is the horrific assassination of
martyr Qasem Soleimani in January 2020, in a terrorist act conducted at the direct
order of the United States President in gross violation of international law. Given the
leading role of martyr Soleimani in defeating Security Council-designated terrorist
groups in the region, his assassination was an exceptional gift to Da’esh and helped
it to increase its terrorist activities in Iraq and Syria.
The irony is that such designations and lists include only countries and
organizations that resist the hegemonic policies of the United States. Conversely,
they exclude the Israeli regime, which inherently is founded on terrorism, and the
involvement of its institutions and authorities in terrorist acts is well-documented,
86/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

the latest example being the serious indications that the assassination of martyr
Fakhrizadeh, a prominent Iranian scientist, on 27 November 2020, was conducted
by the Israeli regime.
Harbouring terrorists and providing them with a safe haven is another
indicator of the politicization of, and selective approach in, counter-terrorism efforts.
Since a few years ago, the United States, in clear violation of its obligations under
international law, has been harbouring the Mojahedin Khalkh Organization — an
extremely dangerous terrorist group that is responsible for the killing of more than
12,000 Iranians and many Iraqis — and providing its members with safe havens.
Just very recently, the current Administration of the United States, in an
entirely vindictive move, designated Cuba as a so-called State sponsor of terrorism
and Ansar Allah of Yemen as a so-called terrorist organization, and also baselessly
accused Iran of having ties to Al-Qaida, which we reject categorically. The Islamic
Republic of Iran condemns, in the strongest possible terms, all such unfounded and
politically motivated acts.
The aforementioned cases are only a few examples of how destructive the
politicization of counter-terrorism efforts and the selective, imbalanced and partial
implementation of relevant international obligations are. If left unaddressed, such
challenges would further undermine international cooperation, erode our counterterrorism capacities and ultimately embolden terrorist networks to increase their
activities. We should not allow this to happen, particularly owing to the newly
sophisticated means used by terrorists that necessitate our further vigilance and
enhanced cooperation in a genuine and constructive manner and in full accordance
with international law, as well as through the adoption of a comprehensive and nonselective approach to address all root causes of terrorism and combating it in all its
forms and manifestations.
As an active country in combating terrorism in the region, the Islamic Republic
of Iran stands ready to continue its unprecedented contribution towards uprooting
this menace.

21-0048287/129

S/2021/48

Annex 44
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Israel to the
United Nations, Gilad Erdan
The State of Israel embraces resolution 1373 (2001). Its adoption has been
central to effectively combating terrorism in the world after 11 September. The
resolution has led the way for the imposition of critical sanctions against some of the
leading threats to world security — Da’esh, Al-Qaida and the Taliban.
Israel also embraces the important work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate. As a leading partner in the global fight against terrorism, we
will continue to work with those bodies to combat all forms and manifestations
of terrorism.
In looking towards the future and the actions that are needed from the Security
Council, the United Nations and Member States to fight terrorism effectively, I
would like to suggest the following five steps.
First and foremost, the Security Council and the United Nations as a whole
must adopt a zero-excuses and zero-tolerance policy for terrorism. Terrorism is
terrorism is terrorism, and should never be excused or justified. The United Nations
should serve as a moral compass and embrace this approach with no ambiguity
whatsoever. To do otherwise is to politicize and render impotent any meaningful
effort to fight terrorism.
Secondly, we need collective action to prevent the spread of terrorism, hatred
and incitement on the Internet and social media platforms. As United Nations
bodies have reported, there has been an upswing in online activity, incitement and
recruitment by terrorist organizations in 2020. There is no doubt this will have longterm implications on global peace and security. We must create public-private global
partnerships to curb this disturbing trend. Companies must take responsibility
for their role in this and take immediate action to prevent their platforms from
becoming breeding grounds for extremism. While freedom of expression is of the
utmost importance and must be safeguarded, it cannot be used as an excuse to allow
incitement and radicalization to continue undisturbed.
Thirdly, it is time to embrace counter-terrorism decisions and strategies that
not only address past challenges but also adequately confront current and emerging
threats. While the Security Council has rightfully imposed sanctions on some of the
main perpetrators of terrorism — namely, Da’esh, Al-Qaida and the Taliban — it
has failed to address the threat posed by other non-State, major terrorist groups,
especially Hamas and Hizbullah. By failing to do so, this institution has turned
a blind eye towards groups that terrorize civilians regardless of their nationality
or religious affiliation, use innocent victims as human shields and threaten
global security.
Fourthly, it is incumbent upon the Security Council to take critical and decisive
action against States that arm, train and sponsor terrorists and acts of terrorism. It
is not enough to sanction merely the terrorist groups themselves. While the Security
Council has adopted some important decisions in recent years to prevent the financing
and material support to terrorist groups, more must be done. The Iranian Ayatollah
regime advances its malign geopolitical goal of regional and political hegemony by
supporting its terrorist proxies, wreaking havoc and spreading violence throughout
the Middle East and beyond. This must be stopped.
Finally, the United Nations must cease to embrace States and entities that
glorify terrorists and reward acts of terrorism. For example, there should be a clear
88/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

and unambiguous condemnation of the Palestinian Authority’s pay-to-slay policies.
Staying silent as terrorists and their families are rewarded for murderous violence,
with higher sums for more violent and bloody acts, is no less than complicity. Such
policies encourage terrorism, and the Governments and entities that implement them
should be condemned.
Twenty years after the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001), the global fight
against terrorism has seen many important achievements. By adopting the five
important measures I described, the international community can better prepare
itself and properly respond to the challenges that global terrorism poses to our
present and future world.

21-0048289/129

S/2021/48

Annex 45
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Japan to the
United Nations, Ishikane Kimihiro
Let me begin by expressing Japan’s appreciation for the initiative of the
Tunisian presidency to hold an open debate on this important theme.
Despite the dire warning that the 11 September attacks gave to the international
community in 2001 to redouble its counter-terrorism efforts, terrorist activities
continue to pose a serious threat to international peace and security. There is a risk
that social vulnerabilities exacerbated by the ongoing coronavirus disease crisis will
be exploited by terrorists and violent extremists.
Having itself experienced sarin gas attacks by a religious cult in the 1990s,
Japan has been taking strict counter-terrorism measures, fully implementing relevant
Security Council resolutions and supporting United Nations-wide efforts.
First, cognizant of the crucial importance of suppressing the financing
of terrorism, Japan has frozen the funds and other financial assets of designated
individuals and entities in accordance with the relevant Security Council resolutions,
including those listed in March 2020 pursuant to Resolution 1373 (2001). Moreover,
to tackle the emerging forms of terrorist financing sources and platforms such as the
dark web and crypto assets, Japan has supported the capacity-building efforts by the
United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism to raise awareness among officials of
Member States in Asia, enhancing their investigative skills on the Internet and social
media through human rights-based approaches.
Secondly, we need to focus our attention on the Internet, which has become
a major arena in the fight against terrorism. Multi-stakeholder collaboration is key
to preventing and countering the abuse of the Internet by terrorists. To that end,
following up on the Christchurch Call to Action, Japan, as the Chair of the Group of
Twenty (G-20) in 2019, took the initiative to issue the G-20 Osaka Leaders Statement
on Preventing Exploitation of the Internet for Terrorism and Violent Extremism
Conducive to Terrorism. Japan has also actively engaged in discussions on this issue
as a member of the Independent Advisory Committee of the Global Internet Forum
to Counter Terrorism, so as to strike a delicate balance between the freedom of
expression and effective online regulation.
Thirdly, we must continue to tackle wider issues in society that provide
breeding grounds and safe havens for terrorist groups. As part of such efforts,
Japan has keenly backed the efforts by the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate to improve strategies for prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration of
terrorists in South-East Asia.
Notwithstanding the pandemic, the year 2021 is full of opportunities to
advance multilateral counter-terrorism actions, including the review of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. Japan is honoured to host the fourteenth
United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice in Kyoto in
March, in cooperation with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.
In conclusion, Japan avails itself of this commemoration to reaffirm
its commitment to global counter-terrorism efforts here at the United Nations
and beyond.

90/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

Annex 46
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Jordan to the United Nations
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, I should like to thank the Permanent Mission of Tunisia, which
holds the presidency of the Security Council for the current month, for convening
this meeting to mark the occasion of the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1373 (2001), which was an important resolution that contributed to the
establishment and consolidation of global efforts to combat the scourge of terrorism.
We must continue to address the challenges arising from terrorism through a
comprehensive approach that consolidates international cooperation in this area.
We hope that during this meeting we will identify the best ways to strengthen
international cooperation in the fight against terrorism and violent extremism
through an exchange of expertise and the provision of technical assistance required
to enable States to comply with the obligations imposed on them under the relevant
Security Council resolutions.
I must thank the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism and the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate for their ongoing efforts to enhance
international efforts by identifying the challenges arising from combating terrorism
and violent extremism, as well as the assistance they provide to States to address
those challenges. We are fully confident that the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Coordination Compact, put forward by the Secretary-General in 2018, will
help to ensure integration among the United Nations agencies that fight terrorism
and violent extremism so as to strengthen international coordination efforts.
The contributions of Jordan to the fight against terrorism have been ongoing at
various levels. They include promoting peaceful coexistence, harmony and interfaith
dialogue and developing techniques for countering the misguided extremist ideas
espoused by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and Al-Qaida to prevent that
dark ideology from hijacking the teachings of true Islam.
In the light of the manifold challenges presented by violent terrorism and
extremism, His Majesty King Abdullah II launched the Aqaba process at the State
leadership level as a platform to discuss these challenges and the main ways they
might be addressed, from military, security and intelligence needs to enhancing the
preventive and proactive approach to confronting extremist ideology in all its forms.
Aqaba process meetings have been held in several regions around the world. Those
meetings discussed the challenges faced by each region as a result of terrorism and
violent extremism, lessons learned and partnerships to address those challenges.
Those meetings were held in Albania, Nigeria, the Netherlands, the United States
and Singapore.
Jordan believes that terrorism is on the rise because of the chaos of conflict
and armed struggles. We are convinced that the fight against terrorism is closely
linked to the search for peace and just and comprehensive political solutions to major
international crises and addressing their roots. Peacebuilding plays an important
role in reducing those crises, which are the main fuel for the spread of terrorism and
extremist ideology.
We must not overlook the fact that economic pressures, particularly those
associated with the coronavirus disease pandemic, have brought about economic
contraction, widespread poverty and high unemployment. The negative effects are
not confined to the economic sphere but extend also to counter-terrorism. Economic
decline creates ideal opportunities for terrorist groups to exploit unfortunate
economic conditions to attract and recruit marginalized and disadvantaged young
21-0048291/129

S/2021/48

people. We must therefore make sustainable development a key ally in the fight
against terrorism and extremism, now and always.
The fight against terrorism and violent extremism requires that we not focus on
purely security efforts. While we recognize the importance of security measures and
the strengthening of the security of air, land and sea borders, attention must be paid
to intellectual counter-efforts against extremist ideas and cross-border ideologies. In
that regard, we stress the problems posed by insecure cyberspace, which is another
challenge that poses many complications. Terrorist and extremist groups exploit
numerous social media applications and electronic gaming platforms to spread their
extremist ideology rooted in a culture of hatred and non-acceptance of the other while
seeking to recruit Internet users and specifically the youth demographic. National
efforts should focus on raising the awareness among Internet users to prevent them
from getting caught up in this misguided ideology. In addition, we must increase our
technological capabilities to monitor potential dangers in cyberspace. International
cooperation and exchange of experiences will play an important role in building the
capacity of countries in this area.
The use of remote-controlled aerial technologies is also a serious challenge
when such technologies fall into the wrong hands. It would be prudent, from
a preventive standpoint, to regulate the acquisition of such technologies through
legislation and regulations for the purchase and use of such techniques. There must
also be international coordination to exchange technical expertise to defend against
such risks.
In conclusion, I should like to emphasize the commitment of Jordan to
combating terrorism and violent extremism, which flows from the Kingdom’s
enduring belief in moderation, restraint, the promotion of peace and the rejection of
the dark ideologies espoused by terrorist groups. Jordan will remain an active member
of the international system for combating terrorism and its extremist ideology.

92/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

Annex 47
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Libya to the United Nations
[Original: Arabic]
I am pleased, at the outset, to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for this month and to wish you all the best in
conducting its business and carrying out the duties assigned to it. I also thank you for
holding this virtual open debate on threats to international peace and security posed
by terrorist acts and international cooperation in the fight against terrorism 20 years
after the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001).
My country welcomes the Security Council’s diligence in periodically
reviewing the issue of terrorism, its multiple dimensions and its major negative
implications for all aspects of the current and future situations of peoples. We
are confident that resolution 1373 (2001), with its specific and clear international
commitments, provides an international approach to confronting terrorism and a
road map for the major tracks at all levels to strengthen and coordinate efforts to
eliminate this scourge, which threatens the security and safety of all and undermines
efforts to protect and reinforce human rights and reach internationally agreed
development goals.
Libya welcomes all international efforts aimed at continuing to develop and
implement plans and programmes to respond to the challenges posed by this growing
phenomenon, which threatens international peace and security as a whole.
Terrorism is no longer confined to a particular place or time. In the long-run
it represents a threat to all and causes human suffering almost every day around the
world. In our view, counter-terrorism plans and programmes cannot turn a blind
eye to addressing that scourge as a priority and creating suitable solutions. In that
regard, we stress the following.
It is important to develop peaceful and expeditious solutions to protracted
crises and conflicts. An end must be brought to foreign occupation of peoples’ lands
and the plundering of their resources, and the accompanying practices of injustice,
oppression and enslavement, and all forms of discrimination based on ethnic,
religious or sectarian affiliation. All manifestations of social marginalization must
be eliminated.
An end must be put to negative and illegal foreign interventions in conflicts in
certain areas. Such interventions are often responsible for fuelling and exacerbating
those conflicts and widening the cycle of violence, retaliation and extremism. That
increases the tasks and burdens on security institutions that undermine their efforts,
which creates an environment conducive to the activities of terrorist groups.
An end must be put to the use of modern technology and social media by
terrorist groups, which has enabled them to promote their extremist ideas and
develop their bloody methods.
We must increase dialogue, tolerance and understanding among civilizations,
cultures and peoples, promote mutual respect for religions and prevent defamation.
We must work to implement the agreed resolutions of the General Assembly in
that regard.
We all agree on the importance of strengthening joint cooperation based on the
exchange of information, experiences and successes in tracking terrorist networks
and bringing their members to justice. We believe that our regional and international
conventions are adequate to achieve the objectives to which we aspire. We emphasize
the important work of the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism and the
21-0048293/129

S/2021/48

Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, which have the capability to
provide the technical assistance that countries need to build their human resources
and institutional capacities to address and eliminate terrorism.
We in Libya have stressed at every opportunity our condemnation and
categorical rejection of terrorism in all its forms and regardless of its source or
motivation. We have warned against falling in line with those who try to link it to
a particular religion or belief, which only causes divisions and undermines efforts
to fight this scourge. We are constantly emphasizing that an equivalence should
not be drawn between terrorism and the struggle of peoples for independence and
self-determination.
The Security Council has adopted many resolutions that have called, among
other things, for the mobilization of regional and international efforts to address
this phenomenon. At the national level, we in Libya have made great sacrifices
to eliminate terrorists, most of whom are foreign fighters who have sought to
appropriate our country’s capabilities and resources to carry out their bloody plans
abroad. They are trying to spread terror and chaos and derail progress. We would
like here to warn against the danger of illegal interventions by certain States that
have had negative consequences for security and peace in my country. They have
contributed to institutional security weaknesses that have given the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant terrorist organization an opportunity, after having been defeated
in Sirte by the forces of the Government of National Accord, to re-emerge in the
south of Libya, where it is now carrying out bloody operations against security
personnel and innocent citizens.
Libya believes in the importance of strengthening international cooperation
to confront and eliminate terrorism. It has ratified all the international counterterrorism conventions. It attended the International Conference on CounterTerrorism. It views the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy as an
important legal framework for guiding the development of national legislation to
combat this phenomenon. Libya is diligent about participating in international
counter-terrorism conferences, including the International Conference on CounterTerrorism. It has acceded to instruments adopted by the African Union and the
League of Arab States. Libya is committed to cooperating, coordinating and
consulting with neighbouring States and its active partners to confront, prosecute
and hold accountable terrorist groups.
In conclusion, allow me to reiterate that the ever-increasing phenomenon of
terrorism demands concerted and consolidated international efforts supported by
genuine political will. We stand ready to cooperate in that regard with any measures
designed to bring about peace and security for all.

94/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

Annex 48
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Malaysia to the
United Nations, Syed Mohamad Hasrin Aidid
My delegation wishes to welcome His Excellency Mr. Othman Jerandi,
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Migration and Tunisians Abroad, and to thank his
delegation for convening this important open debate.
Malaysia associates itself with the statements submitted by the representatives
of the Republic of Azerbaijan (annex 24) and the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia (annex
59) on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation, respectively.
It is now almost two decades since the world re-energized its efforts to combat
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations in the wake of the horrific events of
11 September. Both landmark resolution 1373 (2001) and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, which is tasked with monitoring the implementation of the resolution,
have since then played a crucial role in our joint efforts to combat this global scourge.
Despite those efforts, however, the world is still confronted by this deadly
scourge that targets and victimizes innocent civilians. What we have also regrettably
witnessed is that the coronavirus disease pandemic has not stopped terrorists from
attracting new recruits or staging acts of terrorism. There is growing shared concern
that terrorists and violent extremist groups will seek to exploit the global disruption
caused by the pandemic, particularly in advancing their propaganda and fundraising
efforts. They also continue to exploit new technologies for radicalization and
recruitment. The increased online exposure and the borderless nature of the Internet
also serve to magnify the potential harmful impact of the spread of terrorist and
violent extremist content online.
Malaysia has left no stone unturned in the fight against terrorism and
extremism. We have strengthened our legislation, increased our law enforcement
and security forces operations and broadened our international cooperation with
our strategic partners. Malaysia fully subscribes to the notion that the fight against
terrorism will not end until the root causes are addressed. Military actions and
sanctions will continue to fail in stopping terrorism so long as the causes are not
identified and removed. Until we do that, the vicious cycle of terror and violence
will never end.
Malaysia is committed to combating terrorism through a whole-of-nation
approach. That includes robust national legal frameworks as well as bilateral,
regional and multilateral cooperation to meet our obligations to international
legally binding instruments and relevant United Nations resolutions, including
resolution 1373 (2001).
In Malaysia, terrorism is specifically criminalized under the Penal
Code (Amendment) Act 2014. We continue to focus on detection and preventive
measures to stay ahead of extremism and terrorism by enacting numerous laws
that are consistent with our international obligations and by strengthening our
capacity to counter extremist narratives. Malaysia has also developed an integrated
deradicalization module that addresses religious misconceptions of the radicals and
reintegrates them into the mainstream. At the regional level, since 11 January 2013,
Malaysia has been a party to the Association of Southeast Asian Nations Convention
on Counter-Terrorism. At the international level, Malaysia is a State party to 10 out
of the 19 international legal instruments concerning counter-terrorism.
Malaysia supports the implementation of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy, and we join other Member States in our common endeavour
21-0048295/129

S/2021/48

to enhance the work of the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism and other
United Nations entities and support their important initiatives. My delegation
commends the excellent work carried out by the Counter-Terrorism Committee, with
the support of its Executive Directorate, in raising awareness of emerging terrorist
threats, developments and trends, as well as in assessing the implementation of the
relevant resolutions by States. We look forward to seeing enhanced coordination as
well as the strengthened delivery of counter-terrorism capacity-building assistance
to Member States.
My delegation continues to believe in the need to conclude the comprehensive
convention on international terrorism, which would assist in filling the gaps in
existing treaties. Our position on the draft convention remains the same in that the
definition of terrorism must be all-encompassing to cover acts committed by States
and non-State actors alike. We believe that a distinction must be made between
terrorism and the legitimate struggle of people under foreign occupation for selfdetermination. Terrorism should also not be associated with any beliefs, ethnic
group or nationality.
In conclusion, Malaysia renews its unwavering commitment to strengthening
international cooperation in preventing and combating the scourge of terrorism.
Malaysia looks forward to and welcomes greater coordination and cooperation in
our collective efforts to counter that grave threat to international peace and security.

96/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

Annex 49
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Morocco to the
United Nations
[Original: French]
At the outset, allow me to express my delegation’s deep appreciation to
the Republic of Tunisia for the organization of this important open debate in this
pivotal year.
Through its landmark resolution 1373 (2001), adopted unanimously 20 years
ago, the Security Council established the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC),
entrusting it with the important task of paving the way forward in the fight against
terrorism. We would like to commend Tunisia’s leadership as Chair of the CTC, both
for the exemplary, timely and substantive decisions made in its open briefings, a
guarantee of its transparency and inclusiveness, and for its vision in conducting the
work of the CTC.
Likewise, we welcome the key roles of the CTC Executive Directorate, which is
responsible for supporting the Committee in fulfilling its mandate, and of the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism (UNOCT), and we particularly appreciate their
commitments to Member States. We thank Mr. Voronkov, Ms. Coninsx and the
representative of civil society for their insightful briefings.
Over the years, the international community has intensified its efforts and
the world has seen significant progress in the fight against terrorism. However,
much remains to be done to eradicate that scourge, as the terrorist threat continues
to transform and adapt to global circumstances by exploiting the gaps in counterterrorist responses, while making use of technological advances. Member States
must tackle the different aspects of terrorism, as well as being equipped to
prevent them.
Recent decades have seen a significant increase in terrorist activities, which
threaten international peace and security, endanger the stability of countries and
undermine the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States Members of the United
Nations, leading to too many victims.
Africa, the Sahel region and West Africa are increasingly affected by terrorism.
The coronavirus disease health crisis has increased the vulnerability of States in
the region to the threats posed by armed terrorist groups. The crisis has served to
highlight the importance of strengthening Government institutions in the countries
of the region in the social, economic, development and governance dimensions. In
that regard, international mobilization remains necessary to provide assistance to
those countries in a spirit of solidarity.
The threat of terrorism is multifaceted, evolving and long-lasting. To address
it, it is necessary to focus on building peaceful, inclusive and prosperous societies
based on the rule of law, human rights and sustainable development. Respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms in countering terrorism is essential in order
to ensure an effective judicial response in accordance with due process, as well
as effective prevention, so that counter-terrorist measures are not used by terrorist
groups for propaganda.
Resolute action against terrorist threats is also essential, but it must be
complemented by medium- and long-term investment in prevention and resiliencebuilding. To support that approach, States need strong institutions and effective
governance to deny terrorists and their supporters the space they need to carry out
their activities and to bring them to justice.
21-0048297/129

S/2021/48

Capacity-building is a central pillar in the fight against terrorism, as it enables
Member States to be equipped to deal with the threat. The UNOCT Programme
Office for Counter-Terrorism and Training in Africa, which Morocco is honoured
to host, is part of that effort, as it seeks to strengthen the capacity of Member States
through the development of national counter-terrorism training programmes in line
with the needs of African States.
Aware of the impact of the proliferation of transnational terrorist threats on
security and stability, Morocco is resolutely committed to promoting a comprehensive
and coherent approach to that scourge that combines, in a complementary and
integrated manner, the security and military dimensions, the achievement of
economic and human development, the preservation of cultural and religious identity
and international and regional cooperation.

98/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

Annex 50

Statement by the Permanent Representative of Myanmar to the
United Nations, Kyaw Moe Tun
Myanmar aligns itself with the statement submitted by the delegation of
Azerbaijan on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries (annex XXIV).
The nature of terrorist tactics and the global terrorism landscape have been
continually transforming since the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001). With the
use of advanced information and communications technology, terrorism becomes
transnational and increasingly complex. It is imperative to pay more attention to
capacity-building measures in order to narrow down the capacity gap among Member
States so that all Member States can deal with the evolving threats of terrorism under
resolution 1373 (2001).
In the past, we witnessed and experienced conventional terrorist acts,
such as bombings, kidnappings, armed attacks, assassinations, arson, hijackings
and skyjackings against law enforcement officers and Government assets. The
emergence of home-grown and lone-wolf terrorists has created unprecedented fear
and uncertainty within our societies and communities, since most attacks have been
directed against soft targets.
Myanmar unequivocally condemns and rejects terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations. Nowadays, many countries have been encountering complex
and pressing challenges to respond effectively to evolving threats from the return
and relocation of foreign terrorist fighters (FTFs). FTFs are able to infuse existing
domestic terrorist networks or create a new terrorist organization in a third country
by relocating their members to radicalize the targeted community and recruit
new followers.
The humanitarian crisis in Myanmar’s Rakhine state was ignited by the
unprovoked coordinated attacks of the terrorist group Arakan Rohingya Salvation
Army (ARSA), also known as Al Yaqin, against the country’s law enforcement units
in 2016 and 2017. ARSA’s leader, Atta Ulla, himself has been an FTF, since he was
born, raised and trained in foreign countries and has commanded terrorist acts from
outside Myanmar. In addition, ARSA has been guided and supported by foreign
terrorist groups, such as Al-Qaida and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant,
which have called for jihad against Myanmar.
Therefore, we are seriously concerned about the support of regional and
international terrorist organizations to make ARSA a part of the regional terrorism
networks. In that context, support to ARSA, including moral support, wittingly or
unwittingly, must be avoided. No terrorist activity can be justified or condoned as a
legitimate act for any reason.
In that regard, we are of the view that all Member States should be fully
committed to the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001), in particular paragraph 2,
which sets out the obligation that all Member States shall refrain from providing any
form of support, both actively or passively, to entities and individuals involved in
terrorist acts.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to reiterate Myanmar’s commitment
to combating terrorism in all its forms and manifestations and all acts and practices
of terrorism wherever, by whomsoever and for whatever purposes.
I would also like to affirm our continued support for, and cooperation with,
regional and international actors, including the United Nations, in the global
fight against terrorism. Accordingly, we look forward to further enhancing our
cooperation with the United Nations counter-terrorism bodies for capacity-building
and information-sharing.

21-0048299/129

S/2021/48

Annex 51
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Nigeria to the
United Nations, Tijjani Muhammad-Bande
I would like to thank the delegation of Tunisia for organizing today’s
open debate. I also thank the briefers for sharing their perspectives on this very
important subject.
The fallout of the 11 September 2001 terrorist attacks prompted the Security
Council to take important steps against terrorism. Perhaps its most important action
was the adoption of the landmark resolution 1373 (2001), which imposes binding
obligations on States to prevent and suppress the financing of terrorist acts, deny
safe haven to terrorists, set up effective border controls, enact domestic counterterrorism legislation and bring to justice those who commit acts of terrorism, among
other things.
Terrorism poses a major threat to international peace and security and
undermines the principles on which the United Nations was built. As this year
marks the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1373 (2001), which calls on States to
work together to prevent and suppress terrorist acts, including through increased
cooperation and the full implementation of the relevant international conventions
relating to terrorism, it is important to undertake a review on how States have
effectively coordinated the implementation of executive mechanisms in all areas,
including police and intelligence structures, customs and immigration accordingly.
However, the coronavirus disease pandemic has undoubtedly diverted attention
and resources towards addressing new challenges that have emerged. The pandemic
has presented challenges not only for national Governments but also for regional
cooperation, with many State institutions under considerable strain in responding
to the health, economic, political, social and security dimensions of the pandemic
within their borders. The crisis was therefore rapidly placed as a top priority of
national and international agendas, diverting attention, capacities and resources
from other core obligations, including counter-terrorism.
At the continental level, the African Union underscores the need for collective
approaches in the fight against terrorism and urges its member States to sign and
ratify all existing African Union and other relevant international instruments aimed
at preventing and combating terrorism. The Committee of Intelligence and Security
Services of Africa and the African Union Mechanism for Police Cooperation are part
of the security apparatus set up to build the necessary synergy and guard against the
duplication of efforts. That enhances information- and intelligence-sharing among
the relevant security agencies of Member States.
With the support of the international community, the Economic Community
of West African States has also concentrated efforts on enhancing the capacity of
national justice systems and cooperation between and among border police and
financial intelligence units, as well as the involvement of civil society groups and
local communities, aimed at preventing and combating terrorism.
Nigeria continues to face security challenges posed by various terrorist
groups, including the Islamic State West Africa Province and Boko Haram, which
focus their attention on attacking Government installations, security forces and
civilian targets in a bid to gain media attention and global prominence. Nigeria
continues to work with affected neighbours under the Multinational Joint Task Force
to counter the threat of such terrorists by blocking supply routes, eradicating bases
and training camps and reclaiming the control of territories. The assistance rendered
by international partners, notably the United Nations, the European Union, the
100/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

United States, France and the United Kingdom, to Nigeria and its Lake Chad basin
neighbours continues to consolidate regional and wider international cooperation.
In conclusion, we urge the Security Council to sustain its support for regional
organizations towards combating terrorism. There should be concerted measures to
tackle the menace of illicit financial flows, which serve as a conduit for financing
terrorism and other vices. We also urge Member States to redouble their efforts to
reduce to the barest minimum the proliferation of small arms and light weapons,
which, by no small measure, fuel those acts of terrorism.

21-00482101/129

S/2021/48

Annex 52
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Pakistan to the
United Nations, Munir Akram
I would like to congratulate Tunisia on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council and on organizing this important debate on the twentieth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1373 (2001).
Terrorism has rightly been described as the scourge of our times. Since
the attacks of 11 September 2001, the international community has adopted and
implemented a number of countermeasures to deal with the threat of terrorism. Yet
terrorism has spread across the world, transnational groups have proliferated and the
threat has morphed into new forms and manifestations that pose a threat to peace and
stability in several regions of the world.
For the past two decades, Pakistan has been at the forefront of the global
campaign against terrorism. Pakistan is responsible for the virtual elimination of
Al-Qaida’s central command. We conducted comprehensive military operations
along our western borders to eliminate terrorist groups, which had been pushed
into Pakistan due to the war in Afghanistan. Pakistan adopted a whole-of-nation
approach to defeat terrorism, including a national action plan and the comprehensive
National Counter Extremism Policy Guidelines, which, inter alia, banned hate
speech and incitement to violence. Intelligence cooperation between Pakistan and
its international partners was manifested in averting major terrorist attacks around
the world.
Pakistan facilitated the agreement between the United States and the Taliban,
which has for the first time kindled hope for a peace settlement in Afghanistan.
There is now renewed expectation that terrorism will be eliminated in and from
Afghanistan. No other country has made a greater sacrifice in fighting terrorism
than Pakistan. We have paid a heavy price, suffering more than 50,000 casualties,
military and civilian, and over $120 billion in damage to our economy.
Pakistan is a victim of externally sponsored terrorism from across its border.
Some of the most gruesome terrorist attacks, including the Army Public School
attack in 2014, killing 142 innocent children, the Mastung terrorist attack in 2018,
killing 100 innocent Pakistanis, the attack on the Chinese Consulate in Karachi and,
more recently, the attack on the Pakistan Stock Exchange in Karachi, were all aided,
financed and perpetrated by India through its mercenary terrorist groups operating
from across our western border.
Pakistan has conveyed detailed information to the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253
(2015) on the financing and arming of the Tehreek-e-Taliban Pakistan and Jamaatul-Ahrar, two terrorist groups listed on the 1267 Committee’s sanctions list. We
hope that the 1267 Committee will take appropriate action to implement its sanctions
measures against these United Nations-designated terrorist entities. Pakistan has also
presented detailed dossiers to the international community on India’s involvement in
subversive terrorist activities against Pakistan and its prolonged campaign to malign
my country through disinformation campaigns.
As we reflect on the global response to terrorism in the past 20 years, one
conclusion is inescapable: we will not defeat terrorism unless its root causes are
eliminated. These root causes include foreign occupation and intervention, political
and economic injustice and inequality, and the failure to deliver economic growth,
jobs, education and social development.
102/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

It is also essential to address certain neglected manifestations of terrorism,
one of which is the phenomenon of State terrorism. There are numerous situations
of foreign intervention and occupation, such as in Indian illegally occupied Jammu
and Kashmir, where occupation forces are perpetrating war crimes, crimes against
humanity and crimes against occupied peoples in order to terrorize them into
submission. Yet, as history attests, the colonial and foreign occupying Powers justify
State terrorism by portraying the freedom struggle of the oppressed and occupied
peoples as terrorism. State terrorism must be addressed urgently and effectively.
One of the most concerning new trends in global terrorism is the proliferation
of violent nationalism, such as White and Hindu supremacism as well as other
forms of racially and ethnically motivated violence. These violent nationalist groups
are growing stronger and more popular in North America, Europe and elsewhere,
attempting to mainstream right-wing ideologies and exploiting social media to spread
propaganda, recruit new members and finance their organizations and operations.
In India, such neo-fascist groups now rule the country. The violent extremist
Hindutva ideology practiced by the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party and its militant
parent, the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS), and other associated militant
groups, poses an existential threat to the 180 million Muslims in India. The April
2020 Delhi pogrom was just one manifestation of this violent ideology. International
observers have warned against potential genocide in occupied Jammu and Kashmir
and against India’s Muslims in general.
These violent extremist supremacist groups pose a clear and present danger to
regional and international peace and security. They must be outlawed by the Security
Council like other terrorist groups. Such violent racist and extremist terrorism
will inevitably breed counter violence and validate the dystopian narrative of such
terrorist organizations as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)/Da’esh and
Al-Qaida.
It is the responsibility of the international community to take immediate steps
to arrest the rise of the violent nationalism. Some of the measures that the Council
should take include calling on States to designate acts of these violent nationalist
groups, including white supremacists and other racially and ethnically motivated
groups, including Hindutva militants, as terrorism, just as we have done in case of
Al-Qaida/ISIL and its affiliated groups; initiating immediate domestic actions to
prevent propagation of their violent ideologies, recruitment to and financing of these
groups; requesting the Secretary-General to present a plan of action to confront
and defeat these violent extremists and their terrorist ideologies; and expanding the
mandate of the 1267 Committee to include sanctions against such violent nationalist
terrorist groups as the RSS.
We have entered a new era of threats posed by emerging forms and
manifestations of terrorism. The scope of the international community’s counterterrorism strategy must be expanded and adjusted to cooperate and defeat terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations.

21-00482103/129

S/2021/48

Annex 53
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Peru to the United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
We welcome the initiative of the Tunisian presidency to convene today’s highlevel open debate on an issue that requires the continued and urgent attention of the
international community. We thank the briefers for their comprehensive briefings.
Peru reaffirms its commitment to the purposes and principles of the United
Nations set forth in the Organization’s Charter, as well as to an international order
based on the rule of law, so as to build a more peaceful, prosperous and just world.
We condemn all acts, methods and practices of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, wherever and by whomever committed. We therefore support any
action at the multilateral level that constitutes a systematic, sustained and efficient
response to the scourge of terrorism in accordance with international law and
human rights.
In that regard, we wish to highlight the contribution of resolution 1373 (2001)
to attaining this objective. Indeed, resolution 1373 (2001) set a historic precedent
by imposing on all States Members of the United Nations binding measures aimed
at improving their normative and institutional capacities on their territory, in their
regions and throughout the world, in order to make such a response more effective and
coherent. It also established a fundamental milestone in these efforts by providing
for the creation of a specialized body, namely, the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC), which, in 2004, was duly complemented by the establishment of the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED). Since then, this important
body has made significant progress in its work, having successfully adapted to the
complexities of the international scene and the unprecedented evolution of terrorism.
We should note, however, that one of the most pressing challenges to the
effective implementation of resolution 1373 (2001), and such related, subsequently
adopted resolutions as resolutions 2178 (2014) and 2396 (2017), has been the
complexity and onerous cost of implementing the corresponding national measures,
border-transit management being a case in point. We therefore welcome the crucial
technical assistance that the Counter-Terrorism Committee, through its Executive
Directorate, has been providing to a number of States, and encourage its continuation.
The global crisis resulting from the coronavirus disease and its grave
consequences has forced States to focus attention on their response. Unfortunately,
subversive groups are seeking to take advantage of the current delicate circumstances
marked by reduced physical mobility and greater logistical constraints to exploit new
vulnerabilities, a situation that brings additional challenges to the fulfilment of the
obligations set forth in resolution 1373 (2001). We note in particular the growing
risks in cyberspace. In that regard, terrorist groups are intensifying their use of
information and communication technologies to plan terrorist acts and engage in
hate speech, recruitment and financing for their activities.
Dealing with this increased threat requires profound changes that clearly
involve all international actors and bodies concerned with the fight against terrorism,
including the Security Council and the CTC. These include establishing norms for
cyberspace that will have an effect on terrorist groups and criminal organizations
that make improper use of it, comprehensive reform of education systems, and the
strengthening of social-protection networks, among other necessary actions.
It is also relevant to recall that terrorism continues to benefit from its links
with organized crime to obtain financing and logistical support, which makes it
104/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

essential to continue strengthening institutions and multilateral cooperation with a
view to improving the exchange of information and establishing good practices in
areas that are particularly vulnerable. For example, Latin American and Caribbean
countries have been intensifying efforts for a more coordinated fight, as reflected in
the Hemispheric Ministerial Conferences held in Washington, D.C., in 2018, Buenos
Aires in 2019 and Colombia in 2020, which laid the groundwork for a sustained
exchange of good experiences among our respective national institutions. It will be
an honour for Peru to host the fourth Hemispheric Ministerial Conference, in order
to make further progress in this area.
Finally, it is advisable to continue promoting synergies between the multilateral
bodies responsible for the fight against terrorism and the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, leading to capacity-building and greater technical assistance for a
more effective and coherent response to these scourges.

21-00482105/129

S/2021/48

Annex 54
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Philippines to
the United Nations, Enrique A. Manalo
We appreciate the initiative taken by the Tunisian leadership to organize
today’s important open debate on international cooperation in combating terrorism
20 years after the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001). We thank Under-Secretary
General Vladimir Voronkov and Assistant Secretary-General Michèle Coninsx for
briefing the Security Council.
The Philippines has been a strong supporter of resolution 1373 (2001), which
established the basis for the Security Council response in countering terrorist threats.
Resolution 1373 (2001) also established the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) as
a subsidiary body of the Council to assess the compliance of the States Members of
the United Nations with the resolution’s provisions.
As a contribution to the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001), soon
after the adoption of the resolution, in November 2002, the Philippines hosted the
International Conference on Terrorism and Tourism Recovery, in the wake of the
Bali terrorist bombing. The Conference issued the Makati Accord of 2002, which
embodied the strong resolve of all participating countries to intensify efforts aimed
at fighting the international terrorist threat.
To this day terrorism remains a serious threat to the Philippines and many
other countries. Such terrorist groups as the Abu Sayyaf continue to conduct many
attacks. Online recruitment has increased. The Communist Party of the PhilippinesNew People’s Army, collectively known as the Communist Terrorist Group, has
remained engaged in illegal operations despite the onslaught of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19). It has perpetrated armed attacks and illegal activities against
the Government. Our resources are stretched because of the pandemic, but we
remain vigilant.
President Rodrigo Roa Duterte has intensified the Government’s efforts to
deter terrorist fighters, while also addressing the root causes of violent extremism
and radicalization. The Philippine Government has continued to support collective
efforts aimed at combating terrorism and transnational crimes and has cooperated
closely with the CTC through its Executive Directorate (CTED).
The Marawi siege, in which foreign terrorist fighters (FTFs) took part, taught
us that an effective legal framework is crucial. In response to the recommendations
of CTED and the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism, we have strengthened
our legal and criminal justice framework by enacting the 2020 Anti-Terrorism Law,
which shores up the legal framework by finally allowing us to prosecute FTFs and
perpetrators of acts of terrorism. As implemented, the law mandates the State to
uphold the basic rights and fundamental liberties of the people enshrined in the
Constitution; its enactment was undertaken pursuant to our commitment to and strict
adherence with relevant Security Council resolutions, including resolutions 1373
(2001) and 2178 (2014), and the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
Our cooperative relationship with the CTC has been robust. We appreciate
CTED’s second follow-up visit to the Philippines conducted on behalf of the CTC
in October 2019. We take the Committee’s recommendations seriously and look
forward to their implementation. We are also pleased with the joint high-level visit
to Manila by Under-Secretary-General Voronkov and Assistant Secretary-General
Coninsx in March 2020, just before the onslaught of the COVID-19 pandemic.
The deep-dive assessment visit of the United Nations Countering Terrorist
Travel Programme was also productive. Our agencies continue to study the road map
106/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

and review the proposed memorandum of understanding provided on the Countering
Terrorist Travel Programme so that we can respond to the recommendations
provided therein.
Sustained capacity-building continues to be one of our priorities, and we
expect that CTED’s follow-up visit will help in the design and provision of capacitybuilding programmes that address our challenges, including for the implementation
of our nascent National Action Plan on Preventing and Countering Violent Extremism
in the Philippines.
As we commemorate 20 years since the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001), the
resolution that aims to fortify international cooperation in combating terrorism, the
Philippines reiterates its strong support for the indispensable work of the CounterTerrorism Committee and for sustaining the momentum of recent exchanges to
further increase our level of engagement.

21-00482107/129

S/2021/48

Annex 55
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Poland to the United Nations
Poland fully aligns itself with the statement submitted on behalf of the
European Union (EU) and its member States (annex 36). Indeed, the EU and
its member States want a strong and efficient United Nations leadership and
cooperation platform working together with all the regions and States Members
of the United Nations on the global agenda on how to prevent and combat violent
extremism and terrorism.
We express our gratitude to Tunisia for organizing today’s timely debate and
for preparing a very useful concept note (S/2020/1315, annex).
The establishment of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) has been
crucial in coordinating multilateral efforts aimed at mitigating the threat posed by
terrorism globally. We applaud the CTC and its Executive Directorate (CTED) for an
outstanding job in monitoring the implementation of the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council.
In December 2019, Poland hosted a comprehensive visit of CTED experts, who
held a number of meetings with representatives of various Government institutions
responsible for counter-terrorism. The open and constructive exchange of information
between United Nations officials and Polish Government experts was remarkably
fruitful and mutually beneficial. Currently, Poland is finalizing a document that will
provide information on the planned implementation of recommendations presented
by CTED. It will be discussed with the CTC later this year.
With that being acknowledged, countries visited by United Nations officials
benefit substantially from such officials’ expertise and knowledge. We therefore
encourage all Member States to closely cooperate with the CTC and CTED. We
also stand ready to share our experience in the sphere of counter-terrorism with
other Member States. This can help to further advance a comprehensive preventive
approach that could bolster both multilateral and individual capacities to ensure
effective responses to acts of terror.
However, being effective does not mean cutting corners. In recent years, we
have seen several instances of counter-terrorism measures that themselves proved
dubious when it comes to promoting and protecting human rights. As a current
member of the Human Rights Council, Poland reiterates that all responses to
terrorism must not only seek to combat this odious phenomenon and hold those
responsible accountable, but also to respect fundamental human rights.
Among the many challenges presented by terrorism, we would also like to
highlight the dire plight of religious minorities that are often the hardest hit by terrorist
attacks. Following the resolution establishing the International Day Commemorating
the Victims of Acts of Violence Based on Religion or Belief (General Assembly
resolution 73/296) — a resolution adopted upon Poland’s initiative — we strongly
condemn any acts of terrorism targeting individuals on the basis of or in the name
of religion or belief.
Finally, there is an urgent need to pay more attention to the evolving tactics
of terrorist groups, in particular the use of modern technologies to spread their
propaganda. In that regard, we should be aware of the growing threat posed by
various groups and individuals using social media to spread hate, disinformation
and radical political views that might lead to terrorism. Combating the misuse of the
Internet and social media for terrorist purposes should therefore remain high among
all of our priorities.
108/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

Annex 56
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Portugal to the
United Nations, Francisco Duarte Lopes
At the outset, I would like to thank the Tunisian presidency of the Security
Council for having promoted this ministerial meeting to celebrate the twentieth
anniversary of resolution 1373 (2001) and the establishment of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, and for having invited Member States to provide statements regarding
trends, challenges and opportunities in global security.
Terrorism, in all its forms and manifestations, deserves full condemnation,
for it claims the lives of innocent people, destabilizes Governments, undermines
societies, menaces economic and social development and prevents the full enjoyment
of human rights. It poses a threat to global peace and security and therefore requires
a firm and coordinated response at the global, regional and national levels.
Since 9/11, in 2001, the world has witnessed the largest-ever terrorist surge
on a global scale, and terrorism has become a major source of concern on the
international agenda, especially at the United Nations. This meeting comes at a
timely moment as an opportunity to assess the progress made in creating legal and
institutional mechanisms to combat terrorism and violent extremism and to identify
possible challenges to international cooperation and emerging trends.
The impact that the coronavirus disease pandemic has had on the proliferation
of extremist ideologies online, as well as the use of new technologies as a vehicle to
spread terrorist narratives globally, are among the most pressing challenges that we
currently face. Information-sharing through the appropriate channels, countering the
financing of terrorism, disrupting the flow of foreign terrorist fighters, preventing
radicalization and successfully screening, and monitoring and rehabilitating returnee
fighters must be at the heart of an effective response, complemented by effective
work aimed at countering the wrongful use of the Internet and social media.
The Security Council’s timely reaction, through the adoption of the landmark
resolution 1373 (2001), drastically changed the global approach to counter-terrorism,
placing barriers to the movement, organization and financing of terrorist groups
and imposing legislative, policy and reporting requirements on Member States to
assist in the global struggle against terrorism. Since 2001, the United Nations has
adopted more than 30 important resolutions to counter terrorism. Portugal reaffirms
its commitment to the full implementation of all United Nations resolutions on
counter-terrorism and welcomes resolution 2560 (2020), unanimously adopted on
29 December 2020.
We also reiterate our full support for the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, which is at the core of the United Nations response to terrorism, and
note that in resolution 2560 (2020) the Security Council urged Member States to
interact more with the Counter-Terrorism Committee.
Sanctions remain an important tool in the international fight against terrorism,
and we underline the importance of the prompt and effective implementation of all
restrictive measures.
Portugal implements resolution 1373 (2001) through the European Union
(EU) list of persons, groups and entities involved in terrorist acts and subject to
restrictive measures, as set out in Common Position 2001/931/CFSP 931, adopted
on 27 December 2001. That EU decision lays down the criteria for listing persons,
groups and entities and defines the restrictive measures related to the freezing of
funds and financial assets in full compliance with international law, including
human rights law.
21-00482109/129

S/2021/48

We welcome the work of the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism and
express our determination to continue to engage in that endeavour bilaterally but also
through the EU’s cooperation in external action. Having assumed the presidency of
the EU Council on 1 January, Portugal is looking forward to cooperating closely
with the United Nations in the seventh review of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy, due to take place in June 2021, during United Nations CounterTerrorism Week.
Portugal is committed to continuing to play its part in the fight against
terrorism at the national level. Portugal is party to 18 of the 19 international legal
instruments to prevent terrorist acts. In 2015, the Portuguese Government approved
a new national strategy on counter-terrorism. An anti-terrorism coordination unit
has been established, and several amendments to the relevant Portuguese legislation
were approved and enacted, including the criminalization of travelling with the aim
of committing terrorist acts and the criminalization of public incitement to terrorism
through the Internet or other media.
To conclude, let me reiterate that there is no simple solution to this multifaceted
problem. Terrorist groups exploit to their benefit long-standing grievances in conflict
situations, as well as economic, political, social inequalities and marginalization,
and human rights and civil liberties violations. Sustained economic growth, social
development, education, employment and decent jobs, alongside the promotion
of interreligious and intercultural dialogue, must therefore have a relevant role in
addressing the underlying drivers of extremism and radicalization.

110/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

Annex 57
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Qatar to the
United Nations, Alya Ahmed Saif Al-Thani
[Original: Arabic]
We welcome His Excellency Mr. Othman Jerandi, Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Migration and Tunisians Abroad, to preside over this meeting, and we thank
the Permanent Mission of Tunisia for this initiative to highlight work of the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC), which was established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) and is one of the most important subsidiary bodies of the Security Council.
We commend the efforts and activities of the Committee under the chairmanship
of Ambassador Tarek Ladeb, Permanent Representative of Tunisia to the United
Nations. We thank Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, Under-Secretary-General for CounterTerrorism, and Ms. Michèle Coninsx, Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED), for their briefings to the Council.
We appreciate the diligence of CTC in implementing its mandate commendably,
including monitoring, strengthening and facilitating the implementation of Security
Council counter-terrorism resolutions and communicating continuously with
Member States through multiple briefings, even under the circumstances resulting
from the coronavirus disease pandemic over the past few months.
We welcome the Committee’s continued attention to identifying and assessing
all aspects of the fight against terrorism, keeping up with emerging challenges and
ways to address various risks. That is clear from the topics of its briefings, which
have included the protection of unfortified targets, terrorist threats to civil aviation,
emerging trends in violent extremism that lead to terrorism, and countering violent
extremism through a human rights-based approach.
The State of Qatar is fully committed to the implementation of all the
provisions of resolution 1373 (2001) and other Security Council counter-terrorism
resolutions. It is also committed to playing an active role in international efforts to
combat terrorism, particularly within the framework of the United Nations, given
the importance of international cooperation to eradicating this serious scourge that
threatens one and all.
Qatar recognizes the importance of the CTC and has been keen to support its
work and cooperate with it and CTED. That included facilitating the follow-up visit
by CTED to Qatar last year and responding to the Committee’s recommendations
in its report on the visit. We were proud to highlight many of Qatar’s achievements
and practical experiences that qualify it to provide technical counter-terrorism
assistance in areas such as technology and border control. Our close partnership
with CTED continues with ongoing projects. In that regard, we would mention
support for the study conducted by CTED on links between human trafficking and
terrorist financing.
We also maintain a partnership with UNOCT that is constantly generating
important projects and initiatives. Those have included the International Hub on
Behavioural Insights to Counter Terrorism, which is hosted and funded by the State
of Qatar and opened last month, and the Global Programme on Countering Terrorist
Threats against Vulnerable Targets, which has received funding from Qatar and will
be launched next week.
Qatar is also actively involved in international mechanisms to coordinate and
finance counter-terrorism and programmes and activities that have a significant
impact at the international and regional level in combating terrorism and the violent
21-00482111/129

S/2021/48

extremism that leads to it and addressing its root causes, including by countering
terrorist discourse, supporting education and employing young people.
At the national level, the State of Qatar has been assiduous about taking
measures to address any risks and complying with international instruments and
global standards on terrorism and terrorist financing, as wells as with Security
Council resolutions, including the sanctions regimes. Qatar has repeatedly updated its
national legislation and regulations relating to counter-terrorism, terrorist financing
and money-laundering. It has set forth a national counter-terrorism strategy and
maintains cooperation with the United Nations to ensure optimal implementation of
its obligations.
There can be no doubt that compliance with international, humanitarian and
human rights law in the course of fighting terrorism and the violent extremism that
leads to it is a prerequisite for success. That is why that element was made one
of the four pillars of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. It is
also unhelpful and unacceptable to associate terrorism with a particular religion,
nationality or region. I should also like to draw attention to the importance of
supporting the victims of terrorism, ensuring their rights and preserving their
dignity as a moral duty and an integral part of counter-terrorism efforts.
In conclusion, the State of Qatar uses this occasion to reaffirm its condemnation
of terrorism in its various forms and manifestations, whenever and wherever it
is committed and whatever its justifications. It will continue its active efforts at
various levels and remain an effective international partner to address and eradicate
this scourge.

112/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

Annex 58
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Romania to the
United Nations, Ion Jinga
Romania aligns itself with the statement submitted by the European Union
delegation on behalf of the European Union and its member States (annex 36).
On the occasion of the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1373 (2001),
Romania reiterates its strong condemnation of all acts of terrorism, regardless of
their motivation or manifestation, and is determined to fight that scourge as long as
necessary and in accordance with international law and United Nations principles.
We all remember with deep sorrow the difficult context of the adoption of that
resolution. The attacks we have witnessed since the terrorist attacks of 11 September
2001 have shown the extent of the threat that we face from all forms of terrorism.
Such attacks target the fundamental values and human rights that underlie the United
Nations, given that all citizens have the right to a life without fear.
In the current international context, which is marked by the multiplication
and diversification of terrorist-related threats that pose serious risks to international
peace and security, our national role as well as our role as responsible actors in the
global community is of paramount importance.
We remain strong supporters of efforts to resolve crises and conflicts,
considering that terrorism is global by nature and that any area of unresolved conflict
or tension may ultimately contribute to the emergence and fuelling of terrorism. In
that regard, we condemn the actions of terrorist groups against the United Nations
presence — peacekeeping missions and programmes — in the field.
Terrorist organizations have proved capable of obtaining their own revenue,
primarily through criminal activities such as drug trafficking, smuggling networks,
kidnapping for ransom or extortion of local populations. However, when they lack
the necessary financial resources, they are capable of carrying out low-cost attacks
with a significant impact, causing human suffering and immense loss of life.
As a consequence, preventing and combating the financing of terrorism
has become a crucial pillar of the fight against terrorism, and we fully support all
international and regional measures adopted to prevent and combat that major threat.
In Romania, the prevention of and fight against terrorism are carried out in
accordance with the provisions of the international conventions on the repression of
terrorism, to which our country is a party, as well as in observance of the international
regulations and domestic legislation on human rights.
We also support all efforts to discourage any type of propaganda for
extremist ideologies, as well as the online dissemination of mobilization and
terrorist-attack methodologies.
Romania is firmly committed to international counter-terrorism efforts both
as a member of the European Union and within the United Nations, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe and NATO. In our approach, phenomena
such as radicalization, violent extremism and terrorism must be tackled through
a holistic approach that is able to address the root causes of problems through
integrated solutions.
As a principled approach, Romania also considers that the response to terrorism
must be articulated taking into account the imperative of respecting human rights and
fundamental freedoms. Therefore, we have to ensure that a comprehensive response,
including the adoption of protection, support and assistance measures, is provided.
21-00482113/129

S/2021/48

Annex 59
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Saudi Arabia to the
United Nations, Abdallah Al-Mouallimi
[Original: Arabic]
I should like to begin by congratulating you, Sir, on Tunisia’s assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council and wishing you every success in conducting
the Council’s business. I also welcome Tunisian Foreign Minister Othman Jerandi
and express our appreciation to the Permanent Mission of Tunisia to the United
Nations for convening this Security Council ministerial meeting on the twentieth
anniversary of resolution 1373 (2001) and the establishment of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), including trends, challenges and opportunities.
I should also like to emphasize that the views of Saudi Arabia align with those
of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC). It rejects terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations, regardless of motives, the identity of the perpetrator and the
place where it is perpetrated. I also stress that terrorism constitutes a violation of
international law, including international humanitarian law and international human
rights law, and in particular the right to life. Terrorist acts threaten the integrity,
stability and national security of States.
I reiterate that the Kingdom respects the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence of all States in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, and stress that terrorism should not be linked to any particular religion,
race, creed, value system, culture or civilization. The Kingdom strongly condemns
any attempt to link Islam to terrorism for the benefit of specific interests and to
invite hatred of religion, intolerance and hostility against Muslims. The Kingdom
reiterates the importance of promoting dialogue, understanding and cooperation
among religions, cultures and civilizations for peace and harmony in the world, and
welcomes all regional and international initiatives and efforts to achieve that end.
My country affirms its commitment to strengthening international cooperation
in the fight against terrorism. The Kingdom believes that a comprehensive approach
is necessary to combat terrorism. In that regard, we note the essential role played
by the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre, which the Kingdom has been
providing with financial support since its founding. The Kingdom also chairs the
Centre’s Advisory Board, in keeping with its belief in the major role played by
Centre. The Kingdom appreciates the vision and role of the United Nations CounterTerrorism Centre in the United Nations system. The appreciation it receives from
various States for its capacity-building has been increasingly noted. The Kingdom is
committed to providing the necessary political support and guidance for the Centre
to achieve its desired objectives.
Saudi Arabia also commends the efforts of the United Nations, and particularly
those of the Security Council counter-terrorism committees, including the CTC,
whose founding we celebrate today on the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1373
(2001). That Committee plays an essential role in combating terrorism internationally.
It has worked to open dialogue with Member States to discuss best practices and
ways to address global challenges, whether by stopping the financing of terrorism,
in which regard the Security Council sanctions committees play a fundamental role,
or through more efficient exchange of information on cooperation and technical
assistance among Member States, United Nations counter-terrorism bodies and the
relevant international and regional organizations to enhance the capacities of States
to implement the relevant United Nations resolutions.
114/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

The Kingdom emphasizes the need to consolidate efforts to combat terrorism
and strengthen coordination and consistency within the United Nations system to
promote international cooperation in the fight against terrorism. That must be done
without any competition among the various actors, as the whole world faces the
same enemy, which is terrorism, which rejects dialogue and undermines the world’s
efforts towards international peace and security.

21-00482115/129

S/2021/48

Annex 60
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Saudi Arabia to the
United Nations
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation (OIC).
I would like to welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Migration and
Tunisians Abroad of Tunisia, Mr. Othman Jerandi. At the outset, allow me to
convey the OIC group’s appreciation for the convening of the present meeting on
the theme “Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts:
international cooperation in combating terrorism 20 years after the adoption of
resolution 1373 (2001)”.
The OIC group condemns terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,
regardless of motivation, identity of perpetrator and location committed. The OIC
member States reaffirm that terrorism constitutes a flagrant violation of international
law, including international humanitarian law and international human rights law,
in particular the right to life. Terrorist acts endanger the territorial integrity and
stability of States as well as national, regional and international security.
The OIC group reiterates its respect for sovereignty, territorial integrity
and political independence of all States in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations. The group reaffirms that terrorism should not be associated with
any religion, race, faith, theology, values, culture or society. The group strongly
condemns any attempt to link Islam with terrorism to achieve narrow interests;
such attempts play into the hands of terrorists and constitute advocacy of religious
hatred, discrimination and hostility against Muslims. Accordingly, we reiterate the
importance of promoting dialogue, understanding and cooperation among religions,
cultures and civilizations for peace and harmony in the world, and welcome all
regional and international initiatives and efforts to that end.
The OIC group recognizes that terrorism is a global threat. In that connection,
the group reaffirms its commitment to strengthening international cooperation
in the fight against terrorism. The group believes that it is essential to follow a
comprehensive approach in combating terrorism. That should be done by addressing
the root causes of terrorism, including the unlawful use of force, aggression, foreign
occupation, festering international disputes and political marginalization and
alienation. Moreover, it is necessary to combat all terrorist groups and organizations,
wherever they exist and without any distinction.
Furthermore, the group believes that it is essential that Member States enhance
their cooperation and coordination, with the aims of prosecuting the perpetrators
of the terrorist acts and preventing the provision of any financing, safe havens,
assistance or weapons to terrorist groups and organizations. It is also imperative
to enhance cooperation and coordination to refute the narratives and ideologies of
terrorist groups and organizations.
The OIC requests the Secretary-General to reach out, in cooperation with
Member States, to relevant United Nations mechanisms to broaden the scope of
sanctions imposed pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) against individuals and entities
associated with anti-Muslim racist extremist groups so as to effectively respond to
the evolving threat of terrorism.
The OIC is deeply concerned at the resurgence in multiple regions of the world
of racist movements based on intent to incite phobia, hatred of and hostility against
Muslim nations, immigrants and individuals, and we call on all Governments to
prohibit any discourse, attempt or act that tolerates, encourages or incites hostility
116/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

against Muslims or defamation of Islam and Muslims, as well as to protect all
individuals and groups against hate and violence based on religion and faith and to
ensure the protection of places of worship.
Once again, the group reiterates the need to distinguish between terrorism and
the exercise of the legitimate right of people to resist foreign occupation, and would
like to stress that this distinction is duly observed in international law, international
humanitarian law, Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations and General
Assembly resolution 46/51, which endorsed this position.
The OIC reaffirms that the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
constitutes an ongoing effort and is a living document, which should be updated
and re-examined regularly. The group also reaffirms that the Counter-Terrorism
Strategy should be implemented in a balanced manner in all its aspects. We stress
the importance of enhancing capacity-building for Member States to assist them in
the implementation of various obligations under United Nations resolutions, through
increasing the resources for United Nations entities and departments entrusted with
this task as well as enhancing bilateral technical assistance and technology transfer.
In that regard, the OIC recognizes the role played to that end by the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Centre.
The OIC looks forward to the convening of a second high-level conference under
the auspices of the United Nations in order to formulate a joint organized response
by the international community to terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.

21-00482117/129

S/2021/48

Annex 61
Statement by the Permanent Mission of South Africa to the
United Nations
I wish to again congratulate Tunisia on its presidency of the Security Council
for the month of January 2021. South Africa greatly valued the close cooperation
enjoyed with Tunisia during our term on the Security Council, as part of the
configuration comprised by the three African members of the Council and Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines. We commend Tunisia for its continued, excellent
chairpersonship of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC).
Allow me also to extend South Africa’s deepest sympathies to the people
of the Niger, who, only days ago, suffered another horrendous terror attack in the
Tillaberi region, which claimed the lives of an estimated 100 people. These types
of incidents, which are part of a wave of terror increasingly affecting Africa, serve
to highlight the importance of a multilateral, cooperative approach to counteringterrorism, as emphasized in resolution 1373 (2001).
Today’s meeting, marking the twentieth anniversary, in September 2021, of
the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001), is also an important reminder, as the world’s
focus remains captured by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, of the
importance of not losing sight of the deadly threat of terrorism. Indeed, the deadly
attacks of 11 September 2001 in the United States, which remain burned in the
collective consciousness of the world, and which had such a profound effect on the
world, including in prompting resolution 1373 (2001), were regrettably not the last
time that terrorism would rear its ugly head in such a vicious way in the 20 years that
have passed since resolution 1373 (2001) was adopted.
In this period, the world would go on to witness in horror the emergence
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh) and the atrocities it carried
out. Likewise, the rise of violent right-wing extremist terrorism, so-called “inspired
attacks” and, the most unpredictable of all, “lone-wolf attacks” have all made clear
that terrorism continues to pose a serious, adaptive threat to international peace
and security.
This situation has further been exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic,
which in many cases has diverted already limited resources and capacity from
countering terrorism to more immediate pressing health threats. Terrorism, much
like the COVID-19 pandemic, is a threat that knows no boundaries and requires of
us a collective, coordinated, global response, in which the centrality of the United
Nations remains critical.
Great progress has been made in harmonizing a global approach to this
scourge, via the Secretary-General’s reform of the United Nations counter-terrorism
architecture, including the establishment of the United Nations Office of CounterTerrorism and the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact,
which straddles the three pillars of the work of the United Nations, namely, peace
and security, sustainable development, human rights and humanitarian affairs.
It is important, however, that we continue to review our approaches at national,
regional and international levels, and South Africa looks forward to the review of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in June this year as a valuable
opportunity to ensure congruency between emerging threats and existing counterterrorism measures.
The efforts of the CTC, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate and the Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999),
1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
118/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

(Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, in
strengthening the implementation of relevant Security Council resolutions remains
critical. South Africa is also supportive of continued dialogue among the United
Nations, Member States and, in particular, regional organizations, not only to
address the challenges they face but also to share good practices.
South Africa would also urge the revival of discussions towards a
comprehensive convention on terrorism, which has remained deadlocked around
the definition of terrorism, while a sophisticated, adaptive threat from terrorism
continues to manifest unabated throughout the world.
As always, South Africa urges an approach to counter-terrorism that ensures
maximum compliance, at all times, with international obligations and commitments,
in particular human rights law, international humanitarian law and international
refugee law.
We would also continue to encourage the importance of addressing not only
the security dimensions of this challenge, but equally factors that provide fertile
ground for recruitment by terrorist groups, such as inequality, marginalization,
economic and social exclusion, particularly youth unemployment, and lack of respect
for human rights and the rule of law.

21-00482119/129

S/2021/48

Annex 62
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Switzerland to the
United Nations
[Original: French]
Switzerland thanks Tunisia for having organized this timely open debate on
an important topic.
These are anniversaries we would have prefer not to have to mark, but who
could have predicted in 2001 that the threat of terrorism would have proliferated and
diversified as it has? In the interim, the structures put in place in 2001 have stood
the test of time and proven capable of evolving — and, all signs would suggest,
will remain with us going forward. There are therefore grounds to celebrate the
international community’s capacity in the fight against terrorism, and likewise to
react and to remain steadfast, as demonstrated under the auspices of the United
Nations. In this context, Switzerland welcomes the incredible work and commitment
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED).
Switzerland would like in particular to underscore the importance of
the Committee through CTED country visits and its role in recommending and
collecting good practices, thereby helping ensure compliance in national legislation
with international law, including human rights law and international humanitarian
law. As the first country to have agreed to share its evaluation, Switzerland strongly
encourages other countries visited to do likewise, with a view to promoting good
practices and the adoption of appropriate national legislation.
The establishment of the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism, followed
soon after by the establishment of the Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination
Compact, were major steps towards more coherent and effective United Nations
action in fighting terrorism. These new structures contributed to the balanced
implementation of the four pillars of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
including in terms of coordinated support to Member States.
If Switzerland could highlight only one point in this short statement on
trends, challenges and opportunities for the Security Council with regard to the
fight against terrorism, in particular in the context of this anniversary, we would
stress once again the essential nature of respect for international law, including
international human rights law and international humanitarian law. Switzerland
commends the willingness of the Committee and the Executive Directorate to take
a closer look at this issue, including through a report on the implementation of
counter-terrorism measures in conformity with international humanitarian law and
the impact of those measures, in particular in terms of combating terrorist financing,
on neutral and impartial humanitarian commitments provided for by international
humanitarian law. In that regard, Switzerland recalls that national and international
counter-terrorism measures alike must be so crafted as to avoid criminalizing any
humanitarian activities provided for under international humanitarian law.
In conclusion, we, once again affirm that, to be legitimate and effective,
counter-terrorism measures must be anchored firmly in international law.

120/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

Annex 63
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Syria to the
United Nations, Bashar Ja’afari
[Original: Arabic]
Resolution 1373 (2001), which was adopted unanimously on 28 September
2001, was a milestone among counter-terrorism instruments and collective
international efforts to combat terrorism through a range of measures. On the
twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001), we believe it would
be useful to take a comprehensive look at the impact the adoption of that resolution
has had on reducing terrorism and violent extremism. We must also identify areas of
weakness in the mechanisms adopted under the aegis of the United Nations.
As with all major developments that humankind has witnessed over the
past 20 years at various levels, it must be recognized that terrorism has taken on
numerous and updated forms. It differs in form, methods and proliferation from
what we have previously known. That is particularly the case with regard to its use
of technological advances to disseminate its discourse of hate and to influence to the
minds of young people and draw them into its hatred, extremism, discrimination,
negation of the other and branding people as infidels.
Since the painful events of September 2001, terrorism and extremist ideologies
have spread in virtually all States. That has included the 1995 sarin attack in Tokyo,
the 2004 Beslan school hostage crisis, the 2004 train bombings Spain, the 2005
train bombings in the United Kingdom, the numerous attacks on civilians in France,
Belgium and other European States, the tragic 2008 bombings in the Indian city of
Mumbai, the terrorist attacks on mosque worshippers in Norway in 2011 and New
Zealand in 2019, the 2013 Boston Marathon terrorist attack and the 2015 bombing
of a Russian plane in the Sinai Peninsula in Egypt. We must also not forget the
terrorist attacks in Indonesia that killed hundreds of civilians and tourists in 2000
and 2002, and others, not to mention the targeting of military and civilian facilities
in Afghanistan and Pakistan. Terrorism has also spread to the African continent,
where the Al-Qaida-linked Al-Shabaab terrorist group has been active. Its terrorist
operations have extended to countries such as Somalia, Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania and
others. We must also mention the atrocities committed by the Boko Haram terrorist
group, which has targeted civilians in Nigeria, Cameroon, Chad and the Niger.
Perhaps the most recent iteration of this spread of terrorism and these
genetically modified armed terrorists has manifested itself in my country, Syria. This
is a terrorism that goes by many forms and names. It has included so-called Al-Nusra
Front and its various brigades, the Army of Emigrants and Supporters, the Sultan
Murad Group, Islamic Dawn, the Soldiers of Al-Aqsa, the Nour Al-Din Al-Zanki
movement, Liwa Al-Tawhid Brigade, the Levant Liberation Organization and many
other terrorist organizations. The terrorism reached it apex with the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), whose atrocities have affected not only the Syrian people
but also other peoples of the region and the world.
The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic has carried out its responsibility
to protect its people, their open culture and their many and rich civilizations from
attempts to kill and obliterate them at the hands of blind, ignorant terrorism. Now,
10 years since the start of the terrorist campaign against my country, we continue to
unremittingly carry the flag of counter-terrorism on behalf of the entire world. We are
constantly trying to strengthen collective international efforts to eliminate the threat
that terrorism poses to international peace and security, the safety and stability of
21-00482121/129

S/2021/48

States and the well-being of peoples. In that regard, my country’s delegation would
like to stress the following points.
First, the early awareness on the part of the Government and the people of
Syria of the dangers of the spread of terrorism and its proxies in the region and the
world has provided the evidence on which the Governments that still respect the
Charter of the United Nations and international law base their efforts to stand up to
this tide of Takfirism and blind extremism that excludes the other, brands it as an
infidel and seeks to eradicate it. To this very day, we continue to invite all countries
to share my country’s vision. For years, many terrorist-exporting Governments have
been making an immoral investment. All the peoples of the world without exception
have tasted the bitter taste of terrorism and violent extremism.
Secondly, certain Governments, chief among them the Governments and
States of the European Union, have put their narrow national interests above all else
and created self-serving solutions based on the mentality that ultimately resulted
in the emergence and spread of the phenomenon of “foreign terrorist fighters”.
Those solutions came in the form of unilateral policies that shirk Governments’
responsibilities to prevent the flow of terrorists to my country and to Iraq on the one
hand, and prevent those terrorists and their families from returning to their homelands
or countries of residence on the other. Laws are adopted that strip citizenship from
terrorists and their families or revoke their residency. Those Governments think that
in that way they can reduce the risk of terrorism in their countries while continuing
to dangle the sword of terrorism over the necks of the Syrian people.
Thirdly, up until today there are large numbers of “foreign terrorists without
borders” and their families present in a number of camps controlled by armed
separatist groups affiliated with the United States occupation forces. The most
important is the Al-Hol camp, in the north-east. To this day, inside those camps
a new generation of terrorists and extremists is being raised by men, women and
young people who subscribe to terrorism. For that reason, they cannot be viewed as
victims of terrorism or violent extremism. The threat must be dealt with decisively
and swiftly.
Despite all this, my country, Syria, has not and will not shirk its international
obligations to prosecute and hold terrorists accountable and rehabilitate their
families, on the basis that all Governments of the world have a responsibility to
take back any of these terrorists who are their citizens and residents along with their
family members.
My country supports United Nations efforts to fight terrorism and dry up its
sources of funding, and my country will offer all assistance required to eradicate
its remnants. It emphasizes its position supporting the principles of international
humanitarian law and the relevant Security Council resolutions. The time has come
to move on from the theoretical framework to fighting terrorism on the ground,
translate the declarations of Governments into reality and force them to acknowledge
their responsibilities for the spread of terrorism around the world in general and in
my country, Syria, in particular.
We must confront extremist Takfirist ideas and incitement to violence and
terrorism. We must try to cut off and dry up the funding resources of terrorist
organizations, whether they are provided by direct support from certain Governments
or indirectly as a result of some Governments paying bribes and ransoms or entering
into commercial transactions in oil, gas and stolen antiquities with terrorist groups,
particularly ISIL and the Al-Nusra Front. We must emphasize here the need to prevent
weapons and ammunition from being supplied to terrorist groups, particularly
chemical weapons and their means of production and delivery.
122/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

All must be made aware that terrorism has a single idea wherever it has
appeared around the world over the years. That idea is hatred, murder and destruction.
There is no permitted terrorism and forbidden terrorism, no positive extremism
and negative extremism. However varied the forms of terrorism, its essence is the
same. The destruction of States, the overthrow of Governments and the murder
and displacement of millions by other Governments that are permanent members
of the Security Council in the name of combating terrorism, as has happened in
Afghanistan and Iraq and is now happening in Yemen, Libya and elsewhere, is
regarded by some as a blessed collective effort to eliminate terrorism, or “halal
terrorism”, while the efforts of other States to exercise their natural and legitimate
right and duty to defend their children and their future are deemed illegal and
unwelcome at the international level. Accusations are hurled against the latter, while
a blind eye is turned to the responsibility of many United Nations States Members
that are supporting, sponsoring, financing, arming and spreading terrorism in my
country. The policy of double standards adopted by a number of Member States has
proven to be the perfect environment for the continuation, growth and spread of
terrorism in my country and other regions around the world.
In conclusion, we must translate implementation mechanisms into progress
on the ground, follow up the outcomes of resolutions and put into effect the counterterrorism instruments that we have adopted over the years. That includes resolutions
1267 (1999), 1373 (2001), 1624 (2005), 2170 (2014), 2178 (2014), 2199 (2015) and
2253 (2015), as well as the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. Those
instruments must be implemented free from politicization, manipulation and double
standards. We must stop ignoring reports and documented information provided by
some Member States about the support of certain Governments for terrorism. We
remind the Council of resolution 2178 (2014), which provides for the prevention of
the flow of foreign fighters to both Syria and Iraq through Turkish territory, and
resolution 2170 (2014), on drying up the sources of material, military and logistical
support and financing for extremists, especially ISIL and the Al-Nusra Front.
We also stress the need to hold the Governments of States that support
terrorism accountable and to compel them to cease their violations of international
law and the Charter of the United Nations. The failure of the Security Council to do
so sends the wrong message of tolerance for terrorists and their supporters.
We must confront hate speech, destructive Takfirist and extremist ideas,
false teachings that have nothing to do with human religions and civilizations, and
incitement to violence and terrorism. We must prevent stereotyping, discrimination
and persecution based on religion, nationality, race, colour, sex or other factors,
which are a form of collective punishment of entire segments of humankind.

21-00482123/129

S/2021/48

Annex 64
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Turkey to the
United Nations, Feridun Sinirlioğlu
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this timely meeting
on the occasion of the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of landmark resolution
1373 (2001). This year also marks the twentieth anniversary of the 11 September
terrorist attacks, in view of which the resolution was adopted. On this occasion,
Turkey conveys its condolences to the families of all the people who have fallen
victim to the scourge of terrorism all around the world.
Turkey has been under the threat of terrorism for decades from a wide variety
of organizations, such as the Kurdish Workers Party/Kurdish People’s Protection
Units, Al-Qaida, Da’esh, the Fethullah Terrorist Organization and the Armenian
Secret Army for the Liberation of Armenia. We therefore fully understand the pain
and threat posed by this scourge to our societies. The importance of a meaningful
and results-oriented cooperation in the fight against terrorism cannot be overstated.
The coronavirus disease pandemic has put more pressure on the limited
resources in the fight against terrorism. Countries under severe social and
economic pressure inevitably shift their focus towards fighting the pandemic, rather
than terrorism.
More important, soaring unemployment has the potential to lead to more
radicalization arising from a wide spectrum of extremist ideologies, particularly based
on exploitation of religions, far-right extremism, Islamophobia and anti-Semitism.
Thriving from despair, terrorist groups continue to spread their hateful narratives,
offline and online, at increased speed and intensity and to recruit youth and claim
innocent lives. Against all those odds, bringing an end to terrorism and holding
perpetrators accountable is as urgent as ever.
Turkey has been at the forefront of international efforts to counter terrorism in
a holistic manner. We undertake active roles and contribute to the work of the Global
Counterterrorism Forum as well as to efforts of the Global Coalition to Counter
Da’esh. In line with our robust efforts to counter the financing of terrorism, we are a
committed member of the Financial Action Task Force, while the Council of Europe
provides a crucial framework in our legal and judicial response to counter terrorism.
We believe that the United Nations remains the ultimate multilateral forum
in promoting a collective, coherent and legally binding response against terrorism.
We are committed to advancing the United Nations efforts for robust international
cooperation against terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. To achieve that end,
the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001), two decades ago, was a critical milestone.
Turkey attaches the utmost importance to the implementation of the resolution for
various reasons.
First, the hallmark of this resolution is its call for increased cooperation in
eradicating this menace. Clearly, that call is crucial and still relevant given the
fact that terrorism cannot survive against genuine international coordination and
cooperation. The upcoming review process of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy early in summer this year presents us with a unique opportunity
to contribute to that goal.
Secondly, the resolution urges members to share operational information,
refrain from providing support to persons and entities involved in terrorism and
deny safe haven to such entities and persons.
124/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

Unfortunately, we are far from achieving those goals. There is still reluctance,
and even resistance, to implement this obligation. We must not allow hypocrisy and
inconsistency in our fight against terrorism. A selective approach vis-à-vis terrorist
organizations will only strengthen their hand while weakening our collective efforts.
Turkey has been highlighting for a long time that any legitimate Government
cannot partner with a terrorist group with the excuse of fighting another one. That
is because we all well know that such an approach will seriously erode trust in
international cooperation and eventually turn out to be a global security risk in the
long run.
Last but not least, the resolution clearly states that refugee status should not
be abused by terrorists and that extradition requests vis-à-vis persons involved in
terrorism should not be denied on the grounds of their political motivation. That is
also one of the key areas where we lack progress. If we are to achieve tangible results
in our fight against terrorism, that is an area where we need to focus more. Doing so
will demonstrate that there is genuine will and determination to defeat the threat of
terrorism in a collective manner.
Even though resolution 1373 (2001) was adopted two decades ago, it remains
relevant and important today. It provides guidance as to where we need to focus our
attention and resources in order to effectively fight against terrorism despite its everchanging dynamics.
We need to make sure that the obligations stipulated in the resolution do
not remain a set of unfulfilled words. Through concrete steps, as outlined in the
resolution, we will be able to achieve results in eradicating the threat of terrorism.
To that end, Turkey will continue to be a steadfast partner in the implementation of
the resolution and contribute to international efforts to counter terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations.

21-00482125/129

S/2021/48

Annex 65
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine,
Dmytro Kuleba
I thank the Tunisian presidency for organizing today`s debate on resolution
1373 (2001) — a historic decision of the Security Council that set up the necessary
framework for a global response to international terrorism.
Almost 20 years ago, the tragic day of 11 September shocked the conscience
of humankind and left a deep scar on the lives of millions of people. Let me recall
that, on 12 September 2001, Ukraine, a non-permanent member of the Council at the
time, stated,
“[t]he magnitude of yesterday’s acts goes beyond terrorism as we have
known it so far ... new definitions, terms and strategies have to be developed
for the new realities.” (S/PV.4370, p. 3)
After adoption of the resolution and the subsequent establishment of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), with its Executive Directorate, the fight
against terrorism has become a key priority of the United Nations. We welcome the
central role of the CTC in overseeing, and assisting countries in, the implementation
of the specific counter-terrorism measures established by the Security Council,
monitoring compliance with the respective norms and promoting international
cooperation in this field.
Ukraine has always been among those that have actively supported international
efforts, including by the Council, aimed at the eradication of terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations. During the past decades a number of important achievements
were made with a view to advancing new counter-terrorism standards, as well as to
further amplify the international response to both existing and emerging terrorist
threats. The momentum was harnessed to enhance the focus and introduce a more
nuanced approach in the areas of combating the financing of terrorism, depriving
terrorists of weapons and supplies, preventing violent extremism, returning foreign
terrorist fighters from conflict zones, suppressing terrorist propaganda, strengthening
aviation security and enhancing coordination and coherence among United Nations
entities, to name but a few. I am proud to mention Ukraine`s contribution in this
area. On our initiative, the Council adopted resolution 2341 (2017), the first-ever
resolution on protecting critical infrastructure from terrorist attacks.
Regrettably, despite those efforts, hostilities have not ceased — neither on the
ground nor in cyberspace. To date we are witnessing terrorist attacks in different
parts of the world, causing a huge number of deaths and casualties, significantly
disrupting the functioning of societies and wreaking havoc and fear. While the world
faces multiple challenges, including the coronavirus disease pandemic, terrorism
continues to threaten our core values and principles, including human rights, the
rule of law, democracy, equal opportunity and freedom. We are affected by more
sophisticated methods and tactics by terrorists and their sponsors.
Unfortunately, Ukraine knows too well how evil terrorism can be. Russian
armed aggression against Ukraine and its blatant violation of norms and principles
of international law in Donbas and Crimea have led to multiple terrorist acts over
the course of more than six years. Therefore, resolute commitment and mobilized
actions by the entire international community are necessary to deal with the rampant
threats posed by international terrorism.
Ukraine remains fully committed to fighting against terrorism and violent
extremism. Any act of terrorism is unjustifiable and shall be punished. We should not
close our eyes to a Security Council member silencing human rights defenders, civic
126/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

activists and journalists in the occupied Crimea under the guise of counter-terrorism
measures, or terrorizing the civilian population in Donbas, eastern Ukraine.
Combating the activities of individual terrorists and terrorist groups will not
be sufficient if the problem of State-sponsored terrorism is not addressed in a robust
and comprehensive way. It is our task to ensure that all perpetrators, organizers,
mentors and sponsors of terrorism are brought to justice.

21-00482127/129

S/2021/48

Annex 66
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the United Arab Emirates
to the United Nations
[Original: Arabic]
The United Arab Emirates would like to thank the Republic of Tunisia for
organizing today’s open debate.
This year marks the twentieth anniversary of the deadliest terrorist attacks
ever to occur in the United States. We continue to live today with the aftermath of
those attacks.
The terrorist attack on the United States marked a turning point for the
Security Council’s counter-terrorism efforts. The attacks of 11 September led to the
unanimous adoption of resolution 1373 (2001). That resolution imposed obligations
on Member States to criminalize the financing of terrorism, among other measures.
It also established the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC).
Nevertheless, the activities of international terrorism have expanded
significantly in the past two decades. The Middle East and some regions of Africa
have seen the lion’s share of this expansion, which has resulted in heavy losses,
destabilization and waves of migration to Europe. In the face of these existential
threats, the United Arab Emirates has worked hard with regional and international
partners to combat terrorism in the Middle East and beyond. The United Arab
Emirates has joined ad hoc alliances and military operations to defeat terrorist
groups. The State’s strategy has focused on cutting off the flow of funds and fighters
as well as countering extremism and promoting tolerance, peaceful coexistence and
interfaith dialogue at local, regional and global levels. The United Arab Emirates has
also worked with partners and the United Nations system to empower women and
young people to take on leadership roles in the fight against extremism.
In the years following 2001, the international community has also taken
significant measures to prevent terrorist acts, including by strengthening
international legal instruments. The Security Council has taken a series of important
steps, including creating the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) through resolution 1535 (2004) and adopting resolution 1624 (2005), which
calls on all States to adopt measures prohibiting incitement to commit terrorist acts.
The Council has also set up sanctions regimes against Al-Qaida, the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and those who support and finance them. For its part, the
General Assembly adopted the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
and established the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre (UNCTC) and the
United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism (UNOCT).
Despite these ongoing efforts, dangerous terrorist groups such as Al-Qaida,
ISIL and Boko Haram remain active. Some of them still have global networks that
pose a threat to our collective security. Some United Nations reports also indicate
that terrorist groups have sought to take advantage of the impact of the coronavirus
disease pandemic. Individual terrorists still have the capacity to destroy the lives and
livelihoods of innocent people by targeting vital infrastructure, city centres, tourist
sites and places of worship. The threat increases as terrorists acquire sophisticated
weapons and exploit new technologies to spread their propaganda, recruit fighters
and raise funds.
In the face of those complex challenges, United Nations States Members must
address the current gaps that hinder our efforts to fight terrorism. In that regard, the
United Arab Emirates offers the following four recommendations.
128/129

21-00482

S/2021/48

First, Member States must increase compliance with United Nations resolutions
and international law. Although the CTC and CTED are valuable mechanisms for
monitoring the implementation of relevant resolutions by Member States, including
resolution 1373 (2001), the Council can strengthen its mechanisms to hold Member
States accountable for violations of relevant resolutions and their obligations under
international law. States must fulfil their legal obligations so that terrorist groups
cannot exploit the current gaps in the system.
Secondly, terrorist threats demand the adoption of a pre-emptive rather than
reactive strategy. The Security Council’s counter-terrorism strategy needs to be both
smart and comprehensive to effectively address emerging threats of terrorism. That
would include an assessment of how technological innovation can enhance counterterrorism efforts, as well as gender-sensitive analysis of the effects of terrorism that
considers the impact of attacks on women and girls.
Thirdly, Member States must continue to encourage, build and strengthen
partnerships with all stakeholders at the national, regional and international levels.
That should include empowering and including women, which would not only
ensure gender mainstreaming but would also increase women’s participation and
leadership in formulating and implementing strategies to prevent extremism and
combat terrorism.
Lastly, building the capacities of Member States and improving their crisismanagement strategies is critical to success in preventing and confronting terrorism.
The United Arab Emirates commends the efforts of the UNCCT and the UNOCT to
strengthen country capacities. We also note the work of the United Arab Emiratesbased Hedayah Centre, which works to build the capacities of groups that prevent
extremism and promote tolerance and peace while adapting its strategies to different
national and regional specificities.
The United Arab Emirates also commends the important CTC and CTED
Member State visits. Based on the experience of the United Arab Emirates, such
visits have contributed to strengthening the State’s counter-terrorism efforts.
However, efforts to eradicate terrorism cannot succeed without unity within
the Council and the international community as a whole. Member States have made
a lot of progress in the fight against terrorism, but there is still a long way to go. The
United Arab Emirates will continue its efforts to eradicate this global scourge and
will maintain its counter-terrorism approach when it is elected to Security Council
membership for the period 2022 to 2023.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates mourns all the victims of terrorism
and expresses its solidarity with all survivors of terrorist attacks around the world.

21-00482129/129
