A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/51/227
16 May 1997

Fifty-first session
Agenda item 120
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/51/643/Add.2)]
51/227.

Respect for the privileges and immunities
of officials of the United Nations and the
specialized agencies and related
organizations

The General Assembly,
Recalling that, under Article 105 of the Charter of the United Nations,
all officials of the Organization shall enjoy in the territory of each of its
Members such privileges and immunities as are necessary for the independent
exercise of their functions in connection with the Organization,
Also recalling that, under Article 100 of the Charter, each Member of
the United Nations undertakes to respect the exclusively international
character of the responsibilities of the Secretary-General and the staff and
not to seek to influence them in the discharge of their responsibilities,
Further recalling the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the
United Nations,1 the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the
Specialized Agencies,2 the Agreement on the Privileges and Immunities of the
International Atomic Energy Agency3 and the United Nations Development
Programme Standard Basic Assistance Agreements,
Stressing that respect for the privileges and immunities of officials of
the United Nations and the specialized agencies is becoming even more
imperative owing to the growing number of assignments entrusted by Member
States to the organizations of the United Nations system,

1

Resolution 22 A (I).

2

Resolution 179 (II).

3

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 374, p. 147.

97-77281

/...

A/RES/51/227
Page 2

Recalling its resolution 76 (I) of 7 December 1946, in which it approved
the granting of the privileges and immunities referred to in articles V and
VII of the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations
to all members of the staff of the United Nations, with the exception of those
who are recruited locally and are assigned to hourly rates,
Also recalling its resolution 43/173 of 9 December 1988, to which is
annexed the Body of Principles for the Protection of All Persons under Any
Form of Detention or Imprisonment, including the principle that all persons
under arrest or detention shall be provided whenever necessary with medical
care and treatment,
Reiterating the obligation of all officials of the Organization in the
conduct of their duties to observe fully both the laws and regulations of
Member States and their duties and responsibilities to the Organization,
Mindful of the responsibility of the Secretary-General to safeguard the
functional immunity of all United Nations officials,
Mindful also of the importance in this respect of the immediate
provision by Member States of adequate information concerning the arrest and
detention of staff members and, more particularly, of their granting access to
them,
Bearing in mind the responsibility of the Secretary-General to guarantee
appropriate standards of justice and due process to United Nations officials,
Recalling the relevant conventions and also its resolution 49/59 of
9 December 1994, by which it adopted the Convention on the Safety of United
Nations and Associated Personnel, and its resolution 51/137 of 13 December
1996,
1.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on respect for
the privileges and immunities of officials of the United Nations and the
specialized agencies and related organizations, as well as their security and
safety,4 and of the statement made to the Fifth Committee by the United
Nations Security Coordinator on 15 October 1996;5
2.
Expresses its deep appreciation to United Nations personnel,
including those engaged in peacekeeping and humanitarian operations and
locally recruited staff, for their efforts to contribute to achieving peace
and security and to alleviating the suffering of the people living in areas of
conflict;
3.
Deplores the risks confronting United Nations personnel, including
those engaged in peacekeeping and humanitarian operations and locally
recruited staff;
4.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly
at its fifty-second session a report on respect for the privileges and
immunities of officials of the United Nations and the specialized agencies and
related organizations as well as their security and safety;

4

A/C.5/51/3.

5

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-first Session, Fifth
Committee, 7th meeting (A/C.5/51/SR.7), and corrigendum.
/...

A/RES/51/227
Page 3

5.
Also requests the Secretary-General to pay special attention to
Member States' restrictions, which may impede the ability of officials of the
United Nations and the specialized agencies and related organizations to carry
out their functions, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its
fifty-third session.
95th plenary meeting
3 April 1997
