TWENTY-SECOND

YEAR

th
MEETING: 3 JUNE 1967

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l346/Rev, 1)

, ,,......,.....,,..,...,
l

Page
1

Expression of thanks to the retiring President , , . , , . , . , , . ‘, , , , . , , ,, . . , , ,

1

Adoption of the agenda , , , , . . , , . . , . . . . , , . , . , , , , . . , . , , , , , , , , . ,

1

Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and
Denmark addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/7902) . , , , . ,
Complaint of the representative of the United Arab Republic in a letter to the
President of the Security Council dated 27 May 1967 entitled: “Israelaggressive
policy, its repeated aggressionthreatening peace and security in the Middle East
and endangering international peace and security” (S/7907) , . . . . . . . . . . . ,
Letter dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/7910) . , , . . , , . , , , . , . . !, . + . , . . , . I . ., . , . . , .

S/PV. 1346

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Records af the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.

Supplements of fhe, Official

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

THIRTEEN

HUNDRED AND FORTY-SIXTH

MEETING

Held in New York on Saturday, 3 June 1967, at 10.00 a.m.
President: Mr. Hans R. TABOR (Denmark).

Complaint of the representative of the United Arab
Republic in a letter to the President of the Security
Council dated 27 May 1967 entitled: “Israel aggresswe
policy, its repeated aggression threatening peace and
security in the Middle East and endangering international
peace and security” (S/7907)

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Denmark,
Ethiopia, France, India, Japan, Mali, Nigeria, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.

Letter dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/7910)

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 34lVRev.l)

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2.

3. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decisions
previously taken by the Council, and with the consent of
the Council, I now invite the representatives of Israel, the
United Arab Republic, Jordan, the Syrian Arab Republic,
Lebanon, Iraq and Morocco to take the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber in order to
participate without vote in the discussion.

Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and Denmark addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/7902).

3. Complaint

of the representative of the United Arab
Republic in a letter to the President of the Security
Council dated 27 May 1967 entitled: “Israel aggressive
policy, its repeated aggression threatening peace and
security in the Middle East and endangering international peace and security” (S/7907).

4.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. G. Rafael (Israel),
Mr. M. A. El Kony (United Arab Republic), Mr. M. H.
El-Farra (Jordan), Mr. A, Daoudy (Syria), Mr. G. Hakim
(Lebanon), Mr. A. Pachachi (Iraq) and Mr. A. T. Benhima
(Morocco) took the places reserved for them.

Letter dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/7910).

4. The PRESIDENT: Since the last meeting of the
Council, two additional requests, dated 1 June, for invitations to participate in the discussions have been received
from the delegations of Saudi Arabia[S/7920] and Kuwait
[S/7921]. If there is no objection, I propose to invite those
two representatives also to take the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council table in order to participate
without vote in the discussion.

Expression of thanks to the retiring President

1. The PRESIDENT: Before the Council proceeds with
the business for this morning’s meeting, I wish, in my
capacity as President of the Council, to say a word of
appreciation to last month’s President for the manner in
which he conducted the business of the Council.

At the invitation of the President, Mr, G. Al-Rachach
(Saudi Arabia) and Mr. G. A. Al-Rashid (Kuwait) took the
places reserved for them.

2. Mr. LIU (China): Mr. President, I just want to say how
much I appreciate your kind words. I am sure that under
your able Presidency the deliberations of the Council will
be brought to a swift conclusion-and, I hope, a fruitful
one.

5. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council will now
continue its discussion of the three items inscribed on its
agenda, I should like to call to the attention of the
members of the Council the two draft resolutions which
were presented at the 1345th meeting, the first one
sponsored by the United States of America [S/79ld/Rev.l]
and the second sponsored by the United Arab Republic

Adoption of the agenda

[S/7919].

The agenda was adopted.

6. The first speaker on my list is the representative Of
Israel, and I would ask him to take a place at the Council
table in order to make his statement.

Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and Denmark addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/7902)

I

7. Mr. RAFAEL (Israel): The crisis in the Middle East
erupted without warning on 16 May 1967 when an
Egyptian general sent an ultimatum to the Commander of
the United Nations Emergency Force (UNEF). At the same
time that he asked for the removal of the United Nations
Force, he moved his own forces into the positions held by
the United Nations. The course of the events that follOWed
is by now common knowledge and well documented in the
reports of the Secretary-General.
8. The Secretary-General tried to prevent the crisis from
getting out of hand. He failed. It was not his fault. Alarmed
by the gravity of the situation, the Governments of Canada
and Denmark asked for the Security Council to be urgently
convened. For eleven days now the Council has debated the
matter in an effort to resolve the immediate crisis. At the
same time one Arab spokesman after another has come to
this table not to alleviate the dangerous tensions, but to fan
the flames of violence and hatred.
9. In their effort to obscure the real issue and the true
causes of the situation created by their own arbitrary
action, they have raked up the most far-fetched allegations
and have advanced arguments of monumental irrelevance. I
have no doubt that more will come. The volume of this
exercise is equalled by its transparency.

another have rushed troops and armaments to our frontiers
and created a most severe threat to Israel’s security and to
the peace of the region. At the same time the spokesmen,
first of Egypt and then of one Arab State after the other,
have been getting into line to hurl their shafts of invective ;
against Israel and of intimidation against the whole world, /
Claiming that they would not initiate offensive action
against Israel, they have launched a campaign of up Ij
restrained political warrdre here in the Security Council in
preparation for the rota1 war which they openly proclaim j
to be their ultimate objective. As the Foreign Minister of
Iraq himself said, “The conflict will be total and uncom. 1
promising . . . there will be no retreat” [13#5th mcefjng, :
paras. 18 and 191. 1 say to him, you need not retreat if you )
!
do not advance.
:
13. As violent and threatening as these Arab statements ‘:
may sound, they are but a diplomatic echo of the venom /
which is being poured out twenty-four hours a day by tht ;
Arab propaganda machine. I would not take up the 1
Council’s time by quoting from the Arab radio and Prew 1
were it not necessary to leave no doubt as to the extent to !
which the Arab Governments are inflaming the passionsof
their own people.
14. On 2.5 May, Radio Cairo in its broadcast at 2 p.m.
proclaimed: “The Arab people is determined to wipe Israel
off the map.”

10. Behind these verbal assaults three major Arab objectives can clearly be discerned: first, to lay a dense
smoke-screen behind which their own aggressive activities
can be concealed; secondly, to portray the intended victim
of their aggression as the aggressor and thirdly, to hypnotize, paralyse and intimidate the whole international community so that no one will interfere with their preparations
for aggression.

15. On 26 May, the radio station of the Palestine
Liberation Organization broadcast a press conferenceby
Mr. Shukairy in which he said, “D-Day is approaching. ThC
Arabs have waited nineteen years for this and will not
flinch from the war of liberation.”
16. And on 29 May, the same Mr. Shukairy wasevennwx
explicit: “The struggle has begun at the Gulf of Aqabaaad
will end at the Bay of Acre.”

11. This is not the first time that this manoeuvre has been
practised. It presents a very serious challenge to this
Organization. No one has expressed this in more stirring
terms than His Imperial Majesty Haile Selassie, in his
memorable
address before the General Assembly on
4 October 1963, when he said:

17. At 8 p.m. on 30 May, Radio Cairo had this to say:

:

“Faced by the blockade of the Gulf of Aqaba, Israel hu ’
two choices, both of which are drenched with Israel’si
blood: either it will be strangled by the Arab military and
economic siege or it will be killed by the bullets of th?
Arab armies surrounding it from the south, from thl
north and from the east.”

“Twenty-seven years ago, as Emperor of Ethiopia, I
mounted the rostrum in Geneva to address to the League
of Nations an appeal for relief from the destruction which
had been unleashed against my defenceless nation by the
Fascist invader. I spoke then both to and for the
conscience of the world. My words went unheeded, but
history
testifies to the accuracy of the warning that 1 gave
in 1936.

18. On Egyptian television, on 1 June at 6.30p,m., th:
Commander of the Egyptian Air Force told his audiena
that “The Egyptian forces spread from Rafah to Sharm tl
Sheikh are ready for the order to begin the struggle to
which we have looked forward for so long”.

“...
“In 1936, I declared that it was not the Covenant of the
League that was at stake, but international morality.
Undertakings, I said then, are of little worth if the will to
keep them is lacking.“’

19. That is the background against which the PEsfil
military confrontation is taking place.
20. There comes to my mind a very fitting sentenceby tic;
late Adlai Stevenson. When his country found h$i
threatened, he said here in the Security Council: “Were wt;
to do nothing until the knife was sharpened? Were weI$:
stand idly by until it was at our throats?” [loafi

12. While this debate has taken that course, events have
not stood still. First Egypt and then one Arab country after
1 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Eighteenth
SeJxiOtL Plenary Meetings, vol. I, 1229thmeeting,paras.2 and 4.

meeting,para. 18.1
2

t

21. Faced by the combined effect of the headlong rush to
arms in the Arab States, a propaganda barrage of
unprecedented violence and proclamations of a holy war, it
is only natural that my Government found itself under the
elementary duty to place the country on a full defence
footing. Two heavily armed armies are facing each other,
one poised to invade and destroy Israel, the other to defend
it. This is a most explosive situation which has been created
by the Arab Governments. In this situation any incident
could have the gravest consequences. Yesterday, the first
clash of the.present crisis occurred. Two Israel soldiers were
killed and two were wounded in an encounter on Israel
territory with an armed group of marauders from Syria. I
Ilave drawn the attention of the Security Council to this in
my letter of last night [S/7924].

26. This invasion by five Arab armies was thrown back by
the young army of Israel which had grown out of Haganah,
the Jewish defence organization, of which I am proud to
have been a member. This war was terminated by the
conclusion of General Armistice Agreements. These Agreements established the borders between Israel and the
neighbouring States. I would remind the Arab representatives that the only valid basis for the Egyptian
presence in the Gaza area and for the Jordanian presence on
the west bank is in the armistice rigime. They should
therefore be more prudent before they disregard the
significance and sanctity of the armistice demarcation lines.
27. The Armistice Agreements contain two fundamental
and inalterable provisions. They were concluded with a
view towards promoting the return to permanent peace.
They stipulated the complete cessation of all forms of
aggressive and hostile action. The Secretary-General, in
paragraph 17 of his report of 26 May 1967 [S/7906/, has
called attention to Security Council resolution 73 (1949) of
11 August 1949 which declared that “the Armistice
Agreements constitute an important step towards tile
establishment of permanent peace”.

22. The mutual reduction and withdrawal of armed forces
to their normal levels and positions is the obvious first step
towards alleviating this crisis.
23. This is not the first time Israel has found itself facing
such an emergency. The Arab spokesmen have been saying
that Israel was born out of aggression. Aggression by
whom? By Egypt, Lebanon, Syria, Jordan, Saudi Arabia
and Iraq,

28. The Arab States have persistently refused to take a
single step towards the restoration of peaceful conditions.
On the contrary, soon after the conclusion of the Armistice
Agreements, they initiated their campaign of piecemeal
aggression. There lies the root cause of the turmoil which
has so adversely affected the Middle East over the years.

24. This is fully documented in the records of the Security
Council for the summer of 1948. The Arab Governments
are using today the same arguments to cover up their
aggressive intent as they used then. At the 302nd meeting
of the Security Council, Mr. Austin, representative of the
United States, said, with reference to the Arabs:

29. The Arab representatives have found in paragraph 2 of
the Secretary-General’s latest report [ibid/ support for
their policies. The Secretary-General refers therein to “the
continuing Arab-Israel conflict”. What the Arab representatives choose to ignore is that it is Israel that has made
repeated efforts to arrive at a peaceful solution of the
conflict and it is the Arab States that have rebuffed these
efforts. It is their policy to continue the conflict.

“They tell us quite frankly that their business in
Palestine is political. . . . Of course, the statement that
they are there to make peace is rather remarkable in view
of the fact that they are waging war.
‘6.I 1 .
“Therefore, here we have the highest type of evidence
of the international violation of the law: the admission by
those who are committing this violation.“2

30. In justification of that policy, the Arab Governments
claim that, in spite of the United Nations Charter and the
General Armistice Agreements, they are in a state of war
with Israel and are therefore free to conduct any act of
belligerence of their choosing. No lengthy argument is
required to refute that doctrine. The Security Council, in
its resolution 95 (1951) of I September 1951, has ruled
that “neither party can reasonably assert that it is actively a
belligerent” under the armistice rdgime.

2 5. The representative of the Soviet Union, Mr. Gromyko,
the present Foreign Minister, at the 309th meeting of the
Security Council addressed himself to the same situation.
He said:
“This is not the first time that the Arab States, which
organized the invasion of Palestine, have ignored a
decision of the Security Council or of the General
Assembly. The USSR delegation deems it essential that
the Council should state its opinion more clearly and
more firmly with regard to this attitude of the Arab
States towards decisions of the Security Council. It is not
in the interest of the United Nations in general, or of the
Security Council in particular, to tolerate such a situation, where decisions of the Council, designed to put an
end to warfare . . . are being flouted.“3
2 See Official Records of the Security

3 1. That resolution was vahdly adopted. Those who are
urging for the full restoration of the Armistice Agreements
must first insist that the States concerned forgo beIligerence. On behalf of Israel, I can give this assurance. An
armistice with built-in belligerence is no armistice.
32. The draft resolution submitted by the United Arab
Republic [S/7919/ seeks the endorsement of the Security
Council for this policy. Its object is to promote the reaI aim
of the Egyptian Government, which is not to return to the
conditions of 1956, but, as President Nasser has stated
himself, to go back to the situation prevailing in 1948-in
other words and in clear language, to abolish Israel’s
independence. In his speech of 26 May, President Nasser

Council, Third Year,

NO. 7.2,302nd meeting, pp. 41 and 43.
3 Ibid., NO. 77, 309th meeting, p. 2.
3

of the Sea. Both the International Law Commission and the
Geneva Conference stated quite clearly that there must be
no suspension of the right of innocent passage through
international straits. Article 16, paragraph 4, of the Convention on the Territorial Sea and the Contiguous Zone of
1958 embodies the generally accepted rule of international
law governing straits.

left no doubt; he said: “Our basic aim will be to destroy
Israel”.
33. How different were the hopes and expectations
expressed by responsible leaders in 1956, when the late
Secretary of State Mr. Dulles said at the 561 st meeting of
the General Assembly:
“All of us, I think, would hope that out of this tragedy
there should come something better than merely a
restoration of the conditions out of which this tragedy
arose.

!
i
i
r

38. The representative of the United Arab Republic has
said /1344th meeting] that the International Law Commission stated that its draft articles on the law of the sea
regulate the law of the sea in time of peace only. He
omitted to mention that this view was not adopted by the
Geneva Conference, In any case, this whole argument is
irrelevant, because the Egyptian claim of belligerency is
inadmissible.

“There needs to be something better than the uneasy
armistices which have existed now for these eight years
between Israel and its Arab neighbours. There needs to be
a greater sense of confidence and sense of security . . .“.4

t
39. The Egyptian Government itself has recognized the
international character of the Strait of Tiran and its
obligations under the recognized principles of the law of
nations. In its aide-mimoire to the United States Government of 28 January 1950, it undertook “that this passage, I
the only practicable one, will remain free, as in the past, in
conformity with international practice and recognized
principles of the law of nations”.

34. The question of belligerence is not an academic
matter. The Arab Governments, since the inception of the
armistice regime, have not only upheld the doctrine of
belligerence, but, much worse, have been practising belligerence. They have practised it in the Suez Canal; they
have practised it on land by countless armed incursions into
the territory of Israel; by continuous threats against the
territorial integrity of Israel, culminating in an act of
war-the imposition of a blockade in the Strait of Tiran.

40. On 20 February 1957, President Eisenhower declared:

35. The representative of the United Arab Republic, and
in his wake other Arab spokesmen, have raised two main
arguments to justify the blockade of Tiran. The first is that
Israel has no right to be at Eilat, or Umm Reshresh, as it
once was called. I can dispose of that very briefly. The Arab
contention that Israel has no right to be in Eilat at all is a
mystification. Eilat was included in the Jewish State by the
General Assembly’s resolution of 29 November 1947
[lSl (II)]. In May 1949, Egypt complained to the Mixed
Armistice Commission about the Israel presence at Umm
Reshresh. On 8 February 1950, after very careful consideration, the Mixed Armistice Commission rejected-I
repeat, rejected-the Egyptian complaint that the occupation of Umm Reshresh was a violation of the Armistice
Agreement. But what determines the issue is the IsraelJordan General Armistice Agreement, by which Umm
Reshresh-Eilat-is
placed on the Israel side of the border. I
invite the attention of the members of the Security Council
to the map attached to that Agreement, which can be
found in the Security Council’s official records.5

“NOW, with reference to the passage into and through
the Gulf of Aqaba, we expressed the conviction that the
gulf constitutes international waters and that no nation
has the right to prevent free and innocent passage in the
gulf. We announced that the United States was prepared
to exercise this right itself and to join with others to
secure general recognition of this right.”
41. On 1 March 1957, the representative
declared in the General Assembly:

of France

“The French Government considers that the Gulf of
Aqaba, by reason partly of its breadth and partly of the
fact that its shores belong to four different States,
constitutes international waters. Consequently it believes
that, in conformity with international law, freedom of
navigation should be ensured in the gulf through the
straits which give accessto it.“6
42. On 4 March 1957, Prime Minister Lester Pearson, the
then Chairman of the Canadian delegation, declared in the
General Assembly:

36. Another argument is based on the doctrine of belligerency which. as I have already said, is outlawed under
the armistice r&me, and under the Charter.

“Concerning the Gulf of Aqaba and the Strait of Tirm,
I suggested then that there should be no interference with
innocent passagethrough those waters, nor the assertion
of any claim to belligerent rights there.“’

37. The third argument is that the Strait of Tiran is not an
international waterway. The question of the international
character of the waterway, which, in the opinion of my
Government, has always been clear, was authoritatively
answered at the eleventh regular session of the General
Assembly and at the 1958 Geneva Conference on the Law

43. The representative of Denmark declared on 4 March
1957, at the same meeting of the General Assembly:
“In the view of the Danish Government, the Strait of
Tiran must be regarded as an international waterway

4 See Official Records of the General Assembly, First Emergency
Special Session, Plenary Meetings, 561st meeting, paras.154
and 155.
5 See Official Records, of @e Security Council, Fourth Year,
Special Supplement No. 1, annex I.

6’~ee Official Records of the General Assembly, Eleventh Session,
Plenary Meetings, vol. II, 666th meeting, para. 58.
‘7Ibid., 667th meeting, para. 148.

4

through which vessels of all nations have a right of
passage.“’

were mhle to find the answer in our own files. Various
Arab spokesmen have now enlightened us by attributing to
responsible leaders of lsrael statements to the effect that
Israel was ready to march on Damascus and to overthrow
the Syrian Government. I am grateful to the Arab representatives for giving us this clarification. However, I am
sorry that I cannot oblige them and confirm their allegations. I can state quite categorically that no such statements
have been made. In a previous intervention, I assured the
Council and the representative of Syria that Israel has no
interest in the nature of the regime in Syria or in its
activities, so long as they are confined to Syria,

44. I would take up too much of the Council’s time if I
were to quote all the authoritative statements affirming the
international character of the Strait of Tiran. In recent days
more statements to that effect have been issued by many
Governments.
45, The Foreign Minister of Iraq, in support of his
arguments in favour of the blockade of the Gulf of Aqaba,
has stated that not a single resolution was adopted by the
United Nations on the problem of navigation in the Gulf of
A.gaba. Since when does the United Nations have to adopt a
resolution on freedom of navigation through international
straits? Are rights of free navigation in the Skagerrak or
any other international strait impaired by the fact that the
United Nations has not adopted a resolution?

50. Having said that, I should like to point out that for the
twenty years of its existence Israel has been subjected to a
constant barrage of vituperation and threats of exceptional
vehemence. Every conceivable medium of mass communication has been mobilized for this campaign,

46. But, again, we are arguing not an academic legal point,
but a matter which the Secretary-General accurately described as being most vital to Israel’s interest. While in
Cairo, he called to the attention of the Government of the
United Arab Republic the dangerous consequences which
could ensue from restricting innocent passage of ships in
the Strait of Tiran.

51. The Arab Governments have given as a pretext for
their present mobilization and military activity alleged
Israel troop movements and concentrations, which the
Secretary-Genekal has reported never took place, and
statements of Israel leaders, which have never been made.
The archives of the Israel Government are bulging with the
unending torrent of abuse and threats from Arab leaders
against the very existence of Israel. If we were to follow the
Arab logic, every one of those statements would be a
sufficient reason to take up arms. But it is not the
statements alone which are causing the present crisis. This
time these verbal threats are linked to military preparations
on an unprecedented scale. These statements are no longer
hurled into the air. They are now falling on inflammable
ground where two armies are standing face to face.

47. Eilat, a thriving port and industrial centre, is Israel’s
outlet to the Red Sea. It links our country with Africa and
Asia. Considerable trade passes through this essential
maritime route. Eilat is one of the main ports for the
export of chemicals and fertilizers so urgently needed to
keep up the world’s food supplies. It is the terminal of an
oil pipeline connecting it with Haifa. The maritime trade
passing through Eilat is the basis of the city’s economic life
and the life of the hinterland of that city, Severing the
artery is an act as grave as an attempt to truncate part of
our territory. It is a curious thing that those who are
responsible for proclaiming the blockade and creating the
current crisis come here and belittle the significance of their
action for Israel. But if that is so, why do they go to such
lengths and create a situation so fraught with dangers?

52. The situation with which the Council is confronted
today has deteriorated since the Council first met on this
question. In my statement on 29 May [1343rd meeting], I
urged that five immediate steps be taken. None of them has
been taken. On the contrary, the Arab Governments have
intensified their preparations for war. It is not a breathing
spell which will avert the present danger. What is required is
action, concrete steps to forgo all belligerence and to
withdraw the armies back to their previous positions.

48, They are following the same line as was used by the
Nazis in 1939 when they took over Danzig. They broke
down resistance by belittling the significance of their act
and by diverting attention from their ultimate objectives.
The world has paid a terrible price for that appeasement.
The Nazis launched the theme-Why fight for Danzig? -and
that is what we have heard here: Why fight for Eilat?
Mr. Shukairy has givep. us the answer in that broadcast to
which I referred earlier: first the Gulf of Aqaba and then
the Bay of Acre. Israel is determined to make its stand on
the Gulf of Aqaba. Nothing less than complete noninterference with free and innocent passage through the
Gulf of Aqaba is acceptable to the Government of Israel.

53, Mr, TARABANOV (Bulgaria) (translated jbm
French): Since this is the first time that our deliberations
have been presided over by a member representing one of
the countries which have recently acceded to our ranks, I
should like to take this opportunity of congratulating him.
I hope, Mr, President, that you will preside over the
Security Council many, many timei.
54. At the last meeting of the Security Council, on 31
May, the representative of Jordan drew attention [1345th
meet@] to the fact that, ever since the question of
Palestine first came up in the United Nations, it has always
been listed on the agenda as “The Palestine question”. The
same title has been used in all the reports of the Security
Council to the General Assembly, in the reports by the
Secretary-General and in other United Nations documents.
The delegation of the People’s Republic of Bulgaria feels
that there is no reason to depart from this well-tried
practice at the present juncture, and that it would be more

49. Arab representatives have attached themselves with
ardour to paragraph 8 of the Secretary-General’s first report
of 19 March 1967 (S/7896]. on reading that report and
that paragraph we were puzzled and asked ourselves to
what statements the Secretary-General was referring. We
-661th

meeting, pam. 234.
5

--1

1,

I

in keeping with established practice to introduce the three
items on the agenda with the general heading “The
Palestine question”. This would be fully justified on
grounds of substance and. procedure.
55, It is heartening to note that, in a tense and sometimes
artificially overstrung atmosphere, the Security Council has
managed, by patient and sustained endeavour, to conduct
its deliberations on the agenda item before it amid relative
calm and has been able to ensure moderation in its
discussions. The nervous tension created by certain delegations, as manifested in attempts to impose immediate
decisions, even before the Secretary-General’s return from
his visit to Cairo, has subsided thanks to the efforts of the
other delegations, in particular those of the African-Asian
group.
56. Together with many other important factors which
must also be taken into consideration the restrained and
reserved attitude adopted by the Security Council has
undoubtedly exerted a beneficial and calming influence on
certain overheated and over-excited elements, despite the
Israel Foreign Minister’s assertion that “the United Nations
does not emerge from the events of the past two weeks
with brilliance or credit”-an assertion reported in Tlze New
York Times and presented as being the “most massive
understatement of this century”.
57. The calm and resolute attitude of the Security Council
members has so far played a moderating role in the crisis
which is at present convulsing the Middle East. The
breathing spell the need for which was referred to by the
Secretary-General in his report of 26 May /S/7906/-a
suggestion which, although supported by many delegations,
apparently fails to meet with the approval of some 0 the
speakers, as was made clear a moment ago-began, in fact,
from the instant the Council refused lo submit to the
pressure of certain Governments and their delegations.

are still ready to play the game. We shall apply the rules
that we find most suitable.”
62. Subsequent developments in the Middle East proved
such statements to be more than verbal threats. According
to the latest issue of Newsweek magazine of 5 June, the
same Chief of Staff:
“ . * . publicly observed that the time might have come
to seize Damascus and topple the Syrian Government.
“‘And Prime Minister Levi Eshkol warned that if the
terrorism continued, Israel would”-and these are the
exact words of Mr. Eshkol-“ ‘choose the time, the place,
and the means to counter the aggressor.’ “’
63, That is where the source of the danger and of the 2
tension in the Middle East lies. It was this imminent and
very real danger which forced the Governments of the t
United Arab Republic, Syria and the other Arab countries
to take certain precautionary measures. Confronted by
these preparations and provocations, the content, scopeand
sequence of which were revealed by President Nasserin his
speech of 22 May, the Arab countries were obliged to take
the necessary steps to ensure their defence.
64. The withdrawal of the United Nations Emergency
Force has unreasonably annoyed those same imperialist
circles which are responsible for the tense situation in the
Middle East and their representatives, who have the habit of
regarding any United Nations peace-keeping operation as a
military
expedition designed to protect their special in. I
terests, and in this case, to prevent the United Arab 1
Republic from exercising full sovereignty over its territory.
They even went so far as to censure the withdrawal of the
Force, to which the Secretary-General consented without
asking their specific permission, as contributing to the
present crisis in the Middle East.

58. The moderation and reserve with which the Security
Council has acted until now cannot, of course, serve as a
substitute for the moderation which the parties concerned
and all countries should exercise in this matter.

65. The attempts by certain circles to create confusion
and obstruct the withdrawal of the United Nations Emergency Force, which are referred to in the SecretaryGeneral’s report [S/7906], are an indication of their plans
to interfere in the domestic affairs of a sovereign State, The
fact that the presence of the United Nations Emergency
Force in .the territory of a host country, the United Arab
Republic, was in this case conceived as an extraordinary
and hence temporary measure, and the fact that it wasthe
consent of the Government of the United Arab Republic
which constituted the legal basis for that presence, do not
seem to bother those circles.

S9. The actual root causes of the tense situation in the
Middle East lie in the policy of interference and intervention conducted by certain imperialist circles for the
purpose of appropriating and exploiting its vast natural
wealth and re-establishing their control over a region of
particuIar strategic importance where their domination has
been shaken by the struggle of the Arab peoples to free
themselves from colonial rule and regain their national
independence.

66. It is strange to note that certain NATO countries, and
above all the United States of America, deny the United

GO. The preparations made and the measures taken by the
Government of Israel and the aitacks carried out against
Syria and Jordan were nothing but manifestations of that
policy, designed to augment the threat of war and stir up
this hotbed’ of war which has been created by the intrigues
and machinations of the imperialist Powers.

Arab Republic’s right to move its armed forces over its owl1
national territory, when at the very same time armed forces
of the United States are engaged in a war of aggressionon
Viet-Namese soil and have assumed the role of international
policemen in an area remote from their national frontiers
where they may provoke incidents liable to trigger off
another world war.

61, You will remember that on the very next day
following Israel’s act of aggression against Syria, on 14 July
1966, the Israel Chief of Staff, Mr. Itzhak Rabin, said: “We

-

9 Quoted in English by the speaker.

6

67. Even stranger is the Israel representative’s manifest
displeasure at that legitimate action of the Government of
the United Arab’ Republic, considering the refusal on the
part of Israel to accept the presence of the Emergency
Force on its territory as well as to apply the General
Armistice Agreements or to abide by the obligations set
forth therein, thus blocking the machinery of the United
Nations Truce Supervision Organization.

unilaterally denounced by Israel, it is hard to see how any
contribution can be made to the maintenance of peace jn
the Middle East.
75. The Security Council should ask the parties to the
Armistice Agreements between Israel and the Arab States
to abide by those Agreements and to fulfil all their
obligations as regards the effective functioning of the
machinery provided for in the Agreements. This is a
Preliminary Step which the Council should decide on. Any
violation of the Agreements would inevitably lead to an
aggravation of the crisis. In this connexion, an appeal to the
Israel Government to reconsider its unilateral denunciation
of the Armistice Agreement with the United Arab
Republic-which is still valid and binding on the partiesand to apply the Agreement, together with an appeal on the
same lines by the United States, which is on the best of
terms with Israel, would undoubtedly have a salutary
effect. Instead of that, however, The New York Times of
31 May informs US, in a report from the Sea of Crete, that
[the speaker continued in English] the entire long range
striking force of the Sixth Fleet, the carriers America and
fartltoga, the cruisers Little Rock and Galveston and their
ten accompanying destroyers standing by in the Sea of
Crete are ready to intervene in the Middle East if
Washington so decides.

68.

In the light of all these developments, the steps taken
the Government of the United Arab Republic are no
more than measures of self-defence against a very real
danger of aggression.

by

69. Considering all these facts and the announcements by
Israel statesmen, such as that said to have been made by
Mr, Eshkol at a meeting of Mapai party leaders: “Bearing in
mind the incidents of the last few months, we must take
measures that are as rigorous as those taken on 7 April”, no
one has the right to be surprised that the Arab countries
decided to take serious action to cope with whatever might
happen.
70. Nevertheless, while taking these precautions, the
Government
of the United Arab Republic, through
President Nasser and the Foreign Minister Mr, Riad, gave a
formal assurance to the Secretary-General “that the United
Arab Republic would not initiate offensive action against
Israel”. We should like to hear a similar statement, even at
this rather late hour, from the Israel Government.

[The speaker resumed in French]

76. This news item needs no comment. We know only too
well that neither the United States Sixth Fleet nor the
United States military basesencircling that region are there
for peace-keeping purposes. On the contrary, the sole effect
of their presence is to heighten the tension throughout the
region, to create new hotbeds of war and to encourage and
pit one side-in this caseIsrael-against the other-the Arab
peoples, who are struggling for final liberation from the
imperialist and colonial yoke. All this is currently confirmed by reports which, asyou can see,come from United
States sources.

7 1, My country, concerned as it is about the maintenance
of peace and security in the region and throughout the

world, would indeed have liked to have an assurance that
during this crisis--and afterwards-Israel, for its part, would
not initiate any offensive action against any Arab State.
Such a formal pledge by Israel, before the Security Council
and the bar of world public opinion, would contribute
immediately to the reduction of tension in the region.
72. Apart from an urgent appeal for moderation, the
Secretary-General, in his two reports to the Security
Council, felt that it would be particularly helpful “in the
present situation if the Government of Israel were to
reconsider its position and resume its participation in the
Egyptian-Israel Mixed Armistice Commission”[see S/7906,
para. 1.51. He suggested to the Council that it consider that
possible approach during its search for ways out of the
present crisis,

77, This development of the situation in the Middle East
has aroused justifiable concern in our country. I quote an
official statement put out by the Bulgarian PressAgency in
that connexion:
“The people and Government of Bulgaria, which have
close links of friendship with the Arab countries and have
the greatest sympathy with them, support their struggle
against imperialism and colonialism and for freedom and
national independence. The Bulgarian people, like all
peace-loving peoples, is deeply concerned about the
maintenance of peace in the Middle East and cannot
remain indifferent to the course of events in a region
which lies so close to the People’s Republic of Bulgaria.”

73. The Secretary-General’s idea, which incidentally has
been gestating for a long time, has been taken up and
supported in the draft resolution submitted by the United
Arab Republic [S/7919] and supported in the Council by
the delegation of India, The usefulness and necessity of
such an instrument in the present situation are undeniable.
The role that could be played by the Mixed Armistice
Commission in preparing the ground for a settlement of the
important questions pending is more than obvious.

78. In face of the crisis which has been provoked bY the
activities of imperialist circles in the Middle East, it is the
duty of all Members of the United Nations, and especially
the Security Council, which bears the main responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security, to
call for the utmost moderation and to make efforts to
induce Israel to observe the General Armistice Agreements
and participate in the bodies set UP to ensure their
application, so that those bodies can function properly.

74. It is only natural, of course, to ask that the provisions
of the General Armistice Agreement between Egypt and
Israel be strictly complied with. Without the implementation of that Agreement, which has been illegally and
7

79. Only thus will the Security Council and all Members
of the United Nations be able to play their part in tackling
the underlying causes of the crisis that is shaking the Middle
East, and to seek just and effective solutions.
80. The PRESIDENT:
I invite the Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs of the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs of the Syrian Arab Republic to take a place at the
Council table and make his statement.
81. Mr. DAOUDY (Syria): Mr. President, as we assemble
today for the first time under your able Presidency, we feel
confident that you will preside over our deliberations with
the required objectivity, consonant with the great responsibilities attached to your high office.

87. Thus we remember this United States attitude, but we
also remember what the United States Government did at
the end of the Suez crisis. It came out with what was at
that time called the Eisenhower Doctrine, aimed at filling j
the so-called vacuum left in the area. Egypt, the victim of
aggression, categorically refused this vacuum theory, and
the Arab people everywhere, to safeguard their dignity,
rejected the doctrine. This was followed by the stoppage of
food supplies and medicines badly needed by Egypt, At the
same time help of all kinds-money, food and grants-was
rushed to Israel. The end result was that the goodwill I
acquired by the United States for its commendable attitude
was transformed into bitter resentment which swept
through the Arab homeland.
88. Mr. Goldberg expressed pride in the United States
attitude during the debate on the As Sarnu aggression.
Frankly, we all know that this aggression was nothing less
than a war crime, and no Council member could very well
have adopted a different stand without jeopardizing his
moral integrity. It was difficult even for the United States
to refrain from condemning this Israel act of mass
assassination. It is interesting now to recall the many
expressions of implicit wonder that Israel had directed its
American-made instruments of death against Jordan, and
not against Syria-whose r&me is not liked by Tel Aviv
and Washington-which not only actively supports the
rights of the Palestine people to regain its homeland, but
which also is most outspoken in backing every liberation
movement in the world.

82. At the same time, I should like to refer to what you

said in the meeting of the Council on 30 May, in your
capacity as the representative of Denmark: “Let us never
forget that the problem confronting mankind today is, in
the words of a Danish poet, ‘coexistence or no existence,
that’s the question.’ “(1344th meeting, para. 107.1 Let me
remind you respectfully that your honourable people in
Denmark,, who have a great love for liberty and a
deep-rooted attachment to independence, did not accept
this advice when it came to coexistence with the Nazi
occupation, and rightly so.
83. Mr. President, I should now like to reply to the speech
delivered on 30 May by Mr. Goldberg [1344tlz meeti?zg/.
when he attempted, in his answer to my colleague,
Mr. Tomeh, to convey the impression of the non-alignment
of United States policy in the Arab-Israel conflict. He
referred to the United States attitude during the Suez crisis
in 1956, and to his Government’s statement and vote
during the debate by this Council on the Israel aggression
against As Samu in Jordan in November 1966.

89. At the same time, we wish to remind the United States
delegation of the Israel aggression against Syria on 14 July
1966, when the Israel Air Force attacked Syrian territory,
killed a number of civilians and destroyed a development
project. The United States defeated in the Council the
resolution condemning the wanton Israel aggression and
massacre of innocent Syrians. The same happened in
November 1964, when a large number of Israel military
planes also destroyed a development site in Syria, killing
civilians ‘and damaging properties. The United States
adopted the same hostile stand against us, to mention only
a few instances.

84. In doing so, I am not trying to score points in a mental
exercise, but I am acting out of necessity, especially after
the developments that have. taken place since 30 May, The
United States delegation has submitted a draft resolution
[S/7916/Rev.l].
And the United States Government’s
antagonistic stand against the Arabs becomes more
threatening, In the atmosphere there looms the shadow of a
new Suez-like operation.

90. A more recent reminder was what happened on 1
7 April 1967. My colleague Mr. Tomeh gave you the other
day [134&h meeting] a full account of this treacherous
aggression against my country. It was substantiated by a
report issued by the Israel-Syrian Mixed Armistice Commission, with irrefutable proof of the criminal assault on
Syria by Israel. Why, we ask, should Washington officials, j
echoed as usual by their followers in London and else. j
where, make such an uproar when Syria announced its 1
decision to defend itself and protect its people? Why the !
outcry when the United Arab Republic responded, in the I
face of Israel’s declaration of intentions for aggression, bJ’ 1
implementing the Mutual Defence Pact between the two 1
countries and re-establishing its sovereign rights over its
territorial waters?

85. It is a fact that the United States Government
disapproved of the Suez aggression and joined hands to go
along with the sincere, firm and constructive efforts made
by the Soviet Union and the African-Asian countries, That
attitude of the United States received the appreciation of
the Arab people and of peoples the world over. The Suez
crisis, as is well known, could easily have led to a third
world war, only eleven years after the end of the Second
World War.
86, Today again, after another eleven years of these tragic
events, Israel is leading the world to the brink of catastrophe. One has the impression that Israel is following a
cycle which makes it gamble with the fate of our area and
the peace of our planet every eleven years. However, Israel
could not and would not do what it is doing if it were not
assured of strong backing by its powerful protectors and
benefactors.

91. Why did the United States Government keep quiet
when Israel leaders, only a few weeks ago, came out with
their insolent threat to invade Syria, occupy Damascus and
topple its revolutionary Government? Not a single voice
8

was then heard from Washington about the threat to peace
and security in the Middle East. Consequently, that mobile
itlstrument
of United States diplomacy in our area, the
Sixth Fleet, continued its leisurely routine course.

97. Surely American interests, real or imagined, cannot be
safeguarded by sheerbrute power or fleet diplomacy, as has
been shown in the war against the people of Viet-Nam.
98. In this brief review I have attempted to show the
erroneous and aggressive nature of United States official
policy towards the Arab countries and have cited a few
examples of the slanderous campaign conducted by the
Zionists and their friends and supporters in this country.

92. All this is nothing but a manifestation of the official
United States policy vis-his Syria and the Arab people-a
policy of inherent active enmity, while catering to Zionist
ambitions
in our area. The United States attitude was
confirmed
once again by a statement of Mr. Eshkol, in
which he revealed that he had received assurances from
Mr. McNamara of his Government’s readiness to put the
Sixth Fleet at the disposal of Israel.

99. In the face of such provocations, which vary from the
SUpplY Of arms to the support given Israel in the Security
Council, from the so-called declaration on the freedom of
navigation in the Gulf of Aqaba to the threat to use
American force against us, what are the Arab countries
expected to do? The answer has been given by many Arab
official statements, either in the area or before the Security
Council. Our attitude is purely defensive in nature and
legitimate in its motives. If, despite what has been said and
reiterated, Israel alone, or together with overt United States
participation, carries out an aggressionin the Gulf of Aqaba
or elsewhere, the Arab Governments are determined to
react strongly and unitedly to defend their people by all
means at their disposal.

93. The traveller who comes to New York from the
Middle East these days-and that is my case-must be struck
by the atmosphere of hysteria prevailing in most of the
mass communications media of this city in favour of Israel.
94. The slanderous campaign conducted against the Arab
countries in general, and Syria in particular, is systematically distorting the facts and misleading American public
opinion. Unfortunately, it is fed by statements made by
some of the politicians in this country who, for well-known
and obvious reasons, portray Israel as a little, harmless and
innocent State surrounded by powerful fanatical elements
bent upon exterminating it. The result, in their opinion, is
that Israel is in dire need of aid and protection from the
United States of America. As most of the people of this
country are known to be kind-hearted, those who have
embarked
on the campaign of distortion are using this
characteristic to lead the public astray in order to promote
their personal, selfish interests, and not the national
interest. But let us ask: is Israel really that harmless, weak
and innocent creature, or is it precisely the opposite?

100. Here we would like to make our views quite clear and
plain. Whatever Israeldoes, it will certainly be with the full
backing of the United States Government.
101. In this respect, it may be of interest to the Security
Council to know ahout the feelings and attitude of our
people, Ten days ago, when the Israel threats against Syria
reached their dangerous point, the Central Council of the
International Union of Arab Workers decided to hold an
emergency meeting in Damascus.

95. As an illustration of this misleading and provocative
campaign by the news media, allow me to give an example
of the irrational course followed by the friends of Israel in
this country. In an editorial appearing in The New York
Times on 31 May under the title “Middle East and/or
Viet-Nam”,
it was stated:

102. On 22 May, delegations of trade unions representing
the various countries of the Arab homeland hurried to
Damascus to show their full support of Syria and of the
United Arab Republic. At the end of their meetings, the
Arab trade unions passed, on 24 May, a number of
resolutions expressing the determination of the Arab masses
to defeat any aggression against the Arab countries. Allow
me to read out from some of those resolutions:

“In
terms of American
interests-as well as
commitment-the
Middle East is to be differentiated from
South-East Asia.
“. . .

“At the spark of any Israel aggression, the Arab workers
throughout the Arab world are called upon to:

“The Persian Gulf area produces 27 percent of the
world’s petroleum and has proved global reserves of 60
percent. American firms have a gross investment in the
region of more thm $2.5 billion. There is nothing
comparable in American interests that can be said of the
South-East Asian peninsula.
“ *+ *

“1. Destroy the oil sources,pipe-lines and installations
from which the enemy cou!cl I?enefit.

“If Washington now argues that it cannot afford to take
on two crucial commitments at the same time, this would
be another good reason to say it is time to de-escalate the
war in Viet-Nam.”

“4. Cripple all institutions and establishments belonging to the colonialist and imperialist countries.

“2. Close all Arab airports to planes belonging to
colonialist and imperialist countries.
“3. Boycott all ships belonging to the enemies of the
Arab Nation and prevent them from entering Arab Ports.

“5. Destroy all foreign military bases still on the land
ot some of the Arab countries.”

96. The stand taken by the influential New York Times
reflects the war-like mentality which characterizes the
Zionist endeavour to poison American-Arab relations.

103. Let me emphasize once more, especially in view Of
the obduracy of Zionism and colonialism in denying the
9

&

Arab people of Palestine their distinct identity, that this
identity does exist. It is specifically in this aspect of the
problem that the United States Government has totally
given in to the Zionist conspiracy against the Arab people
of Palestine. This we feel it our duty to make unequivocally
clear.

equipped not only with small arms, but also with
tommy-guns and machine guns . , , smuggled into Palestine during the past two years.‘l ’
“On 5 May 1943, Brigadier General Patrick J. Hurley,
Personal Representative of President Roosevelt, also
cabled to the President:

104. While the Security Council is now endeavouring to
overcome the present crisis, let us not lose sight of the fact
that, as has been recognized by many speakers, there are
deeper causes. No peace can ever be lasting until and unless
the full rights of the Arab people of Palestine to their
homeland are recognized and fully implemented.
105. With permission, I will say a few words about the
speech which has just been delivered by the representative
of the Tel Aviv authorities. The representative of the Tel
Aviv authorities gave a lengthy statement a few minutes ago
and tried, as usual, to distort the facts.
106. He pretended that the present crisis in the Middle
East erupted on 16 May 1967. Contrary to what he said,
the crisis in the Middle East started, as a matter of fact, on
29 November 1947, when the former President of the
United States, Truman, used all the influence and might of
the United States to impose the partition of Palestine and
was instrumental in the uprooting of the Palestine people.

“ ‘For its part, the Zionist organization in Palestine has
indicated its commitment to an enlarged program for
(1) a sovereign Jewish State which would embrace Palestine and Probably Transjordania, (2) an eventual transfer
of the Arab population from Palestine to Iraq, and
(3) Jewish leadership for the whole Middle East in the
fields of economic development and control.‘l 1 ”
108. On aggressive statements, the following one by the
Prime Minister of Israel was delivered on 2 April 1967 and
is very revealing. Mr. Eshkol said, according to The Jewsalem Post:
“Israel has not been approached so far on a treaty on
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. Indeed, there was
no difference how men die-whether from nuclear or
conventional arms.”
109. The Israel representative had the courage to speak
about international morality. He forgot the perpetration of
the tragedy of the Arab people of Palestine. What about the
eighteen resolutions adopted by the General Assembly
affirming the rights of the refugees to their homeland? He
forgot also the massacres perpetrated in cold blood by the
Zionist underground against the Arabs. To refresh his
memory, let me remind him of the following massacres.

107. As for the latest development in which the Middle
East is embroiled at present, it did actually start on 7 April
1967, when the Israelis sent their military planes over
Damascus, killed civilians and destroyed non-military
targets and threatened to invade Syria. Time and again the
Israel representatives repeat the allegation that the Arab
States attacked Israel in 1948. To answer this, I would like
to state that from the very inception of the Zionist
movement its aim was to throw the Arab people of
Palestine out of their country by terror and slaughter. The
Council is familiar now with the Zionist underground
movement in the Middle East. The following quotations
[see also S/7845 of 9 April 196 7] prove beyond any doubt
what I have just stated:

110. The Haganah, Irgun and Stern gangs committed the
following .massacres in Palestine: the King David Hotel
ma’ssacre, 22 July 1946; the massacre of Deir Yassin, IO
April 1948; the massacre of Naseruddine, 14 April 1948;
the massacre of Carmel, 20 April 1948; the massacre of
Al-Qabu, May 1948; the massacre of Beit Diras, 3 May
1948, the massacre of Beit Khoury, 5 May 1948; the
massacre of Az-Zaytoun, 6 May 1948; the massacre of Wadi
Araba, 13 May 1950; the massacre of Sharafat, 7 February
195 1; the massacre of Falameh, 2 April 195 1; the massacre
of Qibya, 14 October 1953; the massacre of Nahalin, 28
March 1954; the massacre of Gaza, 28 February 1955; the
massacre of Khan Yunis, 31 May 195 5; the massacre of
Khan Yunis, 31 August 1955; the massacre of Tiberias, II
December 1955; the massacre of As-Sabha, 2 November
1955; the massacre of Gaza, 5 April 1956; the massacre of
Rafah, 16 August 1956; the massacre of Ar-Rahwa, 12
September 1956; the massacre of Gharandal., 13 September
1956; the massacre of Houssan, 25 September 1956; the
massacre of Qalquiliyah, 10 October 1956; the massacre of
Kafr Kassem, 29 October 1956. To go further would take
too much of the Council’s time.

“On 23 January 1943, the American Minister in Egypt,
Mr, Kirk, cabled the Secretary of State in Washington as
follows:
“ ‘On the Jewish side I have found Zionist officials of
the Jewish Agency uncompromisingly outspoken in their
determination that Palestine at the end of this war shall
become not merely a national home for the Jews, but a
Jewish state despite any opposition from the l,OOO,OOO
Arabs living there. In various ways the main result of
many of their efforts seems to be to goad Palestinian
Arabs into breaking informal truce that has existed since
war began. This enormously increased assurance on part
of Jews in Palestine stems from two main sources:
(a) their feeling that they have the increasing support of
public opinion in Great Britain and the United States;
(b) their confidence in their increased numbers and in
their supply of arms that makes them feel they can more
than hold their own in actual fighting with Arabs of
Palestine.

111. In concluding, I should like to say also a few words
about the letter dated 2 June [S/7924/ that was circulated
10 Foreign Relationsof the UnitedStates, Diplomatic Papers,
1943 (Washington, D.C., United States Government Printing Office,
19641, vol. IV, p. 148.
11 Ibid., p. 777.

‘( ‘It is no secret that the Haganah, their secret Jewish
military organization, has plans fully made and is well
10

this morning by the delegation of Israel on the so-called
responsibility
of Syria concerning a clash which took place
yesterday within the Israel-occupied territory in Palestine.

Danzig was attributable to the weakness of certain great
Powers ‘at the time, some of those Powers showed similar
weakness in 1947 and 1948 despite the promises they had
made to the Arab States which had supported them in the
struggle against the Axis and despite the legal and moral
obligations of one of those Powers which had the mandate
over Palestine and which should have returned the whole of
that territory to its people. It was that same weakness
which left Czechoslovakia and Poland helpless and enabled
Germany to take Danzig by force.

112. Naturally, Israel does not waste any time in attempting to attribute the responsibility to Syria, and in its usual
Pattern is trying to divert attention from the real facts of
the problem: that the Palestine Arab people are not ready
to give up their homeland and are ready to die for it.
Everything that is happening now is a confirmation of this
simple reality, and neither Syria nor any other country can
claim to talk on behalf of the Arab people of Palestine or to
direct their activities.

118. The United Arab Republic’s claims to Eilat are made
in the same spirit and are of the same nature. The Israel
representative-who seems to be Iosing his touch-made a
poor choice of historical examples to buttress his argument.
After this aside, I shall now proceed to set forth the
Moroccan Government’s viewpoint, and should like first of
all to express our profound satisfaction at the measures
which the Secretary-General immediately took to prevent
events from taking an even graver turn.

113. On the other points raised today by the Israel
representative I wish to reserve my delegation’s right to
answer later,
114. Mr. BENHIMA (Morocco) (translated from French):
Mr. President, I should like to thank you on behalf of my
delegation for the opportunity you have given us to state
the point of view of the Moroccan Government on the
present developments in the Middle East situation. However, before I proceed to express our viewpoint, there are
various comments I should like to offer on the quotations
and references by the Israel representative in his statement
a few minutes ago.

119. Firstly, we unreservedly approve the SecretaryGeneral’s response to the request by the United Arab
Republic for the withdrawal of the ‘United Nations Emergency Force from its territory. The conditions and legal
framework within which the United Arab Republic and the
United Nations Secretary-General had defined the arrangements regarding the stationing of the Force allow of no
challenge from any quarter in respect of the SecrctaryGeneral’s response and the measures which he took to make
that withdrawal effective. Not only did he scrupulously
respect the spirit and the letter of an agreement between
the United Nations and a Member State, but we are
furthermore firmly convinced that that decision, by its very
promptness, safeguarded loyal co-operation between the
United Nations and a Member State and prevented the
situation from being distorted and the course of the crisis
from being diverted along quite different lines by manoeuvres or pressures.

115. Mr. Rafael-at a loss, perhaps, for a suitable foreword
to llis statement-had recourse to a quotation from one of
the African continent’s most eminent heads of State, like
those authors who, in order to conceal the mediocrity of
their work, have it prefaced by a distinguished literary
figure. I should like-as behoves the representative of an
African country-to
replace the quotation outside the
context in which the Israel representative tried to set it.
You will undoubtedly recall that this denunciation of the
impotence
of the League of Nations in the face of the
tragedy being enacted in Ethiopia was in fact an expression
of the Emperor’s feelings when he agreed to leave kis
country
and go into exile with many of his fellow
countrymen,
in the face of the fascist aims of occupying
Ethiopia
and the implantation of a mass of fascist exservicemen who had immigrated into the country in order
to usurp the place and the rights of the Ethiopian people.

120. Simultaneously with that decisibn which enhanced
the esteem and trust in which he is held, at a time when the
very role of the United Nations is being seriously put to the
test, the Secretary-General went to the scene of the crisis in
order to gather information at first hand and learn from the
competent authorities the facts of the situation. He ;las
presented us with a report in which he forthrightly
expresses his concern, but he has also notified us of the
assurance he received that the United Arab Republic would
not initiate any offensive action or violence against Israel.
That frank exchange which an Arab State was ready to
conduct with the Secretary-General in his capacity as
responsible head of this Organization should be noted with
satisfaction in the circumstances in which the United
Nations at present finds itself, for many States in even
graver situations refuse to engage in such exchanges. We still
recall the Secretary-General’s vain efforts to arrange for
visits to Katanga, South Africa and Southern Rhodesia and
the steadfast refusal of certain colonial Powers to agree
even to the dispatch of United Nations fact-finding rnissions.

116. I think that this clarification will help Security
Council members to realize that these quotations were only
a screen used to conceal well calculated designs. It should
also be borne in mind that when it comes to referring to the
fate of the Emperor of Ethiopia and to the odyssey which
had such remarkable symbolic value for the liberation of
the African continent, the Israel representative should be
the last to invoke them to support Israel’s aggression against
the Arab world. It brings to mind those street vendors who,
altlzough not Christians themselves, make money by selling
crucifixes outside churches.
117. In his second reference, Mr. Rafael mentioned the
case of Danzig. I appreciate that his German origins make it
easier for him to refer to German history, but the Danzig
case involved a Nazi claim for passage through the territory
of others. His mention of it reminds me that Eilat is in
exactly the same situation. If the German ocoupation of

121. Having regard both to the Middle Eastern crisis and
to the moral authority of the United Nations, therefore, we
11

should like to express our warm thanks to the SecretaryGeneral for his initiative.

by international Zionism, thus making it daily more
imperative for Israel to sustain its expansionist appetite.
One-and-a-half million Arabs have been living for twenty
years as stateless persons and as witnesses of the occupation
of their towns and farmlands by international Zionism’s
mercenaries. The waters of the Jordan have been diverted
without regard for the legitimate rights of the ripatian
owners. But when the Arabs decide on a legitimate and
reasonable scheme for exploiting their water resources,
Israel threatens and bombs the areas where the work has
begun.

122. I shall refrain from commenting on the statements
made in some of the great capitals by certain senators and
public representatives who saw fit to interpret the measures
taken by the Secretary-General as precipitate actions
detrimental to the interests of peace. It was considerations
of electoral arithmetic in those capitals, rather than concern
for peace, which inspired those ill.considered statements.
123. Many speakers have apprised the Council of their
Governments’ views on what constitute the root causes of
the permanent crisis in the Middle East, of which the
present situation is merely one of the periodic manifestations.

128. It would be pointless and frivolous for us to make
further statements here on the gravity of the present
situation. The United Arab Republic, acting within its
sovereign rights and wishing to create conditions enabling it
to assume the obligations which bind it to the other Arab
States, requested, under the terms of an unequivocal
agreement, the withdrawal of the United Nations forces.
Their maintenance in an area of key importance for the
security of the United Arab Republic and free communication with the other Arab States could no longer be regarded
as a measure preventing confrontation between Israel and
the Arab States, but had become, politically and militarily,
a protective screen from behind which Israel could wit11
impunity pick out any Arab State for attack.

124. It would be wrong to regard the legitimate exercise
by a Member State of certain aspects of its sovereignty as
the starting-point of the present events in the Middle East.
For twenty years now, the United Nations has had occasion
several times a year to examine the tragic situation in the
Arab world since the creation of Israel-at the General
Assembly, in special committees and in the Security
Council. And the reason why the Middle East has consistently been one of the major concerns of the United
Nations is that the process which took place from the time
of the Balfour Declaration up to 1948 and the consequences of the situation created by the dismemberment of
Palestine for the benefit of an artificially constituted State
introduced into the region elements alien to what might
have been its course of natural evolution.

129. The most recent acts of aggression against Jordan and
Syria have amply demonstrated the soundness of the
reasoning which led the United Arab Republic to request
the withdrawal of those troops, as it was entitled to do,
130. Unable to challenge that right and taken by surprise,
perhaps, by the Secretary-General’s legally justified and
wise decision, the Powers which sought to dramatize the
situation arising from that measure have now shifted the
focus of their diplomatic action to the situation created in
the Strait of Tiran and the Gulf of Aqaba. The port of Eilat
is Israeli only as a result of an act of aggression and
occupation committed subsequent to the Armistice Agreement with Egypt and the pertinent Security Council
resolution. Even the state of truce could not give either of
the parties any military or political advantage. When the
Arabs denounced this Israel act of aggression to the great
Powers which had decided to guarantee the status DUO in
the Middle East and lodged a complaint with the Security
Council, they failed, here or elsewhere, to get those Powers
to respect the status quo created by the Armistice; and the
case of Eilat, since then, is simply-and cannot be other
than-one of illegal occupation of a piece of Arab Iand
which, despite all ensuing military operations and arrangements, remains an integral part of Arab territory. The fact
that this port has become vital for the consolidation of
Israel and for its strategy cannot erase the Arabs’ right to
regard it as their territory. It would be difficult for the
great Powers to win acceptance here for considerations
flowing from a fait accompli contrary to international law,
whose champions they claiin to be.

125. Twice in twenty years, the Middle East has experienced war, and both times on account of Zionist
aggression, prepared and supported from outside. On the
second occasion, in 1956, certain great Powers were direct
accomplices, combining with Israel in aggression against the
Arab world. True, in 1948 as in 1956, the United Nations
intervened to restore peace, but without restoring justice.
The Arabs accepted that peace but are still suffering the
consequences of the injustice.
126. If we examine, even briefly, the reasons which have
led the Security Council, over the past twenty years, to
devote attention to the situation in the Middle East, it will
readily be seen that it always did so following acts of
aggression or violations by Israel of the Armistice Agreements and of General Assembly or Security Council
resolutions.
127. The circumstances attending the creation of the State
of Israel and the open backing which it has constantly been
given by certain great Powers could not but generate a logic
which encourages it to seek constantly to extend its
territory, impose its presence further and provide daily
confirmation of the threat it constitutes within the Arab
world. The representatives of the United Arab Republic,
Jordan, Lebanon and Iraq have reminded the Council of the
long series of violations of agreements and Security Council
resolutions by Israel, Twenty-three per cent of the present
territory of Israel was conquered after the Armistice
Agreements of 1948 and the aggression of 1956. Half of its
present population is the result of immigration organized

131. The thesis advanced by the representative of the
United Arab Republic in support of his country’s d,ecision
is irrefutable, and Morocco unreservedly supports it. Quite
apart from political arguments, there is no legal authority
-whether in London, Paris or Washington-who could
12

dispute the soundness of that thesis without impugning the
full weight and integrity of the supreme principles of
international
faw.

dom law, reducing Mr. Wilson to impotence in respect of
his own constitutional law. I purposely mention the case of
Southern Rhodesia at a time when the Council is considering the Palestine question for the good reason that the
process which the Southern Rhodesian white minority has
been applying for several years in many ways resembles that
initiated by Mr. Balfour and allowed to culminate tragically
in the partition of Palestine and the expulsion of one-ancla-half million of its inhabitants.

132. Once again we hear talk of a conference of maritime
Powers. My country can hardly challenge the right of any
group of States to meet and agree on common interests; but
the decisions of a conference which would look more like a
board of directors of a group of shipping companies cannot
acquire the status of international law in opposition to a
gIverI country’s legitimate rights.

136. I am not being a prophet of woe when I tell the
African members of the Security Council, with heartfelt
emotion, that the upheavals which have been convulsing the
Arab world for the past twenty years lead me to fear that
South Africa and Southern Rhodesia are ominous warnings
for the future of the African continent.

133. When geography favours any country with a position
having a vital bearing on its security or prosperity,
illternational
law and friendly relations can provide a
framework permitting some form of arrangement whereby
the international community can share the advantages of
tllat position. But such arrangements can be contemplated
only on the basis of strict respect for the rights and wishes
of the country concerned.

137. The problem which the Security Council is considering today is not an isolated event. It is one aspect of a much
vaster problem, which the fact of having become chronic
does not render any less serious or painful, It cannot be
solved by finding a way of making Saudi Arabia, Jordan
and the United Arab Republic allow free passageto Israel
shipping or to the vesselsof other countries whose cargoes
help to strengthen Israel’s aggressivepotential. The real
solution would be’to display political and moral courage
and make a thorough re-examination of all the relations
between Israel and the Arab States. We are told that the
Security Council is powerlessto find an effective solution
to this crisis. The Council is not an occult force, and its
members’ senseof responsibility is such as to allow of the
possibility of progressively working out the elements of an
over-all solution. It can, in any case-there is nothing to
prevent it-decide that its previous resolutions on the
Palestine problem as a whole remain valid and invite the
parties concerned to comply with them. The greatPowers,
which are permanent members of the Council, not only
voted in favour of these resolutions, but undertook to
ensure respect in the Middle East for the statusquo which
Israel, with the protection of some of those Powers, has
repeatedly changed.

134. The London Conference held in 1956 to impose
freedom of passagethrough the Suez Canal was one of the
most serious breaches of international maritime law as
taught by the most eminent Western authorities. We
thought,
perhaps naively, that the failure of that Conference and of the tripartite aggression would lead certain
great Powers, after ten years of new experiences in
international
relations, to reconsider their methods of
approaching and seeking solutions to conflicts involving a
clash between law and policy. We welcome the fact that the
French Government, in Paris, has taken a position which
marks a break with the views underlying the Suez expedition.
We would undoubtedly have welcomed a like
evolution
in the thinking of some of the highly placed
persons who were responsible for French policy at that
time; but after an interval of ten years, those same leading
figures, instead of remaining silent, which might have been
more dignified but which would have indicated a disavowal
of earlier decisions, persist in coming out again with the old
arguments.
To those of us who like to turn to their elders
to seek the benefit of their experience, that attitude
inclines us to think that in the case of politicians, age does
not
always bring better judgement.

138. As things stand at present, the Secretary-General has
received an assurancefrom the Arab States in Cairo and in
the Council itself, that they will not initiate any act of
violence or war. We would certainly appreciate it if the
great Powers which in this Council are defending several
aspectsof Israel’s thesis would obtain a similar assurance
from the latter and give us proof, either in the Council Or
outside it, that the moral advantage, deriving from their
preponderancein international affairs is finding active
expression in their determination, from now on, to impose
peace on the aggressorand not on the victim.

135. Similarly we noted in a statement in the Council by
the United Kingdom representative [1343rd meeting] an
encouraging appreciation of certain aspects of the thesis
advanced by the representative of the United Arab Republic. When Lord Caradon described the tone of Mr. El
Kony’s second statement to the Council as moderate, we
were led to think that the Government of Mr. Wilson was
perhaps more clearsighted than Mr. Eden’s team had been
in October and November 19.56. However, the latest
statements by the United Kingdom Prime Minister, and in
particular his desire to hold a conference of maritime
Powers, the outcome of which it is easy to foresee, is a
grave disappointment to us. I should like to say, with all the
respect which we have for the United Kingdom Government, that Africa and the entire world would have been
tremendously impressed had Mr. Wilson adopted an equally
energetic approach in dealing with the Government of
Mr. Smith, which in Southern Rhodesia has so flagrantly
violated not only international law but also United King

139. The PRESIDENT: I now invite the representative of
Saudi Arabia to take a place at the Council table and make
a statement.
140. Mr, AL-RACHACH (Saudi Arabia): Mr. President, I
wish to avail myself of this opportunity to thank you and
members of the Council for inviting me to address the
Security Council, Upon instructions from my Government,
I come to state its views on this most vital problem which
may engulf the countries of the Middle East, and possibly
the world, in the start of a third world war.
13

141. The present ominous situation precipitated by the
reckless authorities in Tel Aviv, which threatens an outbreak of hostilities in the Middle East, is in its essence a
legacy of the Zionist adventure in Palestine. Therefore, it
behoves the Security Council to delve into the Palestine
question in its totality and try to deal with the “underlying
causes” that have plagued the Middle East with turmoil and
upheaval, threatening international peace and security in
the area.
142. The present crisis is not an isolated incident, nor is it
the first or the last. This crisis is not of Arab making, nor is
the perennial upheaval and turmoil in the Middle East of
our creation. All this has been foisted upon the Arab world
just as much as the transplanted militant Zionist Jews have
been foisted upon Palestine and its people. Whatever
measures the Arab people have taken, they have been
defensive and in self-defence to preserve the integrity and
sovereignty of the Arab homeland.
143. The Government of Saudi Arabia maintains that the
Gulf of Aqaba and the Strait of Tiran have always been
under Arab control from time immemorial and are Arab
territorial waters. Speaking in an interview on British
television, His Majesty l&g Faisal declared: “We consider
the Gulf of Aqaba to be an Arab Gulf.” His Majesty
labelled the viewpoint advanced by some great Powers that
the gulf is an international waterway as “incompatible with
all the legal principles”.
144. During the last ten years and as a result of Zionist
aggression in 1956, the Israel authorities were enabled to
use the Strait of Tiran behind the shield of the United
Nations Emergency Force. Such usage by the Israel
authorities was never undertaken with the tacit acquiescence of the Arab littoral countries, nor was there any
intention by them to forgo their sovereign rights in the Gulf
of Aqaba and the Strait of Tiran.

Nations resolutions concerning the partition of Pales.
tine”-“The Saudi people, including myself, my brothers
and my sons, if need be, will be in the vanguard in order
to retrieve Palestine and see that it goes back to its
people.” [1309th meeting, para. 53.1
I wish to reiterate, here and now, that this remains the
policy and objective of the Saudi Arabian Government.
148. May I add at this juncture that the Secretary-General,
in his report (S/7906/, referred to the “underlying causes”
that precipitated this crisis. Accordingly, it is incumbent
upon the Council to study immediately these “underlying
causes” in its search for peace in the Middle East, guided by
the history of events in the area during the last nineteen
years.
149. It is our belief that the Secretary-General had in
mind, when referring to the “underlying causes”, the whole
Palestine question, Any attempt to interpret the intention
of the Secretary-General differently is tantamount to an
abdication by the Security Council of its responsibilities
under the Charter to maintain international peace and
security and to put an end to the long suffering of the
indigenous Arab people of Palestine, who were forced by
Zionist terrorism and massacre out of their homeland in
Palestine, to live in the squalor of the refugee camps at
seven cents a day, while alien transplanted Zionists enjoy
the produce of Arab lands and live in Arab homes. For
nineteen years the indigenous Arab people of Palestine have
suffered deprivation and the agony of living away from
home and country, while transplanted Zionists ingathered
from all corners of the world have reaped the income from
Arab properties in Zionist-occupied Palestine.
150. Does this make any sense? And will such conditions
ever lead to peace? As long as the militant Zionists remain
in occupied Palestine, the threat to international peace and
security will continue unabated.

145. The legal arguments and the principles of international law applicable to the Gulf of Aqaba and the Strait
of Tiran were ably presented by other Arab speakers. It is
needless to add that the Saudi Arabian Government
considers the Zionist enclave in Palestine an illegal OCCUpation that has no legitimate rights to navigation in the
Gulf of Aqaba and the Strait of Tiran.

151. The last nineteen years have vindicated the warning
which Arab spokesmen had given during the second regular
session of the General Assembly in 1947 that the Arabs
were unalterably opposed to the partition of Palestine and
the imposition of alien Zionist transplanted Jews into the
heart of the Arab homeland.

146. For nineteen years the United Nations ‘and its organs
have shirked their responsibilities whenever certain facets of
the Palestine question were debated either in the General
Assembly or in its committees or in the Security Council. It
has been the hope of certain big Powers to liquidate the
Palestine question and every vestige of it by the passage of
time. Little did such big Powers know the deep Arab
attachment to the homeland.

152. What the supporters of the so-called Jewish State fail
to conceive is that the Arabs are indigenous to the area,
while the transplanted alien Zionist Jews will continue to
be isolated and unwanted in our midst; I repeat, will
continue to be isolated and unwanted in our midst.
153. If war breaks out in the Middle East, due to either
miscalculation or to the challenge of Israel authorities of
Arab sovereign rights in the Strait of Tiran and the Gulf of
Aqaba, the Arab world will meet this challenge with
courage and fortitude and will resolve once and for a11
Zionist aggression in Palestine; I repeat, once and for all
Zionist aggression in Palestine.

147. The position of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia on
Palestine has always been made crystal clear on every
occasion. On 20 October 1966, Mr. Baroody, while addressing the Security Council, quoted, inter alia, from a speech
delivered by His Majesty King Faisal on 9 October 1966, at
Riyad. His Majesty stated:

154. The Security Council had occasion to hear the views
of a number of speakers from Arab countries in Asia and
Africa. This is ample evidence of the unwavering determi-

“We reject United Nations resolutions concerning the
partition of Palestine”--1 repeat: “We reject United
14

defying international law and the Charter of the United
Nations. Yesterday was no exception in this sequence of
criminal actions. This time, on 2 June, 11 a.m. Moscow
time, United States aircraft bombed the Soviet vessel
Turk-wan anchored in the port of Campha, fifty miles
north of Haiphong. Two United States warplanes dropped a
bomb and strafed the ship with explosive bullets from
large-calibre machine-guns. Two members of the Soviet
vessel’s crew were severely wounded, and one of them, an
electrici‘an, died a few hours later. The vessel was damaged.
I must add that there were no other ships in the harbour
except for the Cypriot vesselAsma.

nation of the Arab people, who occupy an area extending
from the Atlantic in the West to the Indian Ocean in the
East, with a population of about 100 million, to liberate
the occupied part of their fatherland.
155, If hostilities should break out because of the pugnacity of the Zionist usurpers of the Arab homeland in
Palestine, it will be total and unremitting. Supporting the
Arab people in their national struggle are many friends who
have been indignant and deeply appalled by the injustice
committed against the indigenous Arab people of Palestine.
The Arab people have considered every contingency likely
to arise and are accordingly ready to meet such challenges
with all their resources and with all the might at their
command, in blood, treasure or both, irrespective of
sacrifice,

162. This attack by the United States Air Force on a
Soviet merchant vessel constitutes one more flagrant
violation of the principle of free navigation and an act of
piracy that is fraught with the most serious consequences,
The USSR Government has lodged a strong protest with the
Government of the United States, which bears full responsibility for these acts of provocation and banditry by the
United States armed forces.

156. Let those who harbour any idea of hostile action
against us not misinterpret our zeal and our determination
to treat them as our foes and enemies. I repeat, let those
who harbour any idea of hostile action against us not
misinterpret our zeal and determination to treat them as
our foes and enemies.

163. All this patently shows that the ruling circles in
Washington, while endlessly preaching Pharisaic sermons
about peace, legality and international law, indulge in
lawlessness and the reckless use of brute force, and brazenly
arrogate to themselves the right to dictate to other States,
in violation of their sovereignty and national independence.

157. Any resolution that falls short of dealing with the
restoration of a united Palestine to its indigenous people
and the repatriation of the transplanted alien Zionist Jews
to their countries of origin, or to countries of their choice,
will be considered an evasion by the Council of its own
responsibilities. This is the only course; there is no other.
The alternative will lead ultimately to disaster that will
engulf mankind. Such action calls for men of vision and
courage. And of those there is a great want.

164. I should like in this connexion to call attention to
the statement of 2 June 1967 by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the United Arab Republic which has been
circulated as a Security Council document. The statement
reads, in part:

158, Mr. FEDORENRO
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): As my delegation has
had occasion to observe before, the United States representative has repeatedly and at length discoursed in the
Security Council on the theme of international navigation,
the principles of international law, legal rules and standards
in this regard, etc. In doing so he apparently has felt no
compunction in painting a glowing picture of the United
States as a champion of free international navigation and a
guardian of law and justice who watches over these matters
everywhere on earth.

“The United Arab Republic in its present struggle
against colonialism and foreign domination is facing a
new phase of pressure and threats exercised by some
States who claim to speak on behalf of the maritime
Powers. These States are attempting to follow the policies
of the nineteenth century of warship diplomacy. Such an
action is in no way meant to serve the cause of
international trade or international navigation; it is meant
merely to serve the purposes of the Israel aggression.”
[S/ 7925.]

159. We have already pointed out to the Council that
these hypocritical declarations are not merely divorced
from reality, they are very obviously at flagrant variance
with the deeds, the criminal practices, of the United States
of America.

165, In view of this criminal line of action, Washington
has no moral right to assume, here in the Security Council,
the role of guardian of free international navigation.
Indeed, the United States deserves the sternest condemnation for its policies and actions, including its complicity
with the extremist circles in Israel which are perpetrating
aggression against neighbouring Arab States.

160, Members of the Council will no doubt remember that
I asked the United States representative how Washington
justifies the illegal actions of the United States against
Cuba. Members will also remember that we received no
answerfrom the representative of the United States. There
was no answer because these actions cannot be justified,
because the United States of America brazenly flouts the
most elementary principles of international law, including
those relating to free international navigation.

166. An end must be put once and for all to the
high-handed actions of this international gendarme.
167. Mr. KEITA (Mali) (translated from Fremh):
Mr. President, as this is the first time that I have taken the
floor under your presidency, I should like to offer YOU
sincere congratulations on behalf of the delegation of the
Republic of Mali. I do so with all the more wamrth and
pleasure because you are presiding over the Council in this
month of June, following a month during which, in its own

161. AS we know very well, not a day passeswithout the
United States committing some fresh arbitrary act and
1.5

-,

interests and for the benefit of our Organization, the office
of President should, in my Government’s view, have been
held by the great People’s Republic of China, whose capital
is Peking and which is temporarily deprived of its rights
here-to the great detriment of the United Nations itself.
Mr.President, I am convinced that, under your wise
guidance, the Council can expect to achieve fruitful results
in its consideration of the problem before us.
168. On 24 May 1967 the Security Council w& suddenly
convened, to be confronted with a three-paragraph draft
resolution [S/7905], submitted that same day by Canada
and Denmark, dealing with the current situation in the
Middle East, On that day we had two exceptionally
“co1ourful” meetings, in view of the gravity and urgency
which the agenda implied.
169. What, in fact, was at stake?
170. On 18 May the United Arab Republic, a sovereign
country and a fully-fledged Member of the United Nations,
called for the withdrawal of the United Nations Emergency
Force from its territory, The Secretary-General of our
Organization, acting within his prerogatives and competence, acceded to the request of the United Arab Republic
on the same day and on 22 May he flew to Cairo to meet
the President and leaders of the United Arab Republic.

175. My delegation feels that we must recognize stra@t
away that the problem before us today is one of long
standing. It is the problem of Palestine. At this point, my
delegation would like to state that, for the sake of accuracy
and proper procedure, the current debate should be
inscribed in its only true context and under its true title,
“The Palestine question”, which is still a serious and
distressing problem. It is, in fact, a problem created wit/l
the blessing of our Organization itself. It is the problemof
Israel which, for the Arabs, is a State created by Western
racism and imperialism, a malignant tumour, forcibly
implanted in the heart of their country against their will.lf
it was not through racism, why were ihe Jewish people
driven from every corner of Europe to be settled outside
Europe on another continent? What have we seen in recent
days? A far-reaching and tendentious campaign to give
credence to the view that the United Arab Republic’s
decision to request the withdrawal of UNEF frownits
national territory, or its decision with regard to tile
blockade which it has just imposed in the Gulf of Aqaba,
are manifestations of anti-Jewish sentiments. That is going
too far.
176. Why, in their miserable work of brainwashing, llave
they not the courage and moral honesty to rake overthe
ashes? Which are the peoples which have on their con.
science the heavy responsibility for having decinlated
almost 6 million Jews-human beings, men, their brothersonly a quarter of a century ago in the crematoria ovensand
in the concentration camps? Is it the Arabs? Who are
mainly responsible for the forced exodus of the Jews?Isil
the Arabs?

171. On 20 May the United Arab Republic decided to
prohibit the use of the port of Aqaba to any ship flying the
Israel flag or carrying strategic wterials destined for Israel.

177. Why, therefore, is it felt to be reasonable ancl
necessary to ascribe to the Arabs the guilty responsibilit)
which belongs to all those who are today pretending to pla]
the role of Pontius Pilate? Why are they trying tc
transform a question of national sovereignty into a questior
of racism?

172. My delegation applauds the dispatch with which the
Secretary-General took the necessary decisions and acted as
he did, prompted only by a desire to respect the rights of a
sovereign State and by the interests of peace.
173. We could not, and we still cannot, understand why,
while the Secretary-General was holding talks with the
leaders of the United Arab Republic at Cairo, some people
here considered it essential, urgent and imperative to
convene the Council and to take a decision on the very
subject of the talks that were going on in Cairo. We could
not, and still cannot, understand why we were asked to give
the Secretary-General the support of this Council, which,
by the very fact of electing him to his office, accorded him
all the support and confidence he needed for the effective
discharge of the heavy task entrusted to him.

178. Do they think that, by acting in this way, they car
align part of the world against the Arabs? That is neithe
just nor honourable nor constructive, for the result mi&l
on the contrary, be merely to awaken and heighten in thi
Arabs a feeling with which they are credited in advance.1
that the result which it is hoped to achieve?
179. Should we not recognize this inversion of the trutl
which is manifest in this campaign of which we area
aware, for what it really is, namely clever stage-managemeri
by those whose souls are, alas, stained with Jewish blood
It is they who are the true enemies of the Jews. It is the
who are the vampires who drenched and sated themseb
with the blood of the Jews.It is they who, having exploitf
the Jews and even continuing to do so, give theatrici
support to Israel, which they are setting against the Arab’

174. Finally, the Secretary-General, with commendable
swiftness, fulfilled his mission at Cairo with the minimum
delay, as the situation required, and, better still, with even
greater swiftness he began work immediately on his return
to Headquarters in order to submit his report (S/7906/ to
us at noon on 27 May, Once again the delegation of Mali is
grateful to him for all his efforts to help us to work better
and, this time, to have at least a basis on which to work,
namely his report. I have been greatly interested to observe
the skill with which outstanding speakers before me have
made use of the Secretary-General’s report. I would
therefore beg your indulgence in allowing me to imitate
them.

180. Let no one be mistaken, however. This danger01
game of opposing and dividing in which they are engaged
designed solely to protect and safeguard their own interesl
It is not love of the Jews as human beings or as the
neighbours which governs their actions. That is impossibl
the wholesale slaughter of 6 million Jews is enough
convince us of that.
16

hi&t

!I

If long j
int, my
Xuracy

Uld be 1
le title, 1
#usand
:d with
blemof /
Western
forcibly I
*will, If
People I
outside
n recent
to

give

public’s I
‘ram its
to the I/
Aqaba,
is going
ng, have
overthe
leir cop
rcimated
rothers- I
vensand
Whoare
ws?Is it
able and
msibility
g to play
rying to
question I
they can
s neither
dt might,
en in the
Ivance.Is

181. It is something quite different. It is their inter&S,
for the sake of which they do not hesitate to set any region
of tile earth ablaze. They are so skilled at doing this, even
from a distance, that it sometimes seems difficult to find
tl,e trace of their barbarous hands in the fires which they
light.

States, using new and cunning methods. It seems to us that
they are seeking to regain with the left hand what they have
been forced to yield with the right.
188. We have a vivid recollection of the unforgettable and
historic attitude taken recently, during the discussion of the
burning problem, of South West Africa, by the Powers
which were in the best position to take positive action.
Unhappily, economic interests meant more to them than
the fate of millions of human beings,

182. Like leeches, they exploit the Jews to strengthen
their economies. They exploit the Jews in their so-called
aaclearresearch and all the other research whose sole
object
is to prepare the world for an apocalyptic awakening.

189. At this stage, we should like to stress that the
Government of Mali hails any struggle undertaken by a
people to free itself from a colonial yoke or to recover the
inalienable rights that our Charter recognizes for all
peoples. For this very reason, we fear that an unfortunate
interpretation may be placed upon the second sentence of
paragraph 13 of the Secretary-General’s report,

183. That is the truth, Mr. President; the question is not
oneof Arab racism. As we have already stated in this very
forum, we harbour no racist sentiments, either against the
Jewsor against anyone. For us, a Jew is merely a man like
any other man, white, yellow, red or black. Nor do we
tlliak that the Arabs see the question in an entirely
different light. As a distinguished Arab ambassador said
here,the Arabs and the Jews are cousins, if not brothers.
we therefore do not think that, in the circumstances, it is
right to accuse the Arabs of anti-Jewish prejudice. It is,
however,understandable that the Arabs cannot fail to feel
the great frustration to which they have been subjected,
That would be too much to ask of them, for they, too, are
only men.

190. We have tried, with the utmost impartiality, to
identify the reaI problems facing this distinguished Council,
because anything that may be said which has no bearing on
the problems of Palestine is irrelevant in the present
circumstances. The United Nations, which must, alas, bear
its share of the responsibility for the dispute which we are
considering, must act with honesty andsincerity, for if it
were to continue in the passive role of an instrument
-which certain people are endeavouring by every means to
foist upon it-it would be in danger of error or, rather, it
would be perpetuating an error dangerously prejudicial to
itself.

184. Deprived of their goods and their land, they were
expelled,in hundreds, in thousands, in millions, from the
land of their ancestors and reduced to a miserable existence
asoutcastsin exile. The United Nations bears its share of
responsibility for this tragedy, in the face of which
hesitation and postponement can only give rise to vain
hopes.It is lamentable that, for twenty years, those truly
responsiblefor this situation have contrived to use the
United Nations to promote merely stopgap solutions. It is,
alas,necessaryto repeat once again that the problem can be
settledonly by the return of the Palestinians to the land of
theirancestors.

191. After these general commends, let us turn
thoughts to the present situation.

our

192. Before Israel was created, this people possessedno
territory and no port. The Western countries, supported by
the United Nations, gave it a territory after driving out the
legitimate owners.
193. For the United Nations, a new financial item called
the Agency for Palestine Refugees was added to the list of
expenses. This, moreover, is not a happy item, for it must
be admitted in all objectivity, that the sacrifices that are
made are swallowed up like a drop of water in the ocean, SO
completely inadequate are they to dress the wounds for
which they are intended.

185. The stagnation which handicaps the United Nations
is due to the persistence of the problems which arise in that
areaand to which, from time to time, mere semi-solutions
areapplied. Until an appropriate solution has been found to
thePalestineproblem, it will gnaw at the Organization itself
like an ulcer,

:he truth,
re areall
nagement
h blood?
It is they

186. At a time when the United Nations is justly proud of
acertaindegree of progress accomplished in decolonization,
thanksto which Member States, have seen their number
constantlyincrease through a process which we should like
to seeaccelerated still further, it is well to reflect a little on
,~emselW
the
question of pockets of minorities which receive the
exploited
utmost
assistance from the Western Powers. Thus we see
theatrical that Israel,
South Africa and Southern Rhodesia are alike
he Arabs,
industrialized regions set up in the midst of under-devel3angerous opedcountries.
:ngagedis
interests, 187. For our countries, these minority pockets are basr gi their tionsconsciously and deliberately set up by imperialism for
ae@colonialist purposes. The support which is given to
rpssibk
themby the West is a blatant demonstration of the latter’s
:noughto
insatiable desire to dominate young, newly independent

194. However, for reasons we shall describe as purely
humanitarian, the United Arab Republic allowed these
people, uprooted from Israel, the use of its territory as a
haven, despite the permanent state of war inherent in the
presence of the Jewish people on Arab soil.
195. It would be useful at this point to consider certain
terminological factors.

196. Everyone here is aware-as we indicated briefly on 24
May 1967 at the 1341st meeting-that the United Arab
Republic, as a sovereign Government, replied favourably to
a United Nations request that it would allow the presence
of the United Nations Emergency Force on the national
territory of the United Arab Republic for peaceful purposes.
17

197. We feel that our Organization, whether it says so or
not, owes a debt of gratitude to the Government of the
United Arab Republic for its understanding and cooperation. This was an agreement between the Government
of the United Arab Republic and the Secretary-General of
the United Nations, reached over ten years ago.
198. On 18 May 1967, the United Arab Republic, for
reasons of its own, asked the Secretary-General to withdraw
the UNEF forces from its soil. That was an action fully
within the sovereignty of the United Arab Republic. We
think that it was because he recognized, firstly, the
effective co-operation which the United Arab Republic had
given and, secondly, the legitimacy of that country’s
request, that the Secretary-General, fully aware of the
situation, met the Egyptian request. Had the SecretaryGeneral acted otherwise, the United Arab Republic would
have been justified in considering that its co-operation
efforts and the legal basis underlying its position as a
sovereign State had been disregarded.

In paragraph 7 of his report, the Secretary-General 011.
serves:

j
I

“If the Force had been deployed on both sides of the
line as originally envisaged in pursuance of the General
Assembly resolution, its buffer function would not
necessarily have ended. However, its presence on the
Israel side of the line has never been permitted. The fact
that the Force was not stationed on the Israel side of the
line was a recognition of the unquestioned sovereign right
of Israel to withhold its consent for the stationing of the
Force. The acquiescence in the request of the United
Arab Republic for the withdrawal of the Force after ten
and a half years on United Arab Republic soil was
likewise a recognition of the sovereign autliority of the
United Arab Republic. In no official document relating to
the Force has there been any suggestion of a limitation of
this sovereign authority.”

I
’
,i

200. Thus the legitimacy of the request for the withdrawal
of UNEF from the soil of the United Arab Republic needs
no proof.

199. Moreover, the report of the Secretary-General of 26
May 1967 (S/7906], in paragraph 2, states as follows:

201. Before we deal with the blockade of the Gulf of
Aqaba, let us recall that there is no frontier between Israel
and the United Arab Republic, but a so-called demarcation
line. Moreover, ever since the creation of Israel, as is evident
from the Secretary-General’s report, there has been a real
state of war, a continuing conflict, between Israel and the
Arabs; and it was because of this idea of a continuing
conflict that the stage of an armistice wasreached.

“It has been alleged in some quarters that the prompt
compliance with the request for the withdrawal of the
Force is a primary cause of the present crisis in the Near
East. This ignores the fact that the underlying basis for
this and other crisis situations in the Near East is the
continuing Arab-Israel conflict which has been present all
along , . .”

202. Now, in the Dictionnaire de la terminologie du dmit
international, published by the International Academic
Union in Paris in 1960, we find the following definition of
armistice on page 57: “An agreed and provisional suspension of military operations that allows the state of war to
continue”‘; and article 36 of the rules annexed to Hague
Convention IV of 18 October 1907 notes that an armistice
does not become a state of peace by reason of the fact that
it does not specify a date for its expiration.

In paragraph 3 of the same report, the Secretary-General
points out that:
“The United Nations Emergency Force was introduced
into the territory of the United Arab Republic on the
basis of an agreement between the Secretary-General of
the United Nations and the President of Egypt. The
consent of the host country, in this as in other peacekeeping operations, was the basis for its presence on the
territory of the United Arab Republic. When that consent
was withdrawn, the essential part of the basis of the
Force’s presence ceased to exist.”

203. At this point, I should like to quote an eminent
jurist, Raymond Geouffre de la Pradelle:
“The Armistice Agreement of 24 February I949
between Israel and Egypt states that the armistice
demarcation line ‘is not to be construed in any sense as a
political or territorial boundary’. It was not a peace treaty
but a suspension of hostilities, and after the events of
1956 no new document was signed.”

And in paragraph 5 that:
“My decision in this matter was based upon both legal
and practical considerations.”
Further on, in paragraph 6 of the report, the SecretaryGeneral states:

De la Pradelle also writes:
“The decision which President Nasser has just taken is
in keeping with a position of principle that has been
constantly affirmed by the United Arab Republic. From a
legal standpoint, there is nothing new in it.

“It may be relevant to note here that the Force
functioned exclusively on the United Arab Republic side
of the line in a zone from which the armed forces of the
United Arab Republic had voluntarily stayed away for
over ten years. It was this arrangement which allowed the
Force to function as a buffer and as a restraint on
infiltration. When this arrangement lapsed, United Arab
Republic troops moved up to the line as they had every
right to do.”

“This case involves an unusual gulf which is bordered
by several States, but whose greatest width does not
exceed the territorial waters of the riparian States. The
United Arab Republic holds that its territorial
waters
extend for twelve miles, and in international
law the
18

extension of lerritorial Watt% is a matter to be determined by the individual States. An exception is made,
however, in the Convention on the Territorial Sea and the
Contiguous Zone of ‘29 April 1958. Article 12 of this
Convention states that ‘where the coasts of two States are
opposite or adjacent to each other, neither of the two
States is entitled, failing agreement between them to the
contrary, to extend its territorial sea beyond the median
line . . .‘.

manoeuvre designed to create an unfortunate precedent
which we are not prepared to accept.
210. We condemn in advance any arrangement by any
“club” whatever which might prejudice the logical and
historical restoration that took place in the United Arab
Republic on 20 May 1967, to the benefit of the people of
that country. We regard that restoration, in fact, as the
legitimate recovery by the United Arab Republic of a part
of its national patrimony based on respect for the sovereignty of a country and not on racist feelings against
anyone.

“The waters of the gulf close to the Red Sea are
therefore territorial

waters

either

of the Ullited Arab

Republic tir of Saudi Arabia. Access to the gulf, however,
is well within Egyptian territorial waters, since the Strait
of Tiran is the only channel accessible to slips of large
tonnage .”

211. We do not support-particularly
in this Hall-the
principle that young nations should wait to be gobbled up
indiscriminately at the mere desire or whim of some other
nation. We cannot understand, as an anecdote from our
country illustrates, how anyone can keep saying to the
hare: “Hare, the devil is all yours”, while whenever the
devil appearsthe hare has to run and hide.

204. It would seem, moreover, that article 16, paragraph 4, of the 1958 Convention on territorial waters is not
applicable in the case of the Gulf of Aqaba, since the
provisions of the Convention apply to peaceful relations
and not to states of war. We all recognize that it is this
Iatter situation which still prevails between the Arab States
and Israel.

212. On the basis of the above, my delegation is prepared
to examine carefully any idea or suggestion that will
advance the work of the Council. We therefore feel that it
would be wiseto explore new avenues that would enable us
to consider the problem in its entirety, for only thus will
the Council be able to accomplish the task which the world
rightfully expects of it.

205. Turning once again to the Secretary-General’s report,
we read: “Free passage through the Strait is one of the
questions which the Government of Israel considers most
vital to her interests.”
[S/7906,
para. 10.1 We must
acknowledge, however, that the United Arab Republic is
justified in not considering any ship flying the flag of a
country with which it deems itself at war, or any ship
carrying strategic materials to a country which it considers
its enemy, to be inoffensive,

213. Mr. SEYDOUX (France) (translated from French):
Mr. President, in speaking for the first time since you have
assumed the Presidency of the Security Council, I am
pleased to express to you the special friendship which the
French delegation feels for you personally and for your
country, which you represent with such distinction and
courteous authority.

206. In the light of the foregoing, and in view of the
essentially peaceful mission of our Organization, my delegation thinks that it would be wise to take action to reduce
tension in the area. The Republic of Mali attaches the
utmost importance to peace among men, for we believe
that it is the major, the most precious and the most
indispensable element for life and survival. We want neither
violence nor bloodshed, and we are totally committed to
the peaceful settlement of disputes,

214. In deciding to intervene only at this point in our
debate, my delegation remains true to the rule it has
followed since the beginning of the present serious crisis in
the Near East. The friendly relations my country enjoys
with all States in that region, the understanding shown
there to our policy, our interests and our history, all these
compel us to be particularly objective and at the same time
make it our duty to contribute to the maintenance of peace
in that part of the world.

207. My delegation is therefore ready to lend its wholehearted support to any objective measures designed to bring
peace to the Middle East. As we have already stated,
however, we are not yet convinced that resolutions drawn
up ably but in haste, as we know sn well how to do here,
can solve the problems facing us, as by the wave of a magic
wand. This, we repeat, is a question dating back twenty
years and it is time that we tackled the substance of this
matter objectively and dispassionately, if we are really
seeking to reach the same goal: peace in the Middle East.

215. France’s age-old ties with the Arab world enable us
to understand the great care with which the latter means to
preserveits dignity and independence.

216. In the same spirit of friendship, France wishes to
express its desire to see the existence of the State of Israel
assured and to see a people who have suffered so much for
so long allowed to live unimpeded.
217. Our silence until now in a debate in which numerous

208. Before concIuding, 1 wish it to be clearly understood
that in the opinion of my Government the present crisis in
the Middle East calls for a just settlement of the question of
the sovereignty of the United Arab Republic over its
national territory,

speakers have already taken part must obviously not be

construed as a sign of indifference. Like the other members
of the Council, we have listened intently to the interventions of those who have preceded us. In the past few
days there has been much discussion of the report which
the Secretary.General submitted on 29 May to the Security
Council. At times there has seemed to be a tendency to

209. As the representative of a newly independent country, I wish to stress our concern over the mere idea of a
19

single out certain passages considered more important than
others.
218. My delegation, too, might be tempted to draw
attention to one or another paragraph to support its
judgernent on the events which have led the Council to
meet. I do not think it would be desirable, nor do I think it
was the Secretary-General’s intention, for us to use this
report as a collection of quotations, at the risk of giving the
impression that we wish to stress certain aspects of the
situation instead of considering it in its entirety. In the light
of the urgent necessity to reduce tension, my delegation
views the Secretary-General’s report (S/7906] as a balanced
description of the problems with which we are grappling.
With the outlines thus drawn, we should devote our
attention to specific points, selected in such a way that the
parties concerned will from the very outset. be convinced
that their claims will be considered objectively and in a
spirit of fairness,

224. That is why the French delegation thinks that it
would be useless, if not dangerous, to allow our debate to
proceed from a discussion to a vote on draft resolutions ou
which it seems highly doubtful that a general consensus can
be reached. Such an admission of impotence, deplorable in
itself, might prompt the opposing parties to pursue a policy
or undertake action likely to create a worse situation.
22.5. We therefore appeal to all to work together to seek a
solution on which all could agree and which would lead to
the breathing-spell that is indispensable il’ we wish to see
this crisis guided towards a peaceful settlement.
226. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): The
hour is late and I do not wish to detain the Council unduly.
Nevertheless, I am impelled to exercise my right of reply in
light of several statements that have been made here ‘today
concerning United States policy.
227. The representative O”fthe Soviet Union again persists
in injecting the Cuban missile crisis of 1962 into this
debate. I pointed out the other day that I saw no purpose
in discussing irrelevant subjects not on the agenda. But
Ambassador Fedorenko persists, and I shall now give him
the reply he pressesfor.

219. We are aware, of course, that it has not yet been
possible to follow this course of action. The views
expressed before the Council appear to be so radically
opposed one to another that one might be tempted to
succumb to pessimism. At the present stage in the crisis and
in view of the antagonism between the members of the
Council, we must first decide what useful steps can be
taken in the present circumstances to safeguard the
essential, i.e. peace, and consequently, to pave the way for
a subsequent discussion of the problems which cannot be
ignored.

228. I am surprised that any representative of the Soviet
Union would wish to recall the sordid chapter of military
adventurism on the part of his country. The passage of
offensive missiles, carefully concealed and obscured by
military and diplomatic deception in an effort to produce a
nuclear confrontation threatening the peace of the entire
world, could hardly be described as innocent. What we are
debating today is the right of innocent passage. I would
remind the Council, moreover, that at the height of the
Cuban missile crisis, when the Secretary-General appealed
to the parties to avoid a confrontation, the United States
responded affirmatively and, as a result of the SecretaryGeneral’s appeal and President Kennedy’s courageous and
prudent stand, the crisis was resolved.

220. But we feel that the immediate aim of the Council
should be to obtain a breathing spell, in order to prevent
the crisis becoming worse. We think that this pause should
serve to bring about a psychological, and perhaps even a
military d&ente.
221. We should like to impress upon the parties concerned
how grave a responsibility the one which first decided to
resort to military action would bear. With this in mind we
feel that the Security Council’s most urgent task today is to
reach agreement on the terms of an appeal to the parties to
reFrain from using force of any kind to back up their claims
during this breathing spell. Only by making such an appeal
will the Council live up to the responsibilities which fall to
it and which it has assumed on behalf of the United
Nations.

229. The Secretary-General, in this grave situation, has
made an appeal for restraint to all concerned. The United
States is supporting this appeal. We would hope that,
instead of engaging in invective, the Soviet Union would
show restraint, as Mr. Khrushchev prudently did in the
Cuban crisis situation.

222. In making this proposal, the French delegation
wishes to make clear to the parties whose representatives
have spoken before the Council that for the moment it is
not a question of approving or disapproving their respective
positions, but simply of seeking the ways and means which
might lead to peaceful procedures for settlement, in other
words, to negotiation.

230. With respect to the protest of the Soviet Union about
the incident in Viet-Nam referred to by Mr. Fedorenko, my
Government is carefully and promptly investigating this
allegation and will, in an appropriate diplomatic way, reply
to the protest. I reaffirm, however, the willingness of my
Government not only to talk about Viet-Nam-when it is a
subject on the agenda-but also to vote on the problem of
Viet-Nam any time the Soviet Union withdraws its objeo
tion to the effect that the United Nations has no
competence to deal with this subject.

223. Furthermore, we should be taking an incomplete
view of the situation were we to ignore the special
responsibility weighing on the great Powers. My delegation
therefore calls upon the other permanent members of the
Council to join with it in endeavouring to direct the
ominous crisis in the Near East along the only road which,
in my Government’s opinion, can lead to peace, and which,
I repeat, is that of a dttente followed by negotiation.

231. There is another matter to which I must refer. 1
would suppose that the primary function of the Council, if
it is to hannonize the actions of nations, is to observe
elementary diplomatic courtesy and usage. Several remarks
have been made by participants in this debate about public
20

opinionin the United States on this subject. Article 2,
plrsgraph7, of the United Nations Charter says, for a very
goodreason, that nothing in the Charter authorizes the
UnitedNations “to intervene in matters which are essenfla][Ywithin the domestic jurisdiction of any State”. The
publicopinion of people in any country represented in this
Councilis a matter of its domestic jurisdiction. Our country
isveryproud of the fact that it is a free country and that a.ll
citizens,all newspapers, are free to express their opinions.
232, My Government cannot accept the implications by
representativesof any country that such expressions of
publicopinion are in any way to be curtailed by my
Government.My Government has no constitutional right to
curtailthe exercise by its citizens of the right of free speech
andfree Press, which is basic to our conception of a
democracy.
My Government, of course, like any democratic
government,takes cognizance of the opinions of its citizens
in formulating its foreign policy. It, however, as a Government,declares its foreign policy within its own constitutionalprocesses,and statements on this subject have been
madeby our President and by me, representing our
Government,to the Security Council. These statements, I
franklyand readily agree, are an appropriate subject for
debatein this Council. Every member of the Security
Councilis free to agree or disagree with our statements;
indeedthat is the prerogative of every Member of the
UaitedNations.

233. But it does not serve the cause of harmonizing the
actionsof nations for representatives of any country to
makereferenceto what any of our citizens, in the exercise
of their constitutional rights, may say or legally do with
respect
to their views about the grave situation which we
areconsidering.We all read the world Press. Citizens of all
countriesare expressing their views about this grave
situation,which is indeed highly understandable and
Ilafuralunder the circumstances. But we do categorically
rejectthe right of any representative in any way to express
~ anattitude with respect to the exercise by our citizens of
! theirconvictions in the matter.

United States is firmly committed to the support of the
political independence and territorial integrity of all the
nations of the area . . .“. (1343rd meeting, para. 24.1
That is the Charter commitment, to which all countries of
the United Nations are equally bound. Indeed, in addition
to this broad statement of principle, it would show a very
faulty memory for members of the Council and Member
nations of the United Nations to forget what the United
States has said when problems have arisen on complaints
between Israel and the Arab States in the Council, including
some very recent ones.
236. Does it sound very one-sided for the representative of
the United States to have said in this Council on 29 July
1966-and this was on the complaint of the Government of
Syria:
“My Government considers it deplorable that the
Government of Israel chose to repljr to these raids in a
manner which not only caused further civilian injuries
and deaths but also increased the danger of continued and
more serious breaches of the cease-fire. The United States
Government was not consulted and had no knowledge of
this strike . . . . We believe that reliance on the United
Nations machinery was clearly called for in this instance.”
(1291st meeting, para. 131

In a further intervention, on 3 August 1966, the representative of the United States in this Council said:
“Our conclusion is that both Syria and Israel bear
responsibility for the violence along the borders with
which the Council has dealt, and that a resolution which
only points in one direction is not helpful.” [1295th
meeting, para. 86.]

237. On 14 October 1966, in an intervention
Council, I, on behalf of my Government, said:

in this

“Secondly, to discharge this responsibility, the Council
must act, as it has generally acted in the past . . .
impartially and even-handedly for peace. I believe the
record of many years will show that my own Government
has sought to act whenever the fragile state of peace in
the area was endangered or broken from either side.”

, 234. I should like to make another observation. It has
leensaidhere-it was said two or three times today-by
‘epresentatives
of certain countries that the United States
Ittitudeon this matter is one-sided. I have adverted to this
)efore,but I should like to say a very brief word about it
Igain.The implication has been that while at Suez our
Government
was “impartiaI”; since Suez that has not been
le case,because our Government, if I understand the
argument,
recognizes Israel as a State-just as we recognize
ailotherMembers of the United Nations as States.

[1307th meeting, para. 86.1

On 17 October 1966, I said again in this Council, referring
to a statement made previously by the United States
representative:

2% I should have thought that this argument could not
bevalidly made under the Charter. The Charter is very
explicit
in Article 2; it says that:

“The decision of the Government of Israel to ‘respond’
. . . to these incidents was a deplorable one, given the
availability of United Nations machinery on the spot.”

“All Members shall refrain in their international relationsfrom the threat or use of force against the territorial
integrityor political independence of any state . . .“.
Thestatementmade by the President of the United States,
which
I quoted here the other day, explicitly derives from
hisCharterstatement. I repeat it:

[1308th meeting, para. 162.1

On 17 October I also said:
“We seek good relations with all countries. We seek to
apply the provisions of the Charter and of United Nations
resolutions which call for non-intereference in the affairs
of other countries.” [Ibid., para. 168.1

“TO the leaders of all nations of the Near East I wish to
QYwhat three Presidents have said before-that the

21

238. I could repeat many other statements that have been
made-in the Jordanian complaint, in the Syrian complaint,
for example-and they have been very clear and expressive
statements. And they were not only statements; they were
supported by votes in this Council which demonstrated the
even-handed nature of our position.

generous words which he was good enough to expresswith
regard to my august Sovereign. I should like also to tha&
him for the appropriate clarifications which he made in his
brilliant statement before the Council this morning,
244. The meaningful appeal of His Imperial Majesty the
Emperor of Ethiopia was made in the course of his address
on the occasion of Africa Day, and reads as follows:

239. It would be helpful if other countries, particularly
other great Powers, were to make similar statements. I am
still waiting for statements from some of the other great
Powers in this debate, statements which would contribute
to the relief of tension in the area: statements to the effect
that the Charter provisions, that the political independence
and territorial integrity of all States are to be respected;
that aggression and violence and force wherever they occur
are to be deprecated; and that the rights long confirmed by
this Council and established by international law-rights
which have long been recognized-should be respected. I am
still waiting for statements of that character which could
help to restrain the situation. I have not heard them. The
United States has expressed itself very clearly; and those
expressions have been backed up by action, as I have said,
throughout the year.

“We are greatly disturbed at the dangerous turn of
events in the Middle East. As we have stated on previous
occasions, the preservation of world peace is the common
concern of every people and nation. We would therefore
avail ourselves of this opportunity to appeal to all
concerned to exercise every restraint in the spirit of their
solemn undertakings in the Charter of the United
Nations, and to make every effort to maintain the peace
in the Middle East.”
I respectfully submit that this appeal of Ethiopia’s Headof
State is fully in accord with our efforts in the Council at
the present time and is expressive of Ethiopia’s keen and
genuine desire to contribute to the efforts of the Council to
resolve this dangerous crisis.

240. We have hoped to enjoy and tried to enjoy, as the
President has said, good relations with all countries in the
area. Our objective today is a very simple one. It is to
support an appeal made by the impartial agency of the
United Nations, the Secretary-General. Our draft resolution
was cast in those plain terms. It did not seek to go beyond
them. It did not seek to prejudice the claims of any party.
It sought to help, in the Secretary-General’s explicit words,
to alleviate tension in the area. This is the objective of the
United Nations, and this is what we are pursuing in the
Council.

245. Finally, with your permission, Mr. President, I should
like to associate myself, in the spirit of the appeal which I
have just read, with the remarks made by the representative
of France: his call for restraint, his call for time, his call for
the continuation of the intensive consultations that we are
carrying out and which are well under way under your able
leadership. It would be a great pity if these were not
allowed to continue, with the objective of obtaining a draft
resolution containing an appeal which would be acceptable
to the members of the Security Council as a whole.

241. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of Ethiopia
had asked to make a few remarks, but, by error his name
did not appear on my list. I therefore now give the floor to
the representative of Ethiopia.

246. The PRESIDENT: Before we pursue our debate, I
should like to say just one word. I would certainly hesitate
to interfere with the right of any member of the Council to
express himself on subjects which he considers to be
directly or indirectly linked with the question under
debate. On the other hand, I believe that it will speed UP
our deliberations and promote our efforts to achieve the
results we all desire if all the members of the Council
confine their statements, as strictly as possible, to the item
under discussion.

242. Mr. MAKONNEN (Ethiopia): Since this is the first
time I have intervened in the Council since your elevation,
Sir, to the high office of President of the Security Council,
may I take the opportunity to associate myself with those
representatives who have spoken before me in congratulating you, and to assure you of my delegation’s full and
sincere co-operation in the performance of your important
duties. We are confident that you will bring to the office of
the Presidency of this Council the objectivity, wisdom and
cool common sense so characteristic of the Nordic region of
which iour country forms so vital a part.

247. Mr. FEDORENKO
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): May I state first of all
that, as was to be expected, Ambassador Arthur Goldberg,
the representative of the United States, did not answerand
is hardly likely to inswer the direct question I put to him.
As before, he tried to shift the discussion to a different
plane and to a different subject, a device frequently
resorted to in court proceedings and legal practice in certain
countries. But eluding an answer does not cancel out the
question, and I say again that Washington had no justitication, no grounds and no rights to warrant its illegal and
arbitrary actions against Cuba, a Member of the United
Nations.

243. Since reference was made earlier in our debate to the
name of my august Sovereign and to an historic declaration
which His Imperial Majesty made in 1936, in circumstances
which had nothing to do with the present crisis in the
Middle East, I should like to be allowed to remove any
possible misunderstanding that could arise from this farfetched and unrelated reference made by the representative
of Israel, by reading for the record of the Council a message
of appeal which His Imperial Majesty, my august Sovereign,
made on 25 May 1967. In so doing, I wish to express my
gratitude to the representative of Morocco for the kind and

248. Secondly, the statement by the United States repre.
sentative has again made it quite clear that Washington lays
claim to the role of world judge and policeman. The Utlited
22

States considers itself entitled to install its nuclear weapons
in any part of the world, thus endangering peace and the
fives of millions of people. Nuclear bombs of the United
States, as we all I~IIOW, have actually fallen on the territory
Of other States, whether by accident or not. What comes
immediateIy
to mind is Palomares, where United States
nuclear bombs were “lost” in the Mediterranean.

Viet-Nam th&t is posing a direct threat to peace,
only ih South-East Asia?

and

not

25g. Let me also say that in my earlier statement today I
made another point, concerning Washington’s hypocritical
declarations about freedom of navigation, In that connexion I should like to draw attention to the fact *ha* the
Soviet Vessel firkestan, which was subjected to a piratical
United States attack, waschartered to carry cod from *be
Port of Campha to Japan. The United States representative
sought to console US by saying that arrangements were
being made in Washington for an investigation and that a
reply would be given in the usual diplomatic way,

249. Washington’s ruling circles have gone so far as to
install nuclear weapons in the immediate proximity of the
Soviet
Union and other socialist countries.
250. Would it not be more reasonable for the United
States representative, instead of lecturing others, to
recommend to his Government that it stop this hazardous
nuclear adventurism, which as we know is still the order of
the day?

259. But can there be any doubt that a criminal attack
was made on this Soviet merchant vessel by the United
States Air Force? Can it possibly be denied that this
United States act of provocation resulted in casualties? Are
we to take it that the crime was not committed by the
United States Air Force but by Martians or by sinister
forces from some other planet? Or perhaps our United
States colleague will tell us that special investigating
commissions, including Congressional Commissions, have to
be set up? But we all know something about investigation
procedures and the voluminous reports they produce.

25 1. In 1962 the Soviet Union repelled the threat of
direct United States aggression against Cuba. As we all
remember, this action by the Soviet State was hailed
throughout the world,
252. AS $0 the adventurism about which the United States
representative spoke, glaring instances of it are the infamous aggression against Cuba at Playa Girbn supported by
the United States in April 1961 and the quite recent
aggression against the Dominican Republic.

260. Members of the Security Council can have no
illusions about the insincere preachings of Washington, The
value of the hypocritical declarations by United States
representatives about “peace”, “justice” and “legality” has
been known for a long time. We know what is happening in
reality. While their spokesmen make long, tedious speeches
inside and outside the United Nations, peaceful VietNamese villages are mercilessly burnt down with United
States napalm and untold numbers of bombs and artillery
shells rain down day and night on the territory of the
sovereign State of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam. In
the most monstrous fashion, the ravening hordes make
desperate attempts to crush the heroic people of Viet-Nam,
who are waging a patriotic war. The United States
interventionists are trying to drown the nation in blood.
But no wild excessesof United States militarism, in the
blind rage of aggression and adventurist frenzy, can arrest
the inexorable movement of peoples which are proudly and
unyiel&@y defending their sacred rights to national and
social freedom and to independent existence and development. There can be no doubt that their just cause will
triumph, whatever the sacrificesexacted from them by the
forces of international imperialism and aggression.

253. Furtllermore, the United States representative repeated for the nth time that the United States is willing to
discuss the question of Viet-Nam in the Security Council,
where this matter, for reasons of which everyone is fully
aware, cannot and should not be considered. I take this
opportunity to confirm once again the position expressed
by my delegation both in the Security Council and
elsewhere.
254. The United States representative is no doubt trying
to convince us of the truth of his ingenuous tale in the hope
that the discussion of the Viet-Nam question in the
Security Council would be a sort of palliative affording a
justification for the dangerous policy of the United States.
Is there any need to say how deeply mistaken he is?
255. Can it matter whether the Viet-Nam question is
discussed here or not? Can there be anyone who does not
yet understand that the crux of the affair is Washington’s
unwillingness to stop the aggression against the VietNamese people, its determination to go on escalating the
war in Viet-Nam?

261. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): If we
needed my proof that the Soviet Union’s
COnCePtiOn
of
helping *o relieve tension in the preSent Crisis is to engage in
a cold-war exercise, we have just heard it. The United
States conception is otherwise. We shall continue to
exercise our influence in this situation to help keep the
peace in the Near East.

256. The United States representative referred to an
appeal made by the Secretary-General, back in 1962; but
would it not be better for those concerned in Washington
to heed the Secretary-General’s warning that the world is
now on the threshold of a third world war, and is it not
clear to everyone what the Secretary-General bad in mind?

262. The PRESIDENT: There are no more names on the
list of speakers, but before adjourning the meeting, I wish
to make a brief statement.
263. As *he result of informal consultations among
members of the Security Council, there appears to be a

257. Does the United States representative not know that
it is the criminal aggression of the United States in
23

general agreement to hold the next meeting on Monday,
5 June, at 3 p.m., on the understanding that members of
the Council will hold themselves available for consultations
also over the week-end and for an urgent meeting of the
Council before Monday afternoon in case there are any new
developments that may require the convening of the

Council. As I hear no objection, I shall take it that it is so
decided.
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 2.20 p.m.

24

HOW

TO

United

Nations

OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

publicotions,moy

be

the world.
or Geneva.

Consult

COMMENT

SE PROCURER

Ler publications
dCporitairer
du

your

der
monde

Nations

Unier,

Section

COMO

CONSEGUIR

bookstore

PUBLICATIONS
obtoined
or

from
bookstores
and distributors
United
Notions,
Soles
Section,

write

to:

LES PUBLICATIONS
Nations
entier.
der

DES

Unies
sent
Informez-vour

ventes,

PUBLICACIONES

New

York

in U.N.

Price:

$U.S.

UNIES

en vente
dons
ler librairier
et les ogencer
oupr&s
de votre librairie
ou adrerrez-vows
6:
ou GenBve.

DE LAS

NACIONES

Los publicaciones
de los Naciones
Unidas
ert6n
en todos
porte%
del mundc.
Consulte
a IV librero
Ventas.
Nueva
York o Ginebro.

Litho

NATIONS

throughout
New York

1.50 (or equivalent

en vento
o dirljose

in other

UNIDAS
en librerior
y cosos dirtribuidoras
a: Nacioner
Unidas,
Seccibn

currencies)

de

6812-December

1970-2,100
