S/PV.8978

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

8978th meeting

Friday, 25 February 2022, 10.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Nebenzia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. De Rivière
Ms. Oye
Mrs. Hackman
Mr. Raguttahalli
Mr. Kelly
Mr. Kimani
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Ms. Juul
Mr. Abushahab
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. Mills

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016),
2393 (2017), 2401 (2018), 2449 (2018), 2504 (2020), 2533 (2020) and 2585 (2021)
(S/2022/135)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-26919 (E)
*2226919*

S/PV.8978

The situation in the Middle East

to promote the full implementation of the resolution in
a manner that meets the legitimate aspirations of the
Syrian people and restores the full sovereignty, unity
independence and territorial integrity of Syria.

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258
(2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017), 2401 (2018),
2449 (2018), 2504 (2020), 2533 (2020) and 2585
(2021) (S/2022/135)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of the Islamic
Republic of Iran, the Syrian Arab Republic and Turkey
to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in the meeting: Mr. Geir Pedersen,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria;
and Ms. Joyce Msuya, Assistant Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy Emergency
Relief Coordinator.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2022/135, which contains the report
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014),
2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017),
2401 (2018), 2449 (2018), 2504 (2020), 2533 (2020)
and 2585 (2021).
I now give the floor to Mr. Pedersen.
Mr. Pedersen: Every month, I draw your attention
to the fact that Syrians across the country and those who
are displaced are facing poverty and hunger at levels
higher than at any point in the conflict. Ms. Msuya will
brief the Council on the latest humanitarian situation.
However, let me emphasize that the full implementation
of resolution 2585 (2021) is important not only on
humanitarian grounds, but also in the context of
building trust and confidence. For my part, I remain
steadfastly committed to implementing my mandate in
resolution 2254 (2015) to convene the Syrian parties in
a formal political process and to exercising good offices
2/19

25/02/2022

Militarily, the front lines remain unshifted, but
we still see all the signs of an ongoing hot conflict.
Any of a number of flashpoints could ignite a broader
conflagration. We continue to see mutual shelling,
skirmishes, improvised explosive devices and security
incidents across the front lines in the north-west, the
north-east and the south-west. Yet again, we have seen
more violence across international borders — drone
strikes in the north-east; Israeli strikes in the south
and in Damascus; and further security incidents on
the Syrian-Jordanian border, which Amman states are
related to drug smuggling. We have also seen Security
Council-listed terrorist groups active across Syria. We
note the United States ground operation that killed the
leader of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.
It is plain that there is a stalemate, that there is
acute suffering and that a political solution is the
only way out. That requires a Syrian-led, Syrianowned political process, which must be supported by
constructive international diplomacy, however hard
that is, especially right now.
I am glad to report that we have now set a date for
convening the seventh session of the small body of the
Syrian-owned, Syrian-led United Nations-facilitated
Constitutional Committee in Geneva on 21 March. In
that regard, the background is that, on the last day of the
sixth session, the co-Chairs agreed with each other on
the fifth day of the session that the Committee needed
a mechanism to improve the workings, and, with my
facilitation, they reached an agreement on how that
could be done.
It is important that the small body’s work continue,
including in such a manner that it builds trust and
confidence. The parties’ positions are substantively far
apart and narrowing their differences will inevitably be
an incremental process. However, in line with the terms
of reference and core rules of procedure, what we need
is a sense of compromise and constructive engagement
from all delegations so that the Committee works
expeditiously and continuously to produce results
and continued progress, without foreign interference
or externally imposed timelines. The co-Chairs have
agreed to future sessions in May and June 2022 and to
discuss a workplan, which is plainly needed.
22-26919

25/02/2022

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8978

In the meantime, I have continued, and will
continue, to work on the broader process to implement
other elements of resolution 2254 (2015) that lie outside
the constitutional basket. I am conducting a rolling
process of consultations to identify how that might be
done. In parallel, I have also continued to engage with
the Syrian parties, meeting with the Syrian Government
in Damascus and the Syrian Negotiations Commission
in Istanbul and here in Geneva. I also held in-depth
discussions with the Foreign Ministers of Jordan,
Turkey and Russia in their capitals this month.

I am convinced that the overwhelming majority of
the Syrian people desperately want the conflict to end,
to see some basic improvements to their shattered lives
and to live in safety and dignity. They also want to see
progress on the file of detainees, abductees and missing
persons, which continues to affect the lives of so many
families in every corner of Syria. Scaled-up action with
regard to releases, particularly of women, children, the
sick and the elderly, and the sharing of information on
the fate and whereabouts of missing persons is more
vital than ever.

Resolution 2254 (2015) speaks of the need for
a political negotiation and for confidence-building
measures to support progress, and it enumerates a range
of specifics in that regard. In that spirit, as I continue
to facilitate the Constitutional Committee, I have been
seeking to identify areas where consensus might be found
on a series of reciprocal confidence-building measures
in resolution 2254 (2015) that could be implemented in
parallel, step for step and, in the process, to explore
how a broader political process could be constructed to
tackle all the issues in the resolution.

Through my most recent round of consultations, I
had hoped that we might be starting to find a way into
a functioning political process to implement resolution
2254 (2015). I am obviously very concerned that the
constructive international diplomacy required to push
that forward may prove more difficult than it already
was against the backdrop of the military operations
in Ukraine.

As I told the Council last month (see S/PV.8955),
I am asking interlocutors not only what they would
demand, but also what they would be able to put on the
table. The aim would be to make progress, step for step,
on issues through commitments that are made with
precision, that are verifiable and that are implemented
in parallel. I am listening carefully to all interlocutors
as to how they believe it is possible to make progress.
I thank all who have engaged so far, and I appreciate
the constructive ideas that have been shared to date. I
look forward to continuing the consultations with those
whom I have not yet been able to consult and to further
rounds of engagement.
Following my last briefing to the Council, I consulted
with the Syrian Women’s Advisory Board in Norway
and look forward to welcoming it in Switzerland from
14 to 21 March. Meanwhile, on Sunday, I will meet with
a diverse group of Syrian civil society representatives
invited for thematic consultations through the Civil
Society Support Room in Geneva. I very much look
forward to resuming that direct engagement and to
hearing their feedback, suggestions and ideas. I am
always encouraged and inspired to see them engage
constructively on how to rebuild a Syrian society based
on common civic values of independence, participation,
plurality, transparency, dialogue and equality despite
their own life stories and diverse narratives.

For my part, I will continue to focus on engaging
and convening the Syrian parties and consulting widely.
We will convene a series of Constitutional Committee
meetings in March, May and June, and we will continue
to roll out a set of consultations on step-for-step
approaches within the wider issues in resolution 2254
(2015) and on how we can make progress.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Pedersen for his briefing.
I understand that this is Ms. Msuya’s first briefing
to the Security Council. I welcome her to this meeting,
and I now give her the floor.
Ms. Msuya: This is my first briefing to the
Council in my role as Deputy Emergency Relief
Coordinator. I look forward to engaging closely with
all Council members.
A few days ago, the United Nations, together with
its humanitarian partners, published its evidence-based
assessment of humanitarian needs in the Syrian Arab
Republic for the coming year. The findings are clear and
paint a very bleak picture. More people are in need now
than at any time since the start of the conflict. A total of
14.6 million people will be dependent on humanitarian
assistance. That is 9 per cent more than last year and
32 per cent more than the year before. The world is
failing the people of Syria. That cannot be our strategy.
Hostilities, primarily along front lines, continue
to claim civilian lives and damage critical civilian

22-269193/19

S/PV.8978

The situation in the Middle East

25/02/2022

infrastructure such as hospitals, schools and water
facilities. Another 14 civilians were killed this January
alone. Mines and explosive ordnance have claimed
additional lives, including children. Hostilities also
restrict freedom of movement, which in turn places
women and children at greater risk of abuse. As we saw
last month with the attack on a prison in Al-Hasakah,
the incredibly precarious situation of the hundreds of
children who remain in detention centres and camps
continues. They should never have been there in the
first place. They need protection. They need services
and hope for the future. The time to act is long overdue.

Last year we also expanded access into northwestern Syria by restarting cross-line operations.
In December and January, after setting up a new
distribution system, cross-line aid began reaching
people in need. We have a plan in place for additional
deliveries and we are ready to move. What we need
now is the support of all the parties concerned to
enable the cross-line missions to go ahead. Let me
reiterate, however, that there is no alternative in place
now that can match the scale and scope of the massive
United Nations cross-border operation, providing food,
vaccines and other vital aid to 2.4 million people.

Syria now ranks among the 10 most food-insecure
countries in the world, with a staggering 12 million
people considered food-insecure. Syria’s economy is
spiralling further downward. Food keeps getting more
expensive and people are going hungry. Over the past
year, the cost of feeding a family of five for a month
with only the most basic items has almost doubled. A
household now spends on average 50 per cent more
than it earns. To get by, families must borrow money
without much hope of being able to repay their loans,
continuing the trend of an ever-increasing financial
burden for them that forces them to make unbearable
choices. Children, and girls especially, are being
pulled out of school. Child marriages are on the rise.
Female-headed households, older people without
family support, persons with disabilities and children
have been disproportionately affected.

The people of Syria have suffered for so long. They
deserve a better future. They now need aid to survive,
but that should not be the case. They need a chance to
build a dignified life for themselves and their families.
They need to be able to give their children hope for a
better future. To achieve that, we need sustainable and
reliable access. We need more funding. We also need
to scale up early-recovery programming, alongside
our life-saving work. But most importantly, Syrians
need peace.

We are ramping up early-recovery programming
this year. I know that Under-Secretary-General
Griffiths also briefed the Council on that recently (see
S/PV.8957). Our 2022 humanitarian response plan
is nearing finalization. We expect that roughly one
quarter of the total appeal will be geared to increasing
resilience and access to basic services, which is a
significant increase from last year. Part of our focus
will be on revitalizing access to some basic services
such as water, but we need more support and we are
counting on the generosity of donors to deliver. It is
critical that the various parties facilitate our efforts.
Millions of people in north-western Syria depend on
our support to survive. Winter has compounded their
suffering, especially for the millions living in tents.
Through our cross-border operations, we deliver food,
medicine and other essential items each month and
support the delivery of essential services, and we do all
of it in a transparent and principled manner.
4/19

The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Ms. Msuya for her briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank
Special Envoy Pedersen and Assistant SecretaryGeneral Msuya for their briefings and would like to
welcome the Assistant Secretary-General, who is here
for the first time. Their briefings are important because
it is imperative that the Security Council continue to
publicly discuss the ongoing political, humanitarian
and security crises in Syria. Today I would like to focus
on three aspects of the Syrian crisis — the need for
progress on the stalled political track, the threat from
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) and the
imperative of expanding humanitarian access, including
through the cross-border humanitarian mechanism.
First, the United States reaffirms its strong support
for Special Envoy Pedersen’s efforts to advance
a political solution in Syria and fully implement
resolution 2254 (2015). We welcome the announcement
of a new round of meetings of the Syrian Constitutional
Committee and call on all parties to participate in good
faith and adhere to the meeting format. We look forward
to further discussion of the Special Envoy’s steps-forsteps approach. We hope that all Syrian parties, as well
22-26919

25/02/2022

The situation in the Middle East

as other stakeholders, engage constructively on ways to
advance all aspects of the political process.
We remain deeply concerned about the lack of
progress on releasing the thousands of people who
have been arbitrarily detained and again call on the
Al-Assad regime to undertake unilateral releases.
We also urge the regime to provide information on
the tens of thousands of missing persons. As we have
heard in countless briefings, that issue affects almost
every Syrian family, and the lack of action on the file
underscores why nations should not be normalizing
relations with a regime that locks up and forcibly
disappears its own people.
Secondly, the attack on the ISIS detention facility
in Al-Hasakah in January is a stark reminder that ISIS
remains a dangerous threat and that the global coalition
to defeat ISIS must continue its efforts. We credit the
Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF) for taking swift action
to spoil that attack and deny ISIS the reinforcements that
it sought. The SDF sustained significant casualties in
responding to that attack. We call on all Member States
to take action to repatriate, rehabilitate, reintegrate
and prosecute, where appropriate, their nationals
who remain in north-eastern Syria. The removal of
former ISIS leader Haji Abdullah from the battlefield
demonstrates our steadfast commitment to denying
ISIS any opportunity to reconstitute, retake and hold
territory in Syria and Iraq.
Thirdly, as detailed by the Assistant SecretaryGeneral, the dire humanitarian situation in Syria
confirms once again what the humanitarian assistance
community and the Syrian people have been saying for
years — not enough aid is getting to those who need it.
And not only that, because according to the 2022 outlook
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, the number of people in need in Syria is now
higher than at any point in the 11-year conflict. The
Syrian people do not have enough food, medicine,
fuel, blankets or winter clothes. The situation in northeastern Syria, which was already tragically bad before
the closure of the Al-Yarubiyah crossing with Iraq, has
become empirically worse since the Council failed to
authorize its continued use.
We commend all States that are providing
coronavirus-disease-related assistance to Syria,
including a recent major donation of vaccines from
Italy, but in order to get the vaccines into arms faster,
we need to expand humanitarian access. Continued

S/PV. 8978

cross-border and cross-line access remains essential. It
is our collective responsibility to renew and expand the
cross-border mechanism this summer. We support all
modalities for the delivery of humanitarian assistance.
That includes cross-line shipments, and we call on all
parties to work constructively with the United Nations
to facilitate cross-line deliveries. However, as we and
the Secretary-General have often said, cross-line aid
cannot match the scale of cross-border aid. The Council
must therefore work together to ensure not only that
Bab Al-Hawa remains open, but that all cross-border
options are available to meet the pressing humanitarian
needs. While the United States and other donors
continue to support the humanitarian response in Syria,
we must all remain vigilant about detecting any attempt
by the Al-Assad regime and its cronies to manipulate
humanitarian aid. The regime’s record on that, dating
back to the start of the conflict, is clear and disgraceful.
We therefore want to take this opportunity to recall the
critical importance of the parameters and principles of
United Nations humanitarian assistance in Syria, which
aim to ensure that humanitarian aid is delivered in a
principled manner based on need alone. We call on all
actors to allow the United Nations and all humanitarian
organizations to operate without interference in the
service of the Syrian people.
Mr. Kelly (Ireland): I am making this statement
today on behalf of Norway and Ireland, the co-penholders
of the Syria humanitarian file. I want to welcome
Assistant Secretary-General Msuya and to thank her
for her very sobering briefing, which has once again
underlined the sheer depth of ongoing humanitarian
needs on the ground. She has also reminded us of the
complex challenge of delivering the humanitarian
response throughout Syria.
Since the start of 2022, Syria has seen increased
insecurity and violence. Hostilities have resulted in
the deaths of at least 92 civilians during the reporting
period, including 19 children. Their deaths are
deplorable, as is the systematic harming of civilians
perpetrated by parties to the conflict. The flagrant
disregard for the lives of Syrians is simply unacceptable
yet has tragically become the norm. We urge all parties
to the conflict to comply with their obligations under
international humanitarian law, including by ensuring
the protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure in
the conduct of military operations.
More than a decade of armed conflict on multiple
fronts in Syria has left vast stretches of the country

22-269195/19

S/PV.8978

The situation in the Middle East

littered with mines and all kinds of explosive ordnance.
Innocent civilians seeking only to go about their
daily lives pay a terrible price through loss of life or
limb. Explosive ordnance contamination is not only a
major protection concern, it also stands in the way of
expanding humanitarian access, as well as efforts to
build livelihoods and resilience in Syria. Mine clearance
capacity has long been a missing link in the broader chain
of humanitarian interventions in Syria. We welcome
the commencement of clearance operations supported
by the Mine Action Service in western Ghouta. The
arrival of capable mine action organizations in Syria
offers donors and other humanitarian stakeholders an
opportunity to begin filling the gap, as a matter of
urgency, in line with humanitarian principles.
We are deeply concerned about the continually
deteriorating security situation at Al-Hol camp, with
four murders reported in January alone. We urge
that the review of security protocols be concluded
swiftly. It is crucial that security provided at the camp
protect civilians and humanitarian workers without
constraining humanitarian access.
Syrians continue to struggle through a harsh and
cruel winter to devastating effect. Camps have been
flooded, destroying tents, affecting the lives of tens of
thousands of civilians and resulting in the deaths of men,
women and children. The economic crisis has deepened,
driving food prices ever higher and contributing to food
insecurity. Water access has been further affected by
hostilities, low rainfall and disruptions to the water
systems. We commend the continued efforts of the
United Nations and other humanitarian organizations
in delivering early-recovery activities and welcome the
progress that has been made in that regard during the
reporting period.
Through this bleak season, the humanitarian
cross-border operation has continued to provide
critical humanitarian support for millions of people in
desperate need in north-west Syria. As the SecretaryGeneral has said once again, there is currently no
alternative that can match the scale and scope of the
cross-border operation. As co-penholders, Ireland and
Norway continue to emphasize their support for all
modalities to meet the humanitarian needs of all the
people of Syria. The humanitarian access landscape in
Syria remains complex. The delivery and distribution
of the second cross-line delivery to north-western Syria
is welcome, but the lack of a cross-line delivery so far in
2022 is a disappointment. It is vital that the necessary
6/19

25/02/2022

approvals and security guarantees be provided. We
encourage continued efforts and call on all parties to
commit to ensuring that humanitarian deliveries can
reach everyone in need. It is the people of Syria, already
in dire need, who continue to suffer when humanitarian
access is not possible. I would like to reiterate that
our guiding principle on this file is, and will remain,
addressing the significant humanitarian needs of all the
Syrian people. The Security Council must continue to
work as one to ensure that those needs are met.
I would now like to turn to the political situation and
make some additional remarks in my national capacity.
I thank Special Envoy Pedersen for his briefing. Ireland
commends his continued efforts to reconvene the
drafting body of the Constitutional Committee for the
planned seventh meeting to be held from 21 to 25 March.
The Committee must achieve substantive progress
but cannot do so without meaningful engagement on
texts, especially by the Syrian authorities. We welcome
Mr. Pedersen’s ongoing consultation with the Women’s
Advisory Board. It is essential that the Committee
have a clear understanding of the gendered effects
of the current situation. Gender equality and respect
for international human rights law must be priorities,
underpinned by a gender-responsive constitution.
Women’s full, equal and meaningful participation and
leadership should be a norm at every stage and for
every party.
Ireland calls on all the parties to the conflict to
comply with their obligations under international
law. We reiterate our calls for those responsible for
violations of international law to be held to account.
Ireland will continue to support the work of the Human
Rights Council’s Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian
Arab Republic and the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011. Both have
vital roles in ensuring accountability and justice, which
is essential if the Syrian people are to have lasting
peace and stability.
Ireland remains gravely concerned about the tens of
thousands of people in Syria who have been unlawfully
detained or forcibly disappeared. We look forward to
the forthcoming study from the Secretary-General
on how to bolster the efforts to clarify the fate and
whereabouts of missing people in Syria, as requested
in General Assembly resolution 76/228. This will be
22-26919

25/02/2022

The situation in the Middle East

a valuable addition to existing work, including by the
Office of the Special Envoy.
The Council was reminded last month of the
severe threat Da’esh continues to pose in Syria. The
international community must remain committed to
ensuring its lasting defeat. To help overcome those
and other challenges, Ireland will continue to support
Special Envoy Pedersen in all of his efforts to facilitate
a political resolution that delivers for all Syrian people.
We look forward to further engagement on his stepsfor-steps initiative. We call on all parties to the conflict,
as well as other international and Syrian stakeholders,
to do likewise.
In conclusion, resolution 2254 (2015) must remain
our lodestar. We all know that the only sustainable
solution to the crisis in Syria is through an inclusive and
Syrian-led political process that meets the legitimate
aspirations of the Syrian people. Only then can the
Syrian people be assured that an end to their suffering
is in sight. That is the only way forward.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): I thank Mr. Geir Pedersen and Ms. Joyce
Msuya for their important briefings, and we welcome
Ms. Msuya to her first Security Council meeting.
Today I would first like to address the humanitarian
situation in the Syrian Arab Republic and then turn to
the political issue.
Where the former is concerned, it is essential
to focus on meeting the humanitarian needs of the
Syrian people, who have borne the brunt of the crisis.
Separating political and humanitarian positions should
be a priority. The task of providing the Syrian people
with humanitarian aid and relief should be a matter of
consensus, regardless of political differences, especially
in the light of Ms. Msuya’s statement that 14.6 million
people are in need of humanitarian aid. It is a moral
and humanitarian imperative to ensure that Syrians are
not left to face difficult conditions while lacking the
most basic services such as water and electricity. In that
regard, we underscore that the water crisis is one of the
most critical humanitarian challenges facing the Syrian
people, especially those who depend on the Allouk
water station or who are residents of the city of Al-Bab.
We stress that restrictions on access to water will have
serious humanitarian repercussions. My country also
stresses the need for the relevant parties in Syria to
cooperate in ensuring that humanitarian aid reaches
all in need. In that regard, we commend the continued

S/PV. 8978

delivery of humanitarian aid to Syria in accordance with
resolution 2585 (2021) and the resumption of cross-line
delivery of humanitarian aid over the past few months.
Turning to the political situation, we welcome the
agreement of the two parties to convene the seventh
round of meetings of the Constitutional Committee on
21 March, including their agreement on the modalities
for the session, steps that will help to build confidence
between them in preparation for addressing more
complex challenges. We encourage them to continue
their dialogue to build on these positive developments.
We reiterate the importance of the active participation
of Syrian women in the Constitutional Committee,
especially given their pivotal role in social development
across every sector.
The reality that Syria is an Arab country and that
its stability is linked to that of the Arab region as a
whole cannot be ignored. We stress the importance of
rejecting foreign interference in Syrian affairs. We also
highlight the importance of ensuring a greater Arab role
in the Syrian crisis, as that approach is the most viable
for supporting mediation efforts under the auspices of
the United Nations with the aim of resolving the crisis
and preserving the security of the region.
If progress is to be made on the political process,
action must be taken to address security challenges
through de-escalation and a nationwide ceasefire.
The repercussions that have resulted from the fragile
security situation in Syria and extended to neighbouring
countries, especially Jordan, must be taken into
consideration. The recent clashes on the JordanSyria border between Jordanian armed forces and
various groups trying to smuggle drugs into Jordanian
territories and neighbouring countries resulted in death
or injury for a number of Jordanian border guards. That
is unacceptable.
In conclusion, we emphasize that a political solution
to the Syrian crisis is still possible. It demands that we
display the necessary flexibility while consolidating
efforts to overcome the current obstacles and to move
from managing the crisis to resolving it, in line with
resolution 2254 (2015), so as to meet the aspirations and
basic needs of our brother people of Syria.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Let me thank Special
Representative Pedersen for his briefing. We also
welcome Assistant Secretary-General Msuya to the
Security Council and thank her for her briefing. I will
be brief because I have a feeling that I am likely to

22-269197/19

S/PV.8978

The situation in the Middle East

be repeating myself. No one needs reminding of the
unbearable suffering of the Syrian people under the
current stalemate and, as we heard today, the tragic,
persistent and worsening humanitarian situation. Every
month, as we hear about the overall depressing picture
in Syria, we ask ourselves how many more helpless
millions of people must go hungry and how many
victims and children have to freeze to death for the
Council to use its power to upend the current status quo.
We have highlighted before that cross-border
access is of paramount importance, and I reiterate that.
It should be expanded so that at the next meeting or
those that follow in the months to come, we do not get
the same picture, or a worsening one, of frightening
neglect and disrespect for human life.
Syrians need everything. They need food and all
the help they can get to survive, but most of all they
need peace, hope and prospects. That is why the key to
this issue is a political transition process, without which
no progress can be made towards the normalization
of life in the country in general, including the
humanitarian situation.
There can be no alternative to the full and expeditious
implementation of resolution 2254 (2015). Delays
and derailments will only make a horrible situation
worse. The Syrian regime, which bears the primary
responsibility for the massive suffering inflicted on
the Syrian people and the perpetuation of this deadly
status quo, also bears primary responsibility for the
practically non-existent progress towards a political
resolution of the conflict. We support a Syrian-owned
and -led process, but we also strongly believe that efforts
to rehabilitate the Syrian regime should not precede but
should rather follow real and tangible progress towards
a genuine transition in Syria. Rewarding the regime
without any acceptance on its part of responsibility
to overcome the status quo will only embolden it in
its refusal — as we have seen — to engage in good
faith with the opposition and its ability to continue to
undermine the political transition with impunity.
We reiterate our full and unreserved support for the
Special Envoy in his incremental approach to bringing
the relevant parties together to put Syria back on track.
We remain anxious to seek and create actionable
results that can pave the way for a free and democratic
Syria. We look forward to the next meeting of the
Constitutional Committee and to a sustained process
for making progress on the participation of women.
8/19

25/02/2022

We continue to believe that free and fair elections,
held under a new constitution that reflects the will and
aspirations of the Syrian people, constitute the path
to opening a new chapter for Syria. The release of all
political detainees, a complete halt to attacks on civilian
areas and full accountability for crimes committed are
important preconditions for rebuilding the process that
can move Syria along the right path towards its future.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): I join others in thanking
Special Envoy Pedersen and Assistant SecretaryGeneral Msuya for their updates today.
It has been India’s consistent stand that imposing
external solutions will not help to resolve the Syrian
conflict. It is for the Syrians to determine and decide
what is best for Syria and for their own future. The
Special Envoy has been working consistently to
facilitate the political process in line with resolution
2254 (2015), and we support his active diplomatic
efforts to end the stalemate in the Constitutional
Committee process. We take note of the announcement
that the seventh Constitutional Committee meeting will
be held in Geneva next month. We also take positive
note of the Special Envoy’s recent visits to Damascus
and Moscow and his meetings with the Syrian and
Russian leaderships. He has also engaged with other
leaders in the region, including in Egypt. We believe
that regional actors and Syria’s neighbours will have an
important role to play in the peaceful resolution of the
conflict and in achieving lasting progress through the
implementation of resolution 2254 (2015).
Regarding confidence-building measures, we look
forward to receiving the Special Envoy’s paper on his
new ideas, as was conveyed to the Council in January
(see S/PV.8955). We hope the paper will address issues
related to reconstruction as well. We also welcome the
efforts by the Syrian authorities to prioritize the return
of displaced Syrians to their own areas.
On the security front, we remain concerned about
the overall situation, including increasing incidents of
ceasefire violations in north-western Syria. We call on
all sides to refrain from actions that could cause the
situation to deteriorate further. India has repeatedly
emphasized the looming threat posed by resurgent
terrorist groups in Syria. The brutality of the attacks
by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL/
Da’esh) in north-eastern Syria and Al-Hasakah last
month demonstrates the severity of the problem. The
re-emergence of ISIL/Da’esh in Syria and Iraq calls
22-26919

25/02/2022

The situation in the Middle East

for urgent action by the international community. We
reiterate that the global fight against terrorism cannot
and should not be compromised for narrow political
gains. Terrorists cannot be defeated by forming
alliances with non-sovereign entities or by pushing
narrow political agendas.
The humanitarian crisis in Syria has seen no
significant improvement in recent months. We believe
that a comprehensive nationwide ceasefire is vital to
the interests of the Syrian people. It will also help to
expand cross-line humanitarian aid operations. We
note the progress that has been made on expanding
the overall humanitarian response and facilitating
cross-line access, including drafting a six-month plan
for ensuring a predictable and sustainable flow of
aid. In the north-east, however, we believe there is
considerable scope for expanding operations. It should
also be noted that the ongoing cross-border operations
continue to have a negative impact on the sovereignty
of the Syrian State. We therefore encourage the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and other
United Nations agencies to pursue efforts to enhance
cross-line operations as well.
It will be necessary to scale up humanitarian
assistance and shore up donor support for the United
Nations humanitarian response plan for Syria, which
is still underfunded. We also continue to believe that it
is crucial to achieve progress on the implementation of
resolution 2585 (2021) with regard to early recovery. The
support of the international community in addressing
the economic and humanitarian challenges remains
integral to the success of the political process. For its part,
India has continued to extend developmental assistance
and human resource development support to Syria. In
response to a request from the Government of Syria for
emergency humanitarian assistance, India gifted 2,000
metric tons of rice to strengthen food security in Syria
last year in two consignments, and in July 2020 we
gifted 10 metric tons of life-saving medicines to Syria
as part of coronavirus-disease-related assistance. More
than 500 Syrians have benefited from the artificial-limb
fitment camp that we organized in 2020.
In conclusion, the fact that the political and
humanitarian aspects of the conflict in Syria are strongly
interlinked must not be overlooked. India remains
strongly committed to supporting the ongoing United
Nations-facilitated, Syrian-led and Syrian-owned
reconciliation process as the credible way forward.

S/PV. 8978

Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the three African members
of the Security Council (A3), Gabon, Ghana and
Kenya. We thank Special Envoy Pedersen and Assistant
Secretary-General Msuya for their briefings. We also
welcome the participation of the representatives of
Syria, Iran and Turkey. Our statement will focus on the
political, security and humanitarian situation in Syria.
The situation in Syria continues to demand our
collective responsibility to protect and empower the
Syrian people in their quest for sustained peace and
stability. Progress on the political track is a lifeline
in that regard. We commend the Special Envoy’s
efforts, which after a four-month hiatus have led to an
agreement to hold a seventh round of the Constitutional
Committee meetings in the latter part of next month.
We commend the parties for their willingness to find
agreement on the methodology, which we see as a
promising development. We reiterate our plea to the
parties to engage meaningfully and constructively
in the interests of the millions of Syrians who are
counting on their leadership for a bright future. We
further look forward to the upcoming Astana format
meeting at the Foreign Minister level next month. It is
our hope that the meeting will yield fruitful paths that
can gain headway and promise for Syria. The A3 also
supports other innovative avenues aimed at moving the
political process forward. We take note of the Special
Envoy’s ongoing consultations on a step-for-step
approach and urge that its implementation, particularly
regarding humanitarian matters, be in clear accord with
international humanitarian law.
Regional efforts play a critical role in supporting
the people of Syria in their quest for lasting peace.
Our experience in Africa is that the active positive
engagement of neighbouring and nearby countries,
particularly in a coordinated manner, is key to resolving
difficult political and security crises. We therefore
encourage regional support, bearing in mind that
resolution 2254 (2015) remains the primary road map
for achieving the desired political solution to the crisis.
With regard to the security situation, the A3
condemns the unrelenting violence along the contact
lines in north-western Syria and in Dara’a through air
strikes, ground-based strikes, improvised explosive
devices and explosive remnants of war. The escalation
of violence continues to damage public infrastructure
and hampers the population’s access to public services,
including health care, educational facilities, potable

22-269199/19

S/PV.8978

The situation in the Middle East

water and essential items such as heating, fuel and
food. The resulting destruction of human lives and
livelihoods, especially those of women, children and
other vulnerable groups, is repulsive and should be
stopped at all costs.
It is crucial to ensure that the nationwide ceasefire
is respected and adhered to by all concerned parties, as
it is increasingly clear that military options cannot end
the war. In addition, the perils being visited on innocent
lives by groups that the Security Council has listed
as terrorists, such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and Hayat
Tahrir Al-Sham, continue to be of grave concern. The
A3 underscores the imperative for decisive collective
action to combat such terrorist groups so as to ensure
that the victims get justice.
We also stress the imperative for the protection
of civilians, humanitarian workers and civilian
infrastructure in accordance with international
humanitarian law and the relevant United
Nations resolutions.
That leads me to the humanitarian situation. The
A3 notes with regret that 14.6 million people continue
to be in need. The cross-border aid mechanism,
complemented by cross-line deliveries, remains a
crucial avenue for humanitarian assistance and must
be sustained in the interest of the people. We further
commend the continued deliveries of cross-line aid in
the north-west as a result of the six-month plan and
encourage the addition of medical supplies as part of
that response.

25/02/2022

The A3 commends the early recovery and
livelihoods activities under the United Nations
humanitarian response and encourages the expansion
of such activities to include psychosocial support for
the population, especially for women and children, who
have been disproportionately affected by the conflict.
It is imperative that those programmes be adequately
funded so that they can meet their intended goal of
sustained peace.
In closing, we reiterate the importance of respect
for Syria’s sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence. The A3 stands in solidarity with the
people of Syria in their quest for peace, which can
be delivered only by a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned
political process, with international support.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): I thank Special Envoy
Geir Pedersen and Assistant Secretary-General Joyce
Msuya for their updates, as well as the SecretaryGeneral for the report presented earlier this week.
Once again we are hearing no encouraging news or
positive developments coming from Syria. Civilians and
basic civilian infrastructure continue to be impacted by
active hostilities; high food prices and food insecurity
have left millions of Syrians even more dependent on
international assistance. Special Envoy Pedersen’s
words remain sadly appropriate: it is an unacceptable
status quo.

We must caution against the politicization or
diversion of aid and call for clear standards of oversight
and transparency of aid delivery for the cross-border
mechanism as well as for cross-line deliveries while
ensuring the protection of all humanitarian personnel
and convoys.

Access to safe drinking water is a fundamental
human right. It is disturbing to hear that millions of
people remain without reliable access to water and
that the prevalence of water-borne disease places
additional pressure on the public health system.
Brazil reiterates its call upon all parties to respect
human rights and international humanitarian law,
including by taking constant care to spare civilians and
civilian infrastructure.

We are also concerned about the impact of the
pandemic, which continues to disproportionately put
women’s social and economic prospects in jeopardy
given the fragile state of the country and the destruction
as a result of years of conflict.

Early recovery efforts must be strengthened, and
humanitarian exemptions for any sanctions be strictly
observed to ensure that they do not undermine access
to food, shelter and essential health supplies for those
most in need.

Furthermore, given the dire economic situation,
marked by vast food insecurity, we urge all actors
to support economic recovery measures as a key
component of the longer-term peace that Syria and the
region need.

The growing presence of terrorist groups in Syria
is of particular concern, especially in the aftermath
of the Al-Hasakah attacks. Brazil remains concerned
at the situation of children detained at the Ghwayran
detention centre. We support UNICEF’s call for access

10/19

22-26919

25/02/2022

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8978

to the boys and girls detained in facilities across northeast Syria in order to provide the care needed.

the delegations of the Syrian Arab Republic, the Islamic
Republic of Iran and Turkey.

Brazil reiterates its support for the continuous
flow of life-saving international aid to the Syrian
people, especially those living in camps and
informal settlements.

I will focus my remarks on the political situation,
the violence and the humanitarian crisis in Syria.

The latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2022/135) confirms that cross-border operations
remain critical to ensuring that basic assistance can
reach millions of civilians in need. It also points out
that the Syrian cross-border operation is one of the
most closely monitored operations in the world, subject
to multiple layers of checks to ensure a high degree
of transparency.
Brazil underlines the importance of keeping those
cross-border humanitarian operations under scrutiny
while cross-line operations expand in a safe, regular
and predictable way. We echo the Secretary-General’s
call on all parties to overcome the ongoing challenges to
cross-line operations by complying with their obligation
to ensure free and unimpeded humanitarian access,
in line with the principles of humanity, neutrality,
impartiality and independence.
Brazil remains convinced that only a Syrian-owned
and Syrian-led United Nations-facilitated political
process, with due regard for the preservation of Syria’s
territorial integrity, will bring lasting peace and
alleviate the suffering of the Syrian population.
We support Mr. Pedersen’s efforts to re-engage
key stakeholders and to try new ideas with the aim
of building trust and confidence among the parties in
order to advance the implementation of resolution 2254
(2015).
Brazil welcomes the prospect of a seventh
meeting of the Constitutional Committee next month
and remains hopeful that a new methodology can be
agreed for the submission of substantive revisions of
constitutional elements. After a decade of suffering, the
Syrian people deserve to see effective progress towards
a long-aspired-to political agreement that can end the
conflict and pave the way for sustainable peace.
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and
Assistant Secretary-General Joyce Msuya for their
detailed briefings. I wish Assistant Secretary-General
Msuya every success in her new task. I also welcome

In just a few more days, it will have been 11 years
since the conflict in Syria began. Unfortunately, we do
not anticipate any improvement. The number of people
needing humanitarian assistance has already reached
14.6 million. Of particular concern is the crisis in the
provision of basic services such as water and electricity.
My country, Mexico, reiterates that there can
be no military solution to this conflict. However, for
political dialogue to succeed and to avert increased
costs and human tragedy, political will on the part of
all stakeholders is required.
We reiterate the importance of observing a national
ceasefire and at the same time moving forward with
the political process in accordance with resolution
2254 (2015). On that last point, we welcome the
Special Envoy’s strategy of ensuring meetings among
the various parties as well as consultations with
regional and international stakeholders, especially
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Expatriates of
Syria. We also welcome the agreement to conduct the
seventh session of the small body of the Constitutional
Committee in March. We call for the parties to
participate constructively in those discussions in a
committed manner.
The release of five detainees and the issuance of
40 death certificates in eastern Ghouta is a positive
step forward. However, in our assessment it is not
commensurate with the scale of the problem, given that
thousands of people remain disappeared or in detention.
We reiterate the call for their immediate release and for
the facilitation of access for humanitarian organizations
to detention centres.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2021/1030)
and the latest two-monthly briefing make clear that
safe, sustained and unimpeded humanitarian access
is essential to meet the basic needs of the population
and to mitigate the cumulative effects of more than a
decade of conflict. In addition to medical care, services
such as mental-health care and psychosocial support
are needed.
My country, Mexico, welcomes the progress in
cross-line operations to the north-west. However, it
is clear that that is not a substitute for the more than

22-2691911/19

S/PV.8978

The situation in the Middle East

1,200 truckloads of humanitarian aid that enter through
Bab Al-Hawa each month. The spirit that led to the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2585 (2021) in July
2021 must continue to guide the Council’s work.
The ongoing issues surrounding the Allouk
water station, in addition to the attacks affecting the
distribution of water, exemplify the consequences that
the protracted conflict has had on Syria. Resolution
2585 (2021) highlights the importance of early-recovery
projects. Their implementation is a priority, particularly
for the recovery and resilience of the Syrian people.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Pedersen and Ms. Msuya for their briefings.
A lasting solution to the conflict can only be political.
The war is not over: a bombardment by forces of the
Syrian regime in Idlib province on 12 February resulted
in the deaths of many civilians, including children.
France condemns those bombings and reiterates its call
for an immediate nation-wide cessation of hostilities.
The protection of civilians remains an absolute priority.
The Council unanimously adopted resolution 2254
(2015). It remains our common road map for a political
solution to the conflict. Without its full implementation,
there will be no lasting peace.
France supports the efforts of the Special Envoy
in the context of a step-by-step approach. The political
process must make progress and each actor must
assume its responsibilities, first and foremost the
Syrian regime, which is still not willing to make the
slightest move.
Humanitarian needs have never been as great:
14.6 million people are in need of assistance. Full
humanitarian access to all those people must be
ensured. All parties to the conflict, in particular the
regime, must respect their international obligations.
The cross-border humanitarian mechanism
remains essential. Last year, 10,000 trucks delivered
aid to approximately 2.4 million people in the northwest every month. Progress on cross-line access must
continue in both the north-west and the north-east.
However, the cross-border mechanism will remain
necessary as long as aid does not reach all those in need
throughout the country.
In the absence of a political solution, the French
and European positions on the lifting of sanctions and
reconstruction will remain unchanged. Reconstruction
12/19

25/02/2022

can begin only once a political process is firmly
under way. I repeat: the regime must also assume its
responsibilities in that regard.
Furthermore, the regime’s systematic violation of
the rights of refugees who have returned to Syria shows
that the conditions for a voluntary, safe and dignified
return of refugees have not been met. Once again, it
is up to the regime to assume its responsibilities. It is
also imperative that the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees have access to
returning refugees.
Finally, France will continue its relentless fight
against impunity for the perpetrators of crimes
committed in Syria. They will have to answer for
their actions.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and Assistant SecretaryGeneral Joyce Msuya for their briefings.
China appreciates the efforts made by the United
Nations to advance the political process in Syria and
alleviate the suffering of the Syrian people. Today I
would like to make the following brief comments.
First, we should adhere to the correct direction
of political settlement. China firmly supports the
Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political process, and
calls on all parties in Syria to strengthen dialogue,
narrow differences and promote substantive progress
in the work of the Constitutional Committee. China
appreciates the political mediation of Special Envoy
Pedersen and hopes that the seventh round of the
Constitutional Committee will be held as scheduled in
March. The work of the Constitutional Committee must
remain independent and free from external interference
and Syria’s sovereignty and territorial integrity must
be upheld.
Secondly, terrorism in Syria must be eradicated.
The counter-terrorism situation in Syria remains grim.
In accordance with international law and Security
Council resolutions, the international community
should adopt unified standards, strengthen counterterrorism cooperation and resolutely crack down on
terrorist forces in Syria to ensure secure conditions for
the political process. The recent Islamic State jailbreak
reminds the international community that the problem
of foreign terrorist fighters in Syria and Iraq is flagrant
and has had spillover effects. That long-standing issue
is a common threat to the countries of origin, the
22-26919

25/02/2022

The situation in the Middle East

countries concerned and the countries of the region.
All parties concerned must work together to resolve it.
Thirdly, every effort must be made to improve
the economic and humanitarian situations in Syria.
The economic crisis has affected all aspects of Syrian
society, with food and oil prices soaring. China calls on
the international community to increase its assistance
to Syria by implementing resolution 2585 (2021) based
on Syria’s actual needs and by carrying out large-scale
early-recovery and reconstruction projects to safeguard
the livelihoods of the Syrian people. China welcomes
the progress made by the United Nations on crossline humanitarian relief operations in north-western
Syria, and hopes that the relevant relief operations
will fully utilize the role of the Syrian Government.
The countries concerned should immediately lift the
unilateral sanctions and economic blockade against
Syria to create favourable conditions for humanitarian
relief and post-war reconstruction in Syria.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
May I start by thanking our briefers, Special Envoy
Geir Pedersen and Assistant Secretary-General Joyce
Msuya, whom I welcome to her role.
Today we are reminded of the long-term
consequences of war. After nearly 11 years of conflict
in Syria, where we have seen appalling violations of
international humanitarian law and international human
rights law, 14.6 million Syrians require humanitarian
assistance. The decimation of civilian infrastructure
has left 76 per cent of the population unable to meet
the most basic needs. That means chronic malnutrition,
rising bread prices, families camping in freezing
cold conditions and the stunted growth of young
children — levels of suffering that will take a generation
of recovery.
As we look at the horror of the unfolding situation
in Ukraine, the daily struggles of men, women and
children in Syria should serve as a dire warning to
the international community. The untold suffering
of millions, leading to mass displacement, regional
instability and economic shock, serves no purpose.
The need for a continued and consistent
humanitarian response in Syria is clear. Assistance
needs to be delivered through all modalities possible.
Resolution 2585 (2021) needs to be implemented in full,
and, as we look ahead to July, the renewal of the United
Nations cross-border mandate remains essential.

S/PV. 8978

The United Kingdom supports all efforts to
improve cross-line access and early-recovery efforts.
However, to end the conflict and bring lasting peace
to Syria, a United-Nations led political process, as set
out in resolution 2254 (2015), remains essential. The
United Kingdom welcomes Special Envoy Pedersen’s
continued efforts and the intention to reconvene the
Constitutional Committee talks in Geneva in the
second half of March. The Syrian regime must engage
meaningfully with that process. We urge all parties,
including the regime’s backers, to redouble their efforts
to find a way forward.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I, too, thank Special Envoy
Pedersen and Assistant Secretary-General Msuya for
their briefings.
Let me begin today by underlining Norway’s
continued commitment to an inclusive Syrian-owned
and Syrian-led political solution. That, alongside
addressing the humanitarian, economic and security
situation on the ground, is essential to bringing the
more than decade-long suffering of the Syrian people
to an end. In that regard, advancing the implementation
of resolution 2254 (2015), a consensus-based resolution
adopted by the Council, is paramount. The resolution
must be implemented by the Syrian parties themselves,
as well as by all of us in the international community.
Norway maintains its steadfast support to Special
Envoy Pedersen in his efforts to further the stepfor-step approach as a way to seek progress on the
political track and in the work of the Constitutional
Committee. We welcome the fact that invitations have
been sent out for the seventh session of the small body
of the Constitutional Committee, to be held at the end
of March. The parties should use that opportunity to
bring the constitutional process forward. Progress in
the constitutional process will be welcomed not only by
the Council, but by the whole international community.
We urge all actors involved in the Syrian conflict
to contribute constructively and in good faith. There
are many issues of common interest in resolution 2254
(2015) that will benefit not only the people of Syria
but also neighbouring countries, and be supported
by the broader international community. The release
of detainees and information about missing family
members are crucial and will affect so many Syrians.
That is also the case for the safe, voluntary and dignified
return of refugees, combating terrorism and inclusive
political reform.

22-2691913/19

S/PV.8978

The situation in the Middle East

Let me also emphasize the important work and
role of the Syrian Women’s Advisory Board, which
convened in Norway in January. Its members conveyed
a clear message to the international community about
the need for an inclusive political solution. Their role is
crucial, as is the role of the Syrian Civil Society Support
Room in the effort to take the political process forward.
Although the front lines in Syria have been quite
stable for some time, warfare, shelling and air strikes
continue to take place, and civilians are being killed or
injured as a result. We need a political solution, but it
is also clear that a nationwide ceasefire is needed — a
crucial part of resolution 2254 (2015).
Let me also stress the importance of continuing the
fight against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
in Syria. The need for that has been shown by the most
recent developments, as the terrorist group continues to
use Syria as an operating base. The security situation
remains fragile and the current political stalemate
is untenable. It is time for a new dynamic of genuine
progress for the sake of the Syrian people, their
neighbours and the larger international community.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.
We thank Geir Pedersen for his briefing and
welcome the Assistant Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and new Deputy Emergency
Relief Coordinator in the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Joyce Msuya, to today’s
meeting. We thank her for her briefing.
We believe that constructive intra-Syrian dialogue
must be established, first and foremost, within the
framework of the Constitutional Committee. We are
convinced that there is no alternative to promoting
Syrian-owned and Syrian-led settlement process,
under United Nations mediation, without any external
interference and artificially imposed deadlines. In
that regard, we welcome Special Envoy Pedersen’s
plans to convene the seventh round of meetings of
the Constitutional Committee’s editorial board in
Switzerland next month. We hope that its work will
focus primarily on dialogue among the Syrian parties
in order to encourage them to agree on constitutional
reform, without being distracted by minor issues.
Therefore, we will continue our engagement with
the Syrians, the Special Envoy and other stakeholders.
14/19

25/02/2022

To that end, this week in Moscow Foreign Minister
Sergey Lavrov met with his Syrian counterpart,
Minister Fayssal Mekdad, and Special Envoy Pedersen.
The main focus of the meeting was a comprehensive
resolution on Syria, based on resolution 2254 (2015).
We hope that Mr. Pedersen will focus on the work
of the Constitutional Committee and not be distracted
by initiatives that do not enjoy the support of the Syrian
Government or the Syrian opposition. Those initiatives
should not replace intra-Syrian consultations, which
the Special Envoy is mandated to promote. The work
of the Committee should be seamless, without artificial
interruptions. It should hold regular sessions, in similar
fashion to the editorial board. Frequently postponing
meetings in order to fine-tune and perfect the rules of
procedure is clearly not helping advance the process.
Political efforts are now required in the light of the
fact that the situation in some regions not controlled
by Damascus remains tense. The large-scale terrorist
attack on the Al-Sinaa prison in Al-Hasakah was a
clear confirmation of the dangerous destabilization.
The attack, which was followed by an operation to
neutralize the terrorists and clear the area, with the
help of aviation and armoured vehicles, led to dozens
of peaceful Syrians being killed or injured. More than
45,000 people were forced to leave their homes. That
confirms the need for an uncompromising fight against
terrorism in Syria, and not the need to indulge them.
We note that, to date, nearly all internally displaced
persons have returned home. However, more than 700
children remain in detention facilities, which is cause
for concern. Let me highlight the efforts of Russia’s
Commissioner for Children’s Rights. On 24 February,
14 children, age three to 15, were returned to Russia
from Syria. Five of them had stayed at orphanages
in Damascus and the other nine had been evacuated
from refugee camps in the area beyond the Euphrates.
We will continue searching for Russian children in
Syrian refugee camps and work to repatriate them.
Such efforts began in 2017 on the instructions of the
President of Russia. Since December 2018, 364 Russian
children have been repatriated from conflict zones in
the Middle East. Documents have been prepared for the
repatriation of an additional 128 children.
The humanitarian situation in Syria remains
complex. Some 14 million Syrians are in need of
assistance. Socioeconomic challenges, exacerbated
by suffocating unilateral sanctions, are becoming
22-26919

25/02/2022

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8978

increasingly complex. Progress in implementing
resolution 2585 (2021), which was adopted to increase
comprehensive humanitarian assistance to Syria,
remains limited. Over the past six months, only two
domestic convoys were dispatched to Idlib. There is
still no access to areas of Turkish operations. Western
donors continue to politicize the funding of early
recovery projects.

humanitarian situation, meet basic needs and provide
services, rebuild what terrorism has destroyed, return
Syria to a path of sustainable development and at the
same time guarantee the safe, voluntary and dignified
return of Syrian refugees to their homes and normal
lives, our efforts have met with major obstacles that
limit our ability to achieve our desired goals. In that
regard, I would like to highlight some of those obstacles.

Resolution 2585 (2021) was renewed for another
six months following the publication of the SecretaryGeneral’s special report (S/2021/1030). We expect that
the United Nations and other members of the global
community will galvanize efforts to ensure the full
and good faith implementation of the resolution. Our
discussions, as well as the decision to be made in July
this year, will largely depend on whether or not that
approach is duly upheld and brings about tangible
results. Attempts to cherry-pick the most attractive
elements of the document, such as prioritizing crossborder humanitarian assistance, and ignore early
recovery projects and the task of extending humanitarian
access over the contact line, are unacceptable.
They do not help solve Syria’s humanitarian and
socioeconomic problems.

First, until recently, Syria was self-sufficient in
much agricultural production but has now found itself
forced to import huge amounts of the same products.
For instance, our annual wheat production before the
war was estimated at 2.5 million tons. Today we have
to import 1.5 million tons of wheat annually to provide
Syrians with bread. That is because the United States
forces illegally present in north-eastern Syria and the
separatist militias that it backs have taken control of
Syrian wheat production there and are looting it.

I shall now resume my functions as the President
of the Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): As this is the first time I have taken the floor
in the Security Council this month, I would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your presidency
of the Council for February, and to commend your
able leadership. We value your country’s positions in
upholding the principles of international law and the
Charter of the United Nations.
We listened to the briefing by the Assistant
Secretary-General, Ms. Msuya, who highlighted some
aspects related to the suffering of the Syrian people,
which continues within and outside the country as
a result of wrongful policies and grave violations
of international law and the Charter, including the
imposition of unilateral coercive measures by the
Governments of certain Western countries that have
prioritized their interests and agendas over the lives and
welfare of Syrians as well as the security and stability
of Syria and the region. At a time when the Syrian
Government is making every effort to improve the

Secondly, the dire shortage of water for agricultural
irrigation is due to the fact that the Turkish regime is
violating our bilateral agreements regulating the use of
water from the Euphrates, in addition to using water as
a weapon against civilians and depriving more than a
million Syrian citizens of access to drinking water.
Thirdly, before the crisis, Syria consistently
produced 9,500 megawatts of electricity, whereas its
current production is now less than 2,600 megawatts.
This drop in electricity generation is due partly to the
fact that the United States occupying forces and their
agents have been looting oil and gas from our pipelines
and partly to the crimes committed by terrorist
organizations and the illegitimate international
coalition’s acts of aggression, which have significantly
damaged our power plants and our transmission and
distribution networks, resulting in the decommissioning
of 50 per cent of our electricity system and thereby
depriving Syrians of heating during this harsh winter.
Fourthly, with regard to health care, medical
services and the Syrian pharmaceuticals industry — all
of which were on the cutting edge before the war and
had become self-sufficient in terms of most medicines,
in addition to exporting our products to dozens of
countries — thanks to the embargo, today that important
sector is experiencing acute shortages, which have
been exacerbated by the coronavirus disease pandemic
and have deprived the Syrians of their right to access
critical health care and medicines.

22-2691915/19

S/PV.8978

The situation in the Middle East

Fifthly, the unilateral coercive measures
illegitimately imposed on the Syrian people by the
United States and the European Union have affected
various sectors, including banking, energy, and
communications, as well as land, air and maritime
transportation. In the past few years they have been
ramped up to inhumane and unprecedented levels,
exacerbating the suffering of the Syrian people and the
decline of Syria’s sustainable development indicators
since 2011, when we had achieved substantial progress,
with economic growth at 9 per cent. The consequences
of the illegitimate measures imposed on Syria have also
affected the work of the United Nations organizations
and other international organizations operating in
Syria. While the cost of the food basket provided by the
World Food Programme to those in need has increased
fivefold, its nutritional value has fallen by more than
50 per cent. Exchange rates, inflation and purchasing
power have also worsened. It is worth noting that some
Western countries that have deliberately worked to
damage the Syrian economy have been complaining
about fluctuations in the exchange rate of our
national currency.
In the entire eight months since the Security
Council adopted resolution 2585 (2021), Syria has
cooperated diligently in facilitating the United Nations
in its implementation of assistance, especially with
regard to promoting humanitarian cross-line access and
early-recovery projects. We have waited for too long,
and our patience is exceeded only by our frustration.
We are at the end of February, and the mandate of the
resolution will end in only four months. Unfortunately,
we have not witnessed any notable progress in the
implementation of the early-recovery projects, owing
to a lack of political will on the part of certain
Western countries with regard to implementing the
substance of resolution 2585 (2021), which the Council
adopted unanimously. Nor have we seen any desired
improvement in cross-line activities. While 16 convoys,
including 1,261 trucks, were sent across the border in
December 2021 and January of this year alone, in the
past eight months the United Nations has been able to
send only two convoys, with 28 trucks, across the lines
in the north-western areas of the country. That is owing
to the fact that the Turkish regime and its terrorist
organizations, with their hostile agendas, have been
creating obstacles to access and distribution for that
humanitarian assistance. It is now clear that the Turkish
Government, which sponsors and is the chief protector
of the Al-Nusra Front and other terrorist entities
16/19

25/02/2022

controlling Idlib and its neighbourhoods, is hindering
the implementation of the cross-border mechanism in
order to maintain its interests and those of its affiliates
derived from the cross-border mechanism.
With regard to the political situation, Special Envoy
Pedersen met with Syria’s Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Expatriates and the co-Chair of the Constitutional
Committee for talks in Damascus last week. The
Special Envoy took note of the important achievements
that are being made with regard to reconciliation and
compromises that happened and continue to happen in
various areas of Syria, including Dar’a, Deir-ez-Zor,
Hasakah and liberated areas in Raqqa governorate.
That has enabled a great number of Syrians to return to
their normal livelihoods. It was also noted that general
amnesty decrees were issued by the President of the
Republic, and thousands of Syrians benefited from
them. Those are extremely important measures that
should be highlighted instead of being ignored.
The Syrian Arab Republic reiterates its commitment
to a political solution that is based on a Syrian
national dialogue and is Syrian-owned and Syrian-led,
while being fully committed to Syrian sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity.
We also reiterate the importance of implementing the
provisions that organize the work of the Constitutional
Committee, without exceeding them under any pretext.
Syria emphasizes that the work of the Constitutional
Committee is the exclusive purview of the Syrians
and that no foreign party has the right to interfere
in it, obstruct it, impose timelines or preconceive its
outcome. We look forward to the seventh round of the
Constitutional Committee on 21 March.
In conclusion, Syria stresses the need to
realistically improve the humanitarian situation in
Syria and restore security and stability by changing the
political approach and undertaking rational talks based
principally on meeting the interests of the Syrian people
and ending the foreign occupation of Syrian territories
by Turkey, the United States and Israel, while ceasing
their continuous hostilities against Syrian sovereignty
and their sponsorship of terrorist organizations and
separatist militias.
In addition, that requires closing all illegitimate
camps on Syrian territories, deporting foreign
terrorists and their families from Syria and sending
them back to their countries of origin. It also requires
ending dangerous schemes to recycle terrorists, the
22-26919

25/02/2022

The situation in the Middle East

immediate, unconditional lifting of the economic
embargo imposed by the United States and Europe on
Syria, and supporting the efforts of the Syrian State to
achieve sustainable development in order to improve
the humanitarian situation and provide basic services.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): I thank Special Envoy
Pedersen and Assistant Secretary-General Msuya for
their briefings.
As we have just heard, the humanitarian situation
in Syria is growing worse day by day; 14.6 million
people are currently in need of humanitarian assistance.
That indicates a shocking increase of 1.2 million from
last year. Harsh winter circumstances have brought
the living conditions of displaced persons, especially
in Edlib, to the brink of destitution. The international
community has to do more to ensure that humanitarian
aid continues to increase without interruption.
There is simply no alternative to the United Nations
cross-border humanitarian operation in addressing
those acute needs. This is a fact, and empty promises
will not change it. For its part, Turkey will also
continue to facilitate cross-line convoys. However, it is
hypocritical, if not malicious, to call for more crossline access for the local populations and, at the same
time, carry out attacks against the very same people.
I wish to ask a very clear question: What is the use
of cross-line operations if the regime and its backers
bomb civilians and intentionally target water and
fuel facilities? The regime and its backers must stop
killing civilians so that the cross-line mechanism can
deliver humanitarian aid. It must also be underlined
that humanitarian aid has become a part of the regime’s
shameless corruption. The regime diverts international
humanitarian aid channelled to the country for its own
purposes. That is unacceptable.
The Syrian people’s last resort is the generosity of
international donors. Yet the regime takes away even
that. It is shameful. We expect the United Nations to
answer our earlier queries on the issue. We trust that
the donors are closely monitoring the situation. Due
attention should be paid to the issue in the subsequent
reporting period.
Water and electricity problems caused by the regime
and the Kurdistan Workers’ Party/People’s Protection
Units (PKK/YPG) in the Al-Bab and Rasulayn-Tel

S/PV. 8978

Abyad region should not be ignored. We cannot allow
the propaganda of those groups to find their way into
the reports.
Delays in the political process prolong the suffering
of the Syrian people. We support and appreciate the
efforts of Special Envoy Pedersen, which we hope will
lead to the success of the Constitutional Committee.
However, the regime has been unwilling to seriously
engage in United Nations-led peace talks in Geneva.
It is clear that it intends to stall the process until it
eliminates the opposition on the ground.
The next round of the Constitutional Committee
must produce tangible results. For that to happen, its
backers must exert pressure on the regime. Otherwise,
the regime will continue to abuse the platform and
further stall the political process.
Turkey will consistently support efforts to continue
de-escalation on the ground in order to create an
environment in which the political solution will last. We
will also continue to support United Nations initiatives
backing a political solution. It is critical that those
consultations align with the international community’s
acquis on the Syrian conflict, as well as with the letter
and spirit of resolution 2254 (2015).
We wish call on those countries that intend to
normalize their relations with the regime. They should
not confuse normalization with legitimizing a criminal
regime. We need to normalize the lives of the millions
of Syrians who have been suffering at the hands of the
regime for more than a decade. We need to normalize the
implementation of the universal human rights that the
people of Syria deserve to enjoy. We need to normalize
Syria to become a democratic, secular, prosperous and
secure country.
Da’esh remains a common threat to humankind,
the complete eradication of which requires unified,
coordinated strategies. Genuine intelligence-sharing is
essential to the fight against Da’esh. The repatriation
of foreign terrorist fighters is another necessary step
in that fight.
Thirdly, we must address the root causes of the
conflict. Da’esh and other terrorist organizations found
fertile ground in Syria because the regime not only
failed to protect its own people, but began attacking
them. Until a political solution is found to the crisis in
Syria, terrorist organizations like Da’esh will continue
to recruit people.

22-2691917/19

S/PV.8978

The situation in the Middle East

Some actors in the region have misguidedly tied
their hopes of eradicating Da’esh to another terrorist
organization — the PKK/YPG. Make no mistake, the
PKK/YPG’s goal is not to end the threat of Da’esh in
Syria, but rather to maintain the support it receives
from certain members of the international community
by keeping Da’esh on the agenda. The real fight
against Da’esh can be waged only with the support
of legitimate actors. Those who support the PKK/
YPG must immediately break their ties with that
illegitimate organization.
I also would like to recall that we have yet to
receive a response to our request for a United Nations
investigation into the attack on Al-Shifa hospital on
12 June 2021.
For 10 years, the Syrian people have fled the horrors
of an unjust war that the regime has perpetrated against
its people. Yet what most of those women, children and
elderly and disabled people have found is purgatory.
It is a cruel world in which we live where such a
treacherous journey has led them to a tent that is no
match for snow, the cruelties of the regime, Da’esh, the
PKK/YPG, barrel bombs or air strikes. A tent cannot
allow for social distancing in the coronavirus disease
era, and a damaged tent even less so. Enough is enough.
In the light of the hallucinatory statement made by
the representative of the criminal Syrian regime, I have
to repeat that I do not consider him to be my legitimate
counterpart. His presence here is an affront to the
millions of Syrians who have suffered countless crimes
at the hands of his regime. I will therefore not dignify
his delusional accusations with a response.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran):
I would like to thank Mr. Pedersen and Ms. Msuya for
their briefings.
The Syrian people continue to face numerous
challenges, and meeting them requires hard work in
a multitude of sectors. Nothing is more important or
urgent than ending the unilateral coercive measures
that have harmed the Syrian people to a point where
they have been deprived of their basic human rights,
including the right to medicine, health care, food, water,
electricity and communications. Those illegal measures
18/19

25/02/2022

have a negative impact on the delivery of life-saving
humanitarian supplies Where they are needed most.
Given the dire humanitarian situation in Syria,
where major portions of civilian infrastructure have
been destroyed, the Security Council must work
diligently to ensure that resolution 2585 (2021) is
fully implemented in a balanced and effective manner,
especially in terms of early-recovery projects and the
lifting of unilateral sanctions. We fully support the
Secretary-General’s call for further expanding earlyrecovery operations in Syria, and agree that such
initiatives are crucial to the sustained success of the
humanitarian response in the country. It is particularly
disheartening that due to a lack of collaboration by
other parties, progress on cross-line operations in
areas not controlled by the Government has been far
less than envisaged. We condemn the robbery of the
Syrian people’s natural resources, particularly oil and
agricultural products, in areas controlled by foreign
forces, and recognize the Government’s legitimate
right to combat such criminal acts.
More importantly, Syria’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity continue to be significantly
violated by the unlawful presence of foreign forces,
including those of the United States. We strongly
condemn the Israeli regime’s repeated violations of
Syria’s sovereignty and territorial integrity. Israel’s
recent attacks in Syria, which targeted civilians and
civilian infrastructure, constitute flagrant violations of
international humanitarian law. We call on the Security
Council to hold that regime accountable for those acts
of aggression and other malign activities, as well as its
open threats to use force against other countries in the
region, jeopardizing regional peace and security.
The Astana format will continue its efforts to
bring the crisis to an end and alleviate the sufferings
of the Syrian people. In support of those efforts, the
Foreign Ministers of the Astana guarantors will meet
on 10 March. We commend Mr. Pedersen’s recent visit
to Damascus and support his ongoing efforts to hold
the Constitutional Committee’s next meeting, which
is scheduled for 21 March. We underscore once more
that the Committee must work in strict conformity with
its terms of reference and rules of procedure, without
any outside influence or pressure or any artificial
deadlines. It must be a truly Syrian-led and Syrianowned endeavour, with the role of the United Nations
limited to facilitating that process.
22-26919

25/02/2022

The situation in the Middle East

The free movement of terrorist groups, including the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham, in Syria’s territory,
where foreign forces are illegally present, as well as
their transfer to other countries, endanger regional
and international peace and security. The fight against
terrorism cannot be used as an excuse to undermine
Syria’s sovereignty and territorial integrity. The illegal
presence of foreign forces in parts of Syria, which has
provided favourable conditions for terrorist activities in
Syria, must end immediately. Iran continues to support
Syria’s efforts to tackle terrorist threats and preserve its
unity and territorial integrity.
The President (spoke in Russian): The
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic has asked to
make a further statement. I give him the floor.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): To be honest, I did not ask for the floor to
respond to the lies and allegations put forward by the
representative of the Turkish regime but to draw the
attention of Council members to his fake expressions of
concern about the presence of terrorist organizations on
Syrian territory. The leader of the terrorist organization

S/PV. 8978

Da’esh, Abu Ibrahim Al-Hashimi Al-Qurashi, was
killed by United States forces. The place where he was
killed was only a few metres from where the Turkish
occupying forces are located in Idlib, in north-western
Syria. Al-Qurashi always stayed close to the location of
the Turkish forces. And Abu Mohammad Al-Jawlani,
the leader of the Al-Nusra Front, is able to move around
freely in Idlib under the watch and protection of the
Turkish forces present illegally in that area.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic for
his statement.
I now give the floor to the representative of Turkey,
who has asked to make a further statement.
Mrs.
Özgür
(Turkey):
My
Permanent
Representative has just said what needed to be said. We
are not going to respond to that shameless individual.
The President (spoke in Russian): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

22-2691919/19
