A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/184
6 March 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 100 (b)

RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/49/610/Add.2)]

49/184. United Nations Decade for Human Rights Education

The General Assembly,
Guided by the fundamental and universal principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1/
Reaffirming article 26 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, according to which "education
shall be directed to the full development of the human personality and to the strengthening of respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms",
Recalling the provisions of other international human rights instruments, such as those of article 13 of
the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights 2/ and article 28 of the Convention on the
Rights of the Child, 3/ that reflect the aims of the aforementioned article,

1/

Resolution 217 A (III).

2/

See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

3/

Resolution 44/25, annex.

95-77083

/...

A/RES/49/184
Page 2

Taking into account Commission on Human Rights resolution 1993/56 of 9 March 1993, 4/ in which
the Commission recommended that knowledge of human rights, both in its theoretical dimension and in its
practical application, should be established as a priority in education policies,
Considering Commission on Human Rights resolution 1994/51 of 4 March 1994, 5/ in which the
Commission encouraged the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to include among his specific
objectives a plan of action for the United Nations decade for human rights education and invited the SecretaryGeneral to submit to the General Assembly at its forty-ninth session, through the Economic and Social Council, a
plan of action for a decade for human rights education,
Convinced that human rights education should involve more than the provision of information and
should constitute a comprehensive life-long process by which people at all levels in development and in all strata
of society learn respect for the dignity of others and the means and methods of ensuring that respect in all
societies,
Convinced also that human rights education contributes to a concept of development consistent with the
dignity of women and men of all ages that takes into account the diverse segments of society such as children,
indigenous peoples, minorities and disabled persons,
Taking into account the efforts to promote human rights education made by educators and
non-governmental organizations in all parts of the world, as well as by intergovernmental organizations,
including the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the International Labour
Organization and the United Nations Children’s Fund,
Convinced that each woman, man and child, to realize their full human potential, must be made aware
of all their human rights - civil, cultural, economic, political and social,
Believing that human rights education constitutes an important vehicle for the elimination of genderbased discrimination and ensuring equal opportunities through the promotion and protection of the human rights
of women,
Considering the World Plan of Action on Education for Human Rights and Democracy, 6/ adopted by
the International Congress on Education for Human Rights and Democracy convened by the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization at Montreal from 8 to 11 March 1993, according to which
education for human rights and democracy is itself a human right and a prerequisite for the realization of human
rights, democracy and social justice,

4/ See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1993, Supplement No. 3 (E/1993/23), chap.
II, sect. A.
5/

Ibid., 1994, Supplement No. 4 and corrigendum (E/1994/24 and Corr.1), chap. II, sect. A.

6/

See A/CONF.157/PC/42/Add.6.
/...

A/RES/49/184
Page 3

Recalling that it is the responsibility of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to
coordinate relevant United Nations education and public information programmes in the field of human
rights, 7/
Taking note of the report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, 8/ in
paragraph 94 of which he declared that human rights education is essential for the encouragement of harmonious
inter-community relations, for mutual tolerance and understanding and finally for peace,
Aware of the experience in human rights education of United Nations peace-building operations,
including the United Nations Observer Mission in El Salvador and the United Nations Transitional Authority in
Cambodia,
Bearing in mind the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action, adopted by the World Conference
on Human Rights on 25 June 1993, 9/ in particular section II, paragraphs 78 to 82 thereof,
1.
Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General 10/ on human rights
education, submitted in accordance with the request contained in General Assembly resolution 48/127 of 20
December 1993;
2.
Proclaims the ten-year period beginning on 1 January 1995 the United Nations Decade for
Human Rights Education;
3.
Welcomes the Plan of Action for the United Nations Decade for Human Rights Education,
1995-2005, as contained in the report of the Secretary-General, 11/ and invites Governments to submit
comments, with a view to supplementing the Plan of Action;
4.
Invites the Secretary-General to submit proposals, taking into account the views expressed by
Governments, for the purpose indicated in paragraph 3;
5.
Appeals to all Governments to contribute to the implementation of the Plan of Action and to
step up their efforts to eradicate illiteracy and to direct education towards the full development of the human
personality and to the strengthening of respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms;
6.
Urges governmental and non-governmental educational agencies to intensify their efforts to
establish and implement programmes of human rights education, as recommended in the Plan of Action, in
particular by preparing and implementing national plans for human rights education;

7/

See resolution 48/141, para. 4 (e).

8/

A/49/36.

9/

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.

10/ A/49/261-E/1994/110 and Add.1.
11/ A/49/261-E/1994/110/Add.1, annex.
/...

A/RES/49/184
Page 4

7.
Requests the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to coordinate the
implementation of the Plan of Action;
8.
Requests the Centre for Human Rights of the Secretariat and the Commission on Human
Rights, in cooperation with Member States, human rights treaty-monitoring bodies, other appropriate bodies and
competent non-governmental organizations, to support efforts of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights to coordinate the Plan of Action;
9.
Requests the Secretary-General to consider establishing a voluntary fund for human rights
education, with special provision for the support of the human rights education activities of non-governmental
organizations, to be administered by the Centre for Human Rights;
10.
Invites the specialized agencies and United Nations programmes to contribute, within their
respective spheres of competence, to the implementation of the Plan of Action;
11.
Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the attention of all members of
the international community and to intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations concerned with human
rights and education;
12.
Calls upon international, regional and national non-governmental organizations, in particular
those concerned with women, labour, development and the environment, as well as all other social justice groups,
human rights advocates, educators, religious organizations and the media, to increase their involvement in formal
and non-formal education in human rights and to cooperate with the Centre for Human Rights in implementing
the United Nations Decade for Human Rights Education;
13.
Requests the existing human rights monitoring bodies to place emphasis on the implementation
by Member States of their international obligation to promote human rights education;
14.
questions".

Decides to consider this matter at its fiftieth session under the item entitled "Human rights

94th plenary meeting
23 December 1994
