24

General Assembly-Twenty-first Session

2148 (XXI). International Tourist Year
The General Assembly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1108 (XL) of 7 March 1966, recommending that the
year 1967 be designated as International Tourist
Year,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution 1130 (XLI) of 26 July 1966,
Recalling further the resolution of the United Nations Conference on International Travel and Tourism
entitled "Importance of tourism'',1 which stated, inter
alia, that tourism is a basic and most desirable human
activity deserving the praise and encouragement of all
peoples and all Governments,
Taking into account the recommendations contained
in annex A.IV.24 of the Final Act of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, 2 which
recognizes that international tourism, as an important
invisible export, can and does make a vital contribution to the economic growth of developing countries,
Bearing in mind the need for international co-operation in promoting tourism in view of its useful role in
the educational, cultural, economic and social fields,
Recognizing the importance of international tourism,
and particularly of the designation of an International
Tourist Year, in fostering better understanding among
peoples everywhere, in leading to a greater awareness
of the rich heritage of various civilizations and in
bringing about a better appreciation of the inherent
values of different cultures, thereby contributing to
the strengthening of peace in the world,
Considering that the designation of an International
Tourist Year will encourage the intensification of national and international co-operative efforts, by both
Governments and interested organizations, for the promotion of tourism, in particular to developing countries,
Taking note with interest of the report of the International Union of Official Travel Organizations8 on
the preparations for the International Tourist Year
and the proposals contained therein to encourage international tourism, in particular to developing countries,
1. Designates 1967 as International Tourist Year ;
2. Invites the States Members of the United Nations
or members of the specialized agencies or of the International Atomic Energy Agency, and the international,
inter-governmental and non-governmental organizations
concerned, to exert all possible efforts for the success
of the International Tourist Year, with special emphasis on promoting tourism to developing countries ;
3. Further invites those States and organizations to
take into account, as appropriate, in their plans and programmes for the International Tourist Year, the proposals contained in the above-mentioned report of the
International Union of Official Travel Organizations;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to provide, within
the limits of existing resources and available funds, the
necessary assistance for the successful organization of
the International Tourist Year, including the widespread dissemination of information on its objectives;
1 See Recommendations on International Travel and Tourism
(United Nations publication, Sales No.: 64.I.6), p. 17.
2 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, vol. I, Final Act and Report (United Nations
publication, Sales No.: 64.Il.B.ll), p. 55.
8 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, Fortyfirst Session, Annexes, agenda item 20, document E/4218.

5. Further requests the Secretary-General to prepare, in co-operation with the International Union of
Official Travel Organizations, and to submit to the
Economic and Social Council, if possible in 1968, a report embodying:
(a) A description of the programmes and activities
undertaken by Governments and interested organizations during the International Tourist Year, with specific mention of exceptional temporary measures taken
by individual Governments ;
( b) An assessment of the results achieved in realizing the aims and objectives set for the International
Tourist Year, particularly in encouraging tourism to
developing countries.
1458th plenary meeting,
4 November 1966.

2152 (XXI). United Nations Industrial Development Organization
The General Assembly,
Recognizing that the industrialization of developing
countries is essential for their economic and social development and for the expansion and diversification of
their trade,
Conscious of the fact that the acceleration of industrial development, especially in the developing countries, depends largely on the broadest international
co-operation,
Considering the widespread desire for a comprehensive organization capable of intensifying, co-ordinating
and expediting the efforts of the United Nations system
in the field of industrial development,
Bearing in mind the need for special measures designed to give additional impetus to the industrialization of the less advanced of the developing countries,
Recalling its resolution 2089 (XX) of 20 December
1965, by which it established within the United Nations an autonomous organization for the promotion
of industrial development,
Having considered the report of the Ad Hoe Committee on the United Nations Organization for Industrial Development, 4

I
Decides that the United Nations Industrial Development Organization (hereinafter referred to as the Organization), established as an organ of the General
Assembly, shall function as an autonomous organization within the United Nations in accordance with the
provisions set forth in section II below ;

II
PURPOSE

1. The purpose of the Organization shall be to promote industrial development, in accordance with Article
1, paragraph 3, and Articles SS and 56 of the Charter
of the United Nations, and by encouraging the mobilization of national and international resources to assist in,
promote and accelerate the industrialization of the developing countries, with particular emphasis on the
manufacturing sector.
4 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-first
Session, Annexes, agenda item 41, document A/6229.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee
FUNCTIONS

2. In the fulfilment of its purpose, the Organization
shall undertake :
(a) Operational activities, including in particular:
( i) Encouragement and promotion of and making
of recommendations for national, regional and
international action to achieve more rapid industrialization of developing countries ;
(ii) Contribution to the most effective application
in the developing countries of modern industrial methods of production, programming
and planning, taking into account the experience of States with different social and economic systems;
(iii) Building and strengthening of institutions and
administration in the developing countries in
the matter of industrial technology, production, programming and planning;
(iv) Dissemination of information on technological
innovations originating in various countries
and, for the developing countries, assistance
in the implementation of practical measures for
the application of such information, the adaptation of existing technology and the development of new technology especially suited to
the particular physical, social and economic
conditions of developing countries through the
establishment and improvement, inter alia, of
technological research centres in these countries;
( v) Assistance, at the request of Governments of
developing countries, in the formulation of
industrial development programmes and in
the preparation of specific industrial projects,
inp.uding, as necessary, technical and economic feasibility studies ;
( vi) Co-operation with the regional economic commissions and the United Nations Economic
and Social Office in Beirut in assisting the
regional planning of industrial development
of developing countries within the framework
of regional and sub-regional economic groupings among those countries, where such groupings exist;
(vii) Making recommendations, in connexion with
the objectives stated under (vi) above, for
special measures for adapting and co-ordinating
the measures adopted so that, in particular,
the less advanced of the developing countries
will receive a strong impetus to their growth;
(viii) Offering advice and guidance, in close cooperation with the appropriate bodies of the
United Nations, the specialized agencies and
the International Atomic Energy Agency, on
problems relating to the exploitation and efficient use of natural resources, industrial raw
materials, by-products and new products of
developing countries, with a view to increasing
their industrial productivity and contributing
to the diversification of their economies ;
(ix) Assistance to the developing countries in the
training of technical and other appropriate
categories of personnel needed for their accelerated industrial development, in co-operation with the specializ~ agencies concerned,
in conformity with the principles of collaboration and co-ordination set forth in paragraphs
33 and 34 below;

25

(x) Proposing, in co-operation with the international bodies or inter-governmental regional
bodies concerned with industrial property,
measures for the improvement of the international system of industrial property, with a
view to accelerating the transfer of technical
know-how to developing countries and to
strengthening the role of patents consistent
with national interests as an incentive to industrial innovations ;
( xi) Assistance, at the request of Governments of
developing countries, in obtaining external
financing for specific industrial projects, by
giving guidance in the preparation of requests,
by providing information on the terms .and
conditions of the various financing agencies
and by advising the financing agencies on the
technical and economic soundness of the projects submitted for financing;
( b) Action-oriented studies and research programmes
designed especially to facilitate the activities outlined
in sub-paragraph (a) above, including in particular the
compilation, analysis, publication and dissemination of
information concerning various aspects of the process
of industrialization, such as industrial technology, investment, financing, production, management techniques, programming and planning.
INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT BOARD

Composition
3. The Industrial Development Board (hereinafter
referred to as the Board) , established as the principal
organ of the Organization, shall consist of forty-five
members, elected by the General Assembly from among
States Members of the United Nations and members of
the specialized agencies and of the International Atomic
Energy Agency for a term of three years, provided,
however, that of the members elected at the first election the terms of fifteen members shall expire at the
end of one year and the terms of fifteen other members
at the end of two years.
4. In electing the members of the Board, the General
Assembly shall have due regard to the principle of
equitable geographical representation and shall accordingly observe the following distribution of seats :
(a) Eighteen from the States listed in part A of the
annex to the present resolution ;
( b) Fifteen from the States listed in part B of the
annex;
( c) Seven from the States listed in part C of the
annex;
( d) Five from the States listed in part D of the
annex.
The lists of States contained in the annex shall be reviewed by the Board in the light of changes in the membership of the United Nations or of the specialized
agencies or of the International Atomic Energy Agency.
5. Retiring members shall be eligible for immediate
re-election.
6. Each member of the Board shall have one representative with such alternates and advisers as may be
required.
Functions and powers
7. The principal functions and powers of the Board
shall be:

General Assembly-Twenty-first Session

26

(a) To formulate principles and policies to achieve
the purpose of the Organization;
( b) To make proposals for putting those principles
and policies into effect and to take such other steps
within its competence as may be conducive to this end;
(c) To initiate such other action as may be necessary and appropriate to the fulfilment of the purpose of
the Organization ;
( d) To consider and approve the programme of activities of the Organization;
(e) To review and facilitate the co-ordination of activities within the United Nations system in the field of
industrial development ;
{f) To exercise control over the effective utilization
of resources available to the Organization;
(g) To keep the activities of the Organization under
review and to request its Executive Director to prepare
such reports, studies and other documents as it may
deem appropriate;
(h) To report annually to the General Assembly
through the Economic and Social Council; the Council
may transmit to the Organization and to the General
Assembly such comments on the report as it may deem
necessary.
Voting
8. Each member of the Board shall have one vote.
9. Decisions of the Board shall be taken by a simple majority of the members present and voting.
Procedures
10. The Board shall adopt its own rules of pro-

cedure.
11. The Board shall meet as required in accordance
with its rules. It shall normally hold one regular session
a year.
12. The Board shall elect its President, three VicePresidents and a Rapporteur to hold office for a period
of one year. In electing its officers, it shall pay due regard to the principle of equitable geographical representation.
13. The Board may invite any State Member of the
United Nations or member of a specialized agency or
of the International Atomic Energy Agency to participate, without a vote, in its deliberations on any matter of particular concern to that State.

Subsidiary organs
14. The Board may establish such subsidiary organs
on a permanent or ad hoe basis as may be necessary for
the effective discharge of its functions, including, as
required, expert groups to consider specific problems
and to make recommendations.
15. The Board shall determine the terms of reference and rules of procedure of its subsidiary organs.
16. In electing the members of its subsidiary organs,
the Board may include any State Member of the United
Nations or member of a specialized agency or of the
International Atomic Energy Agency, whether or not
that State is represented on the Board.
SECRETARIAT

17. The Organization shall have an adequate permanent and full-time secretariat, which will be appointed
in accordance with Article 101 of the Charter of the
United Nations, and which will avail itself of the other

appropriate facilities of the Secretariat of the United
Nations.
18. The secretariat shall be headed by the Executive
Director, who shall be appointed by the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations and whose appointment
shall be confirmed by the General Assembly. He shall
be appointed for four years and shall be eligible for reappointment.
19. The Executive Director shall have over-all responsibility for the administrative and research activities of the Organization. He shall also be responsible for
all operational activities of the Organization, including
activities executed by the Organization as a participating organization of the United Nations Development
Programme. He shall make arrangements for meetings
of the Board and shall prepare such reports, studies or
other documents as may be necessary for the functioning of the Board and its subsidiary organs and shall
perform such other functions as may be entrusted to
him by the Board.
FINANCIAL ARRANGEMENTS

20. The expenditure of the Organization shall be
classified under the following categories:
(a) Expenses for administrative and research activities;
( b) Expenses for operational activities.
21. Expenses for administrative and research activities shall be borne by the regular budget of the
United Nations, which shall include a separate budgetary provision for such expenses.
22. Expenses for operational activities shall be met:
(a) From the voluntary contributions made to the
Organization, in cash or in kind, by Governments of
the States Members of the United Nations, members
of the specialized agencies and of the International
Atomic Energy Agency ;
( b) Through participation in the United Nations
Development Programme on the same basis as other
participating organizations;
( c) By the utilization of the appropriate resources
of the United Nations regular programme of technical
assistance.
23. Voluntary contributions to the Organization for
its operational activities under paragraph 22 (a) above
may be made, at the option of the Governments, either:
(a) Through announcement at a pledging conference to be convened by the Secretary-General of the
United Nations on the recommendation of the Board;
or
( b) In accordance with regulations 7.2 and 7.3 of
the Financial Regulations of the United Nations; or
( c) By both of these methods.
24. The voluntary contributions referred to in paragraph 22 (a) above shall be governed by the Financial
Regulations of the United Nations, except for such
modifications as may be approved by the General Assembly on the recommendation of the Board.
25. Disbursement of the funds referred to in paragraph 22 ( b) above shall be for purposes consistent
with the policies, aims and functions of the Organization, including such policies and programmes as may be
established by the Board, and shall be made by the
Secretary-General of the United Nations in consultation with the Executive Director of the Organization.

27

Re1olntion1 adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

26. All States Members of the United Nations,
members of the specialized agencies and of the International Atomic Energy Agency, and in particular the
industrially advanced countries, when considering contributions for the operational activities of the Organization under paragraph 22 (a) above, are urged to
bear in mind the pressing need for the industrial development of the developing countries.
CO-ORDINATION AND CO-OPERATION WITH UNITED
NATIONS BODIES AND OTHER ORGANIZATIONS

'l:l. The Organization shall play the central role in
and be responsible for reviewing and promoting the coordination of all activities of the United Nations system in the field of industrial development.
28. In its relations with organs and agencies within
the United Nations system, the Board shall act in conformity with the responsibilities of the Economic and
Social Council under the Charter of the United Nations, particularly those of co-ordination, and with the
relationship agreements with the agencies concerned.
29. There shall be a close and continuous working
relationship between the Organization and the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development, in
accordance with the general principle that the former
shall be competent to deal with the general and technical
problems of industrialization, including the establishment and expansion of industries in developing countries, and the latter with the foreign trade aspects of
industrialization, including the expansion and diversification of exports of manufactures and semi-manufactures by developing countries.
30. The Organization shall establish a close and
continuous working relationship with the regional economic commissions and the United Nations Economic
and Social Office in Beirut.
31. The Organization shall be a participating agency
in the United Nations Development Programme and
there shall be close co-operation and co-ordination between the Organization and the United Nations Development Programme. The Executive Director shall
be a member of the Inter-Agency Consultative Board
of the United Nations Development Programme.
32. Adequate arrangements shall be made by the
Secretary-General of the United Nations for close cooperation and co-ordination between the secretariat of
the Organization and the other departments of the
United Nations Secretariat.
33. The Organization shall exercise its functions,
when appropriate, in close co-operation with the specialized agencies concerned and the International
Atomic Energy Agency.
34. The co-u:-dination between the Organization and
the specialized agencies concerned and the International Atomic Energy Agency shall be carried out at
the inter-governmental level by the Board: Adequate
arrangements shall also be made by the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations for such co-ordination
at the secretariat level.
35. The Organization may establish appropriate
working relationships with relevant inter-governmental
organizations.
36. The Organization may, when it considers it appropriate, establish a working relationship with international non-governmental organizations concerned with
the promotion of industrial development.

FUTURE INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS

37. The General Assembly shall review, in the light
of experience, the effectiveness and further evolution of
these institutional arrangements, with a view to deciding upon such changes and improvements as might be
necessary in order to meet fully the growing needs in
the field of industrial development.
TRANSITIONAL ARRANGEMENTS

38. The provisions approved by the General Assembly under the appropriate sections of the budget for
the activities of the Centre for Industrial Development shall be transferred to the Organization.
39. The post of Commissioner for Industrial Development shall be abolished.
40. The Secretary-General of the United Nations,
in establishing the secretariat of the Organization
under paragraph 17 above, shall make arrangements,
in consultation with the Executive Director:
(a) To transfer to the secretariat of the Organization such of the existing staff of the Centre for Industrial Development as is appropriate to the functions of
the Organization;
(b) To transfer to the secretariat of the Organization the staff at present servicing the operational activities of the Centre for Industrial Development for
which the Organization will assume full operational responsibility;
( c) To recruit such additional staff as may be required to fill the existing posts in the establishment for
the purpose of industrial development.
41. After the adoption of the present resolution, the
Economic and Social Council is requested to abolish
the Committee for Industrial Development.
42. The Executive Director shall submit to the
Board at its first session a report on the activities so
far carried out by the United Nations system in the
field of industrial development and proposals for a work
programme for the Organization, by sectors and areas
of activities.
1468th plenary meeting,
17 November 1966.
ANNEX
A.

LIST OF STATES INDICATED IN SECTION II, PARAGRAPH 4 (a)

Afghanistan
Algeria
Botswana
Burma
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Central African Republic
Ceylon
Chad
China
Congo (Brazzaville)
Congo (Democratic Republic
of)
Dahomey
Ethiopia
Gabon
Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
India
Indonesia
Iran

Iraq
Israel
Ivory Coast
Jordan
Kenya
Kuwait
Laos
Lebanon
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Maldive Islands
Mali
Mauritania
Mongolia
Morocco
Nepal
Niger
Nigeria
Pakistan

28

General Assembly-Twenty-first Session

Philippines
Republic of Korea
Republic of Viet-Nam
Rwanda
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Somalia
South Africa
Sudan
Syria

Thailand
Togo
Tunisia
Uganda
United Arab Republic
United Republic of Tanzania
Upper Volta
Western Samoa
Yemen
YugosJayia
Zambia

B. LIST OF STATES INDICATED IN SECTION I!, PARAGRAPH 4 (b)
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Cyprus
Denmark
Federal Republic of Germany
Finland
France
Greece
Holy See
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Liechtenstein
C.

LIST OF STATES INDICATED IN SECTION II, PARAGRAPH

Argentina
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Guatemala
Guyana

D.

Luxembourg
Malta
Monaco
Nether lands
New Zealand
Norway
Portugal
San Marino
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern
Ireland
United States of America
4 (c)

Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Trinidad and Tobago
Uruguay
Venezuela

LIST OF STATES INDICATED IN SECTION II, PARAGRAPH 4 (d)

Albania
Bulgaria
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist
Republic
Czechoslovakia
Hungary

Poland
Romania
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic
Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics

2155 (XXI). Programme of studies on multilateral food aid
The General Assembly,
Recalling the recommendation contained in annex
A.II.6 of the Final Act of the United Nations Conference, on Trade and Development, relating to the World
Food Programme, 5 and Gener;,J Assembly resolution
2096 (XX) of 20 December 1965 calling for a study of
the means and policies which would be required for
large-scale international action of a multilateral character, under the auspices of the United Nations system,
for combating hunger effectively,
Gravely concerned both at the growing food shortage
in the developing countries, which is due to a decline in
Ii See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, vol. I, Final Act and Report (United Nations
publication, Sales No.: 64.II.B.ll), p. 32.

their production of food-stuffs accompanied by a high
population growth rate, and at the reduction of surplus
stocks of such food-stuffs in the exporting countries,
Taking note of the fact that, according to the third
world food survey carried out by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the total
food supplies in the developing countries should increase, between 1957-1959 and 1975, by some 80 per
cent to ensure a reasonable rise in nutrition levels,8
Considering that international food aid should be the
subject of concerted and planned measures designed to
make available to the developing countries a more regular flow of food-stuffs supplementing outside financial
resources, with a view to supporting the efforts of those
countries to finance their development, and more particularly to ensure the growth of their agricultural production, to absorb unemployment and, in the short term,
to make good their food shortage,
Having considered the Secretary-General's report on
the arrangements made with a view to the preparation
of the programme of studies called for in General Assembly resolution 2096 (XX) ,7 and drawing attention
particularly to the need for modification of the draft
outline for an inter-agency study on multilateral food
aid to take into account the discussions in the intergovernmental bodies concerned and in the light of further inter-agency consultations,
Having considered further the extract from the report of the Committee on Commodity Problems of the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations on its fortieth session concerning the international
study of multilateral food aid, 8 containing, inter alia,
suggestions for modifications of the draft outline for the
study prepared in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 2096 (XX),
Considering that although, according to the present
work schedule, the final report called for in General
Assembly resolution 2096 (XX) will not be available
before the beginning of 1968, it is nevertheless necessary
that the first studies prepared should be taken into consideration at the second session of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development and at other
international meetings dealing with the question of foodstuffs,
1. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the Director-General of the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations and in consultation
with the other organizations and programmes concerned,
and taking advantage of the facilities of the United Nations, including in particular the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development :
(a) To bear in mind the second, third and fourth
preambular paragraphs of the present resolution, the
suggestions contained in the report of the Committee on
Commodity Problems of the Food and Ao-riculture Organization of the United Nations on its f~rtieth session
concerning the draft outline for the inter-agency study,
and the suggestions formulated by members of the
Economic and Social Council at its forty-first session;
(?) To submit as soon as possible the study called
form General Assembly resolution 2096 (XX), taking
into account the views of the States Members of the
6 See Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, Freedom from Hun_ger Camf!aign: Basic Study No. 11,
Third World Food Survey (Rome, 1963), p. 9.
7 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council Fortyfirst S~ssion, Annexes, agenda item 16, document E/4210'.
8 Ibid., document E/4236.
