149

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee
ARTICLE

a working language of the General Assembly and
its Main Committees.

19

The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall inform
all States, inter alia:
(a) Of signatures to this Convention, of the deposit of
instruments of ratification or accession in accordance with
articles 14, 15 and 16 and of notifications made under article
18;
( b) Of the date on which this Convention will enter into
force in accordance with article 17.
ARTICLE

"Interpretation
"Rule 52
"Speeches made in any of the six languages of
the General Assembly shall be interpreted into the
other five languages, provided that interpretation
from and into Arabic shall be made only in the
Assembly and in its Main Committees.

20

"Rule 53

The original of this Convention, of which the Chinese,
English, French, Russian anri Spanish texts are equally authentic, shall be deposited with the Secretary-General of the
United Nations, who shall send certified copies thereof to all
States.

"Any representative may make a speech in a
language other than the languages of the General
Assembly. In this case, he shall himself provide for
interpretation into one of the languages of the
General Assembly or of the committee concerned.
Interpretation into the other language., of the General
Assembly or of the committee concerned by the
interpreters of the Secretariat may be based on the
interpretation given in the first such language.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, being duly authorized
thereto by their respective Governments, have signed this
Convention, opened for signature at New York on 14 December 1973.

3191 (XXVIII). Inclusion of Chinese among the
working languages of the General Assembly,
its committees and its subcommittees and in•
clusion of Arabic among the official and the
working languages of the General Assembly
and its Main Committees: amendments to
rules 51 to 59 of the rules of procedure of
the Assembly

"Languages of verbatim and summary records
"Rule 54
"Verbatim or summary records shall be drawn up
as soon as possible in the languages of the General
Assembly, provided that such records shall be drawn
up in Arabic only for the plenary meetings of the
Assembly and for the meetings of the Main Committees.

The General Assembly,
Having regard to its decision to include Chinese
among the working languages of the General Assembly
and to amend accordingly the relevant provisions of
the rules of procedure of the Assembly, 311
Having regard to its decision to include Arabic
among the official and the working languages of the
General Assembly and its Main Committees and to
amend accordingly the relevant provisions of the rules
of procedure of the Assembly, 36
Having considered the notes by the SecretaryGeneral,87
Decides, with effect from 1 January 197 4:
(a) To replace rules 51 to 59 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly by the following rules:

"VIII.

"Languages of the Journal of the United Nations

"Rule 55
"During the sessions of the General Assembly, the
Journal of the United Nations shall be published in
the languages of the Assembly.

"Languages of resolutions and other documents
"Rule 56
"All resolutions and other documents shall be
published in the languages of the General Assembly,
provided that publication in Arabic of such documents shall be limited to those of the Assembly and
its Main Committees.
"Publications in languages other than the languages
of the General Assembly

LANGUAGES

"Official and working languages

"Rule 57
"Documents of the General Assembly, its committees and its subcommittees shall, if the Assembly
so decides, be published in any language other than
the languages of the Assembly or of the committee
concerned.";

"Rule 51
"Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish
shall be both the official and the working languages
of the General Assembly, its committees and its
subcommlttees. Arabic shall be both an official and

(b) To renumber the subsequent rules accordingly.

85 See resolution 3189 (XXVIII).

ae See resolution 3190 (XXVIII).

2206th plenary meeting
18 December 1973

87 A/C.6/L.961 and A/C.6/L.976.

•

•

•
