UNITED NATIONS

J NATIONS UNIES

SECURITY COUNCIl.
O .... ICIA .. RECORDS

801

TWELFTH YEAR
th MEETING: 13 NOVEMBER 1957

erne SEANCE: 13 NOVEMBRE 1957
DOUZIEME ANNEE

CONSEIL DE SECUBITE
DOCUMENTS o .. rICIEr.s
NEW

YORK

TABLE OF

CONT~NTS

Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/801/Rev.l) ................................•

1

Adoption of the agenda

.

1

The India-Pakistan question (continued)

.

1

T ABLE DES MA TIERES
Ordre du jour provisoire (S/Agenda/801/Rev.l)

1

Adoption de l'ordre du jour .........•...........................•...••..

1

Question Inde-Pakistan (suite) .............................•.........•...

1

( 39 II )

S/PV.801

Relevant documents not reproduced in full in the records of the meetings
of the Security Council are published in quarterly supplements to the Official
Records.

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.

***
Les documents pertinents qui ne sont pas reproduits in extenso dans les
comptes rendus des seances du Conseil de securite sont publies dans des supplements trimestriels aux Documents officiels.

Les cotes des documents de l'Organisation des Nations Unies se composent
de lettres majuscules et de chiffres. La simple mention d'une cote dans un texte signifie qu'il s'agit d'un document de ['Organisation.

EIGHT HUNDRED AND FIRST MEETING
Held in New York, on Wednesday, 13 November 1957, at 3 p.m.

HUIT CENT UNIEME SEANCE
Tenue a New York, le mercredi 13 novembre 1957, a 15 heures.
President: Mr. Hashim JAWAD (Iraq).

President : M. Hashim JAWAD (Irak).

Present: The representatives of the following countries: Australia, China, Colombia, Cuba, France, Iraq,
Philippines, Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America.

Presents : Les representants des pays suivants :
Australie, Chine, Colombie, Cuba, France, Irak, Philippines, Suede, Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques, Royaume-Uni de Grande-Bretagne et d'Irlande
du Nord, Etats-Unis d'Amerique.

Provisional agenda (S/Ageada/801/Rev.l)

Ordre du jour provisoire (S/Agenda/801/Rev.l)

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The India-Pakistan question.

1. Adoption de l'ordre du jour.
2. Question Inde-Pakistan.

Adoption de l'ordre du jour

Adoption of the agenda

L'ordre du jour est adoptee

The agenda was adopted.
The India-Pakistan question (continued)

Question Inde-Pakistan (suite)

At the invitation 01 the President, Mr. V. K. Krishna
Menon, representative 01 India, and Mr. Firoz Khan
Noon, representative 01 Pakistan, took places at the
Council table.

Sur l'invitation du President, M. V. K. Krishna
Menon, representant de l'Inde, et M. Firoz Khan Noon,
representant du Pakistan, prennent place a la table du
Conseil.

1. Mr. Krishna MENON (India): I am grateful to
the President and the other members of the Council
for having adjourned the meeting on the last occasion.

1. M. Krishna MENON (Inde) [traduit de l'anglais} :
Je remercie le President et les autres membres du
Conseil d'avoir bien voulu ajourner le debat a la precedente seance.

2. Before I deal with the main subjects that are left
over, I ask the indulgence of the Council to clear up a
certain matter that came up at the 800th meeting.
Recalling what was said on behalf of the Government
of India in relation to the proposal of the Swedish
Government, and considering that it might perhaps
lead to some misunderstanding of what was said, I should
like to make this statement clear. There was no suggestion at all that the representative of Sweden was
doing anything but representing the views of the
Swedish Government, nor was there any suggestion
that a representative of the Security Council, sent in a
selective capacity and not as the representative of his
country, could not produce any views that were identical with his country's or otherwise. All I sought to
point out was that what Mr. Jarring had established,
namely, that the deadlock was centred in part I of
the resolution of 13 August 1948 and that the whole

2. Avant d'aborder les principaux sujets qu'ils me
reste a traiter, qu'il me soit permis d'eclaircir un point
souleve a la 800 e seance. De peur que ce qui a ete
dit au nom du Gouvernement indien au sujet de la
proposition du Gouvernement suedois risque de donner
lieu a un malentendu, je voudrais faire la mise au
point suivante. Je n'ai jamais donne a entendre que le
representant de la Suede exposait autre chose que l'opinion du Gouvernement suedois ni qu'un membre du
Conseil de securite, envoye en mission parce qu'il a
ete choisi par le Conseil et non parce qu'il represente
tel ou tel pays, ne peut pas avoir des opinions differentes
de celles de son gouvernement. Je me suis seulement
efforce de demontrer que, lorsqu'il a declare que la
premiere partie de la resolution du 13 aout 1948 etait
a l'origine de l'impasse et que toute la procedure
dependait de la resolution, M. Jarring ne defendait
pas la, meme these, car celle-ci revient en fait a contester

1

of this procedure was on the lines of the resolution,
would not be identical with the other view, because
that would involve challenging the sovereignty of the
Union of India, which is the basis of the resolution.

la souverainete de l'Union indienne, qui est le fondement meme de la resolution.

3. On the subject matter itself, the Government of
India has not turned down, out of hand, at any time,
any proposals which are comprised by the v:'~rious
remedies set out in the Charter. Then I went on to
point out what would have to be considered and how
the non-consideration of any part would be considered
an admission on our side that that part was not worth
considering.

3. Pour ce qui est de la question elle-meme, le Gouvernement indien n'a a aucun moment rejete hativement da propositions conformes aux diverses solutions
prevues par la Charte. J'ai indique ensuite ce dont i1
faudrait tenir compte et explique que si un element
queicomlue n'etait pas pris en consideration, on penserait que nous admettons que cet element ne merite
pas de retenir l'attention.

4. I hope that this explanation will bring about some
satisfaction.

4. J'espere que ces explications vous paraitront
satisfaisantes.

5. There is only small element that is left in the
previous statements made by the representatives on
the Security Council - and that is the statement made
by the representative of Iraq, who, I am sorry to say,
said the following:
"We wonder, therefore, if the new stand of the
Government of India regarding the non-implementation of part I of the resolution of 13 August 1948
is not on the one hand an afterthought, and on the
other, an attempt to re-open issues which have long
been closed." [797th meeting, para. 67.]

5. Je n'ai plus qu'un mot a dire sur les interventions
des membres du Conseil de securite; je veux revenir
sur celle du representant de 1'lrak, qui, je regrette
de le constater, a dit :

6. We regret a statement of this kind because, to a
certain extent, it is an attribution of motives. But let
that lie; we do not mind. However, I want to say that
the facts are such that whatever we have said here is
not an afterthought in substance. It is quite true that,
each time one speaks on a subject, he may present a
thing in a better or a worse way. But I invite the
Government of Iraq to peruse the entire record in this
matter, from the time that this question came here, on
1 January 1948, until whatever time it was. And it
will be found that on every occasion - when the
Commission was appointed, during the whole of the
discussions of the Commission from the time that
Pakistan admitted the invasion of India in May 1948
until the time when the Commission became transformed
into an individual, in the person of Sir Owen Dixon,
and afterward in the person of Mr. Frank P. Grahamwhen this matter has come up, we have always said
that there are letters from the Prime Minister of India
to the Commission which are on record, there are the
answers, there are statements made before this Council.
These are all during the period when the Commission
itself was continuing active negotiation. We have also
the support in this matter of no less a person than
Sir Pierson Dixon, on the last occasion, when he told
us: "Augmentation makes removal or reduction more
difficult." What more is required?

6. Nous regrettons ces paroles parce qu'en un certain
sens leur auteur nous attribue gratuitement des pensees
que nous n'avons pas. Mais peu importe, cela ne nous
touche pas. Je voudrais dire toutefois que nos declarations ne s'expliquent pas par des pensees que nous
aurions eues apres coup. Il est certain qu'en parlant
plusieurs fois d'une question, on ne presente pas toujours aussi bien sa these. Mais j'invite le Gouvernement
irakien a retire tout le dossier de l'affaire depuis sa
premiere evocation devant le Conseil de securite, le
1er janvier 1948, jusqu'a la date qui lui plaira. Il verra
que toutes les fois - lorsque la Commission a ete
designee, puis tout au long des discussions de la Commission, depuis le moment OU le Pakistan a reconnu
avoir envahi l'Inde en mai 1948 jusqu'a celui OU une
seule personne est venue remplacer la Commission,
sir Owen Dixon d'abord, M. Frank P. Graham ensuiteque la question a ete evoquee, nous avons souligne
l'existence dans le dossier des lettres du Premier
Ministre de l'Inde a la Commission, des reponses de
celle-ci, et des declarations faites devant le Conseil.
Tout cela au moment meme ou la Commission poursuivait activement ses negociations. Sir Pierson Dixon
en personne a appuye notre these quand il a dit que la
diminution ou le retrait des forces devenaient plus
difficiles des lors que CElS forces avaient ete considerablement accrues. Quelle autre preuve nous demandet-on?

7. On 7 February 1950, Sir Benegal Rau said the
following on behalf of India, which was then a member
of the Security Council:
"India's case is that, just as the entry of the
Pakistan troops into Kashmir was wrong and an
act of aggression, equally wrong and aggressive
was their building up of the subversive "Azad"

7. Le 7 fevrier 1950, sir Benegal Rau, qui representait
l'Inde, a cette epoque membre du Conseil de securite,
a declare:

« C'est pourquoi nous nous demandons si la nouvelle attitude du Gouvernement indien en ce qui
concerne la non-application de la premiere partie
de la resolution du 13 aoftt 1948 ne lui est pas inspiree par une reflexion apres coup, et s'il ne s'agit pas
la d'une tentative qui vise a remettre en question
des problemes regIes depuis longtemps.» [797e seance,
par. 67.]

«Le Gouvernement de 1'Inde pretend que l'entree
des troupes du Pakistan au Cachemire est injustifiee
et constitue un acte d'agression, ce qui est egalement
vrai en ce qui concerne la constitution par ces troupes

Kashmir forces and their occupation of a large part
of the State." [463rd meeting, p. 11.]
I do not want to elaborate on this matter, but it will
be recalled that I pointed out in one of my previous
interventions that the Commission had said in so
many words that Pakistan had used the period in
question in order to consolidate its position. Sir Benegal
Rau continued:
"All these things must be completely undone
before there can be a plebiscite." [Ibid.]
Thus, it is clear that our stand is not an afterthought.
8. On 1 March 1951, Sir Benegal Rau said the following
to the Security Council:
"The Kashmir case has now been before the
Security Council for more than three years. No
solution has yet been found, because the root"cause
of the trouble, namely, the unlawful occupation
of nearly half the State and the creation of subversive forces and authorities therein by Pakistan,
has been allowed to continue. [In other words,
part I of the resolution of 13 August 1948 has not
been implemented.]
". . . so long as the root-cause of the trouble
continues, there can be no solution to the problem."
[533rd meeting, para. IS.]
9. I would ask Mr. Jawad, not as President of the
Security Council, but as representative of Iraq, to
reconsider, in the light of the evidence that I have
already placed before the Council and will now place
before it, the statement that our stand is an after
thought.

10. Later, Mrs. Pandit said the following on behalf of
India at the Security Council's 608th meeting - that
is, after Mr. Graham had been appointed:
"Despite Pakistan's denials and protestations of
innocence, the regular Pakistan army also invaded
the State on 8 May 1948, according to the later
admission of the Pakistan authorities themselves.
This unprovoked aggression and invasion of the
territory of a neighbour and a Member State is a
gross violation of the Charter of the United Nations
as well as of International law.... Until the Council
is prepared, firmly and courageously, to face this
central issue, no just and lasting solution can be found.
" The relative position and status of the parties in
this dispute, and therefore the issue itself, will not
be set in the proper context unless they are related
to these basic facts. • . ." [60Sth meeting, paras.
4 and 5.]
The basic facts to which Mrs. Pandit was referring
are the facts contained in part I of the resolution
adopted by the United Nations Commission for India
and Pakistan on 13 August 1948 [8/1100, para. 75].
11. I therefore submit that I not only have answered
the representative of Iraq as regards the facts, but also
.3

des forces subversives du Cachemire « azad» et
1'0ccupation par ces dernieres d'une grande partie
du territoire de I'Etat. » [463e seance, p. 11.]
Je ne voudrais pas m'etendre sur ce point; on se rappellera toutefois que, dans rune de mes precedentes
interventions, j'ai souligne que la Commission avait
declare expressement que le Pakishn avait mis a
profit la periode en question pour consolider sa position.
Sir BenegaJ. Rau poursuivait :
« 11 faut que la situation qui regnait avant ces
evenements soit retablie si l'on veut qu'un plebiscite
ait lieu.» [Ibid.]
11 est donc manifeste que notre these ne nous est pas
venue a l'idee apres coup.
8. Le 1er mars 1951, sir Benegal Rau a declare devant
le Conseil :
« Le Conseil de securite est saisi de l'affaire du
Cachemire depuis plus de trois ans. On n'a pas encore
trouve de solution, parce que 1'0n a laisse susbsister
ce qui est a la source des difficultes actuelles, a savoir
1'0ccupation illegale par le Pakistan de pres de la
moitie de I'Etat, et 1'0n a permis la constitution par le Pakistan de forces et d'autorites subversives.» (En d'autres termes, la premiere
partie de la resolution du 13 aout 1948 n'a pas ete
appliquee.)
« ••• 11 ne peut y avoir de solution a ce probleme
tant que persistera ce qui est a la source du mal.»
[533e seance, par. IS.]
9. Je m'adresse maintenant a M. Jawad non pas en
sa qualite de President du Conseil de securite~ mais
en tant que representant de I'lrak; je souhaiterais
qu'il tienne compte des faits que j'ai deja exposes
au Conseil et de ceux dont je vais parler maintenant
et qu'il se demande si le representant de l'Irak a eu
raison de dire que notre these nous est venue a l'idee
apres coup.
10. Par la suite, a la 608e seance du Conseil de securite,
c'est-a-dire apres la nomination de M. Graham, Mme
Pandit a declare au nom de l'Inde :
« Malgre les dementis et les protestations d'innocence du Pakistan, l'armee reguliere pakistanaise
a egalement envahi l'Etat le 8 mai 1948, comme
les autorites pakistanaises l'ont elles-memes admis
plus tard. Cette agression non provoquee et cette
invasion du territoire d'un Etat voisin et d'un Etat
Membre constituent une violation flagrante de la
Charte des Nations Unies et du droit internationaL.
Jusqu'a ce que le Conseil soit pret a faire face
a ce probleme fondamental d'une fa<;on ferme et
courageuse, il sera impossible de decouvrir une
solution juste et durable.
« On ne saurait analyser comme il convient la
position et le statut respectifs des parties a ce differend, ni par consequent le probleme lui-meme, si
1'0n ne se place pas dans la perspective de ces faits
essentiels... ll [60S e seance, par, 4 et 5.]
Les faits essentiels dont parie Mme Pandit sont ~eux
qui figurent dans la premiere partie de la resolution
du 13 aout 1948 de la Commission des Nations Unies
pour l'Inde et le Pakistan [8/1100, par. 75].
11. Je crois donc non seulement avoir repondu au
repFesentant de I'Irak par ce simple expose des faits,

have shown that the reflection made in the statement
of the delegation of Iraq does not fit in with those
facts of the case.

mais aussi avoir prouve que ses critiques n'etaient pas
fondees.

12. I shall deal now with an aspect of the subject
which was only touched on in the debates at the
previous series of meetings of the Council, but which
has taken on importance because of various statements
made by members of the Council during the present
series of meetings, because of conditions obtaining in
India, and because of facts that are implied in, contained
in, or behind Mr. Jarring's report. In my first intervention at this series of meetings, I merely referred
to this aspect of the question. I have in mind what are
called the northern areas.

12. J'aborderai maintenant un point qui n'a ete
qu'eflleure lors des deliberations anterieures du Conseil,
mais qui est apparu plus nettement a la suite des
declarations de divers membres du Conseil de securite
au cours des presents debats et aussi a cause de la situation qui regne actuellement en Inde et a cause des
faits que M. Jarring a exposes, ou auxquels il fait
allusion dans son rapport. Lorsque je suis intervenu
pour la premiere fois lors des presentes deliberations,
j'ai seulement mentionne le probleme. Il s'agit de ce
que I'on appelle les regions du Nord.

13. The Security Council has heard a great deal about
the "Azad" forces. It has been told the reason for
the self-confessed invasion of India by Pakistan. The
Foreign Minister of Pakistan said to the Council:
"Yes, we invaded the country; we marched troops
into the country. Why? Because we wanted to protect
our own frontiers. " In other words, in order to protect
Pakistan's frontiers, Pakistan marched troops into
Kashmir: a part of India. But that statement referred
to West Kashmir. Until recently, there was never any
suggestion that there were any "Azad" forces in
what are called the northern areas.

13. Le Conseil de securite a beaucoup entendu parler
des forces « azad. II Il a appris pourquoi le Pakistan a,
de son propre aveu, envahi I'lnde. Le Ministre des
afIaires etrangeres du Pakistan a declare : « Qui,
nous avons envahi ce pays ; nos troupes sont entrees
en Inde. Pourquoi ? Parce que nous voulions proteger
nos propres frontieres. II En d'autres termes, afin de
proteger ses frontieres, le Pakistan a envahi le Ca(memire, qui fait partie de I'lnde. Mais cette declaration
concernait le Cachemire occidental. Pendant longtemps, on n'avait jamais parle de la presence de forces
armees « azadll dans ce qu'on appelle les regions du
Nord.

14. The Government of India first referred to this
matter in August 1948. As I have repeatedly stated
before the Council, it was the outstanding desire of
the Government of India at that time - as it was the
desire of all concerned - to bring about a cease-fire
and, in order that such a cease-fire might be achieved,
to put on one side questions which could be discussed
and decided subsequently. That was the reason why
material other than the cessation of hostilities was
brought into the resolutions of 13 August 1948 and
5 January 1949. The Government of India, however,
referred specifically to the northern areas in August
1948. At that time, negotiations were going on between
the Commission and Pakistan, on the one hand, and
the Commission and India, on the other, prior to the
formulation of this resolution, which was accepted by
India in August. In a letter dated 20 August 1948,
the Prime Minister of India wrote the following:
"The authority of the Government of Jammu
and Kashmir over this region as a whole has not been
challenged or disturbed, except by roving bands of
hostiles, or in some places like Skardu which have
been occupied by irregulars or Pakistani troops....
We desire that, after Pakistani troops and irregulars
have withdrawn from the territory, the responsibility
for the administration of the evacuated areas should
revert to the Government of Jammu and Kashmir
and that for defence to us. . . . We must be free to
maintain garrisons at selected points in this area for
the dual purpose of preventing the incursion of
tribesmen. . . . and to guard the main trade routes
from the State into Central Asia." [8/1100, para. 80.]

14. Le Gouvernement indien a souleve cette question
pour la premiere fois en aout 1948. Ainsi que je I'ai
declare a maintes reprises devant le Conseil, le Gouvernement indien, comme toutes les parties interessees,
desirait avant tout, a cette epoque, aboutir a un
cessez-le-feu ; a cette fin, il voulait traiter separement
les questions que I'on pO"IJrrait discuter et regler par
la suite. C'est pourquoi des questions autres que
celle de la cessation des hostilites ont ete abordees dans
les resolutions du 13 aout 1948 et du 5 janvier 1949.
Toutefois, le Gouvernement indien a parle expressement
des regions du Nord en aout 1948, au moment oula
Commission engageait des negociations avec le Pakistan
d'une part, et avec I'lnde d'autre part, avant la mise
au point de la resolution qui a ete acceptee par I'lnde
au mois d'aout. Dans une lettre datee du 20 aout 1948,
le Premier Ministre de l'Inde ecrivait :

That was the position taken by the Government of
India at that time.

« L'exercice de I'autorite du Gouvernement de
Jammu et Cachemire sur cette region dans son
ensemble n'a ete ni conteste ni trouble, si ce n'est
par des bandes errantes de tribus hostiles ou encore
en certains lieux comme Skardu, qui ont ete occupes
par des irreguliers ou par les troupes du Pakistan...
Nous souhaitons que, lorsque les troupes du Pakistan
et les irreguliers se seront retires de ce te'rritoire,
I'administration des regions evacuees soit de nouveau
confiee au Gouvernement de Jammu et Cachemire,
et que le soin de les defendre nous incombe...
Nous devons etre libres de maintenir des garnisons
en des points choisis de cette region, afin d'empecher
les incursions des tribus... et aussi de garder les
principales voies commerciales qui menent de I'Etat
en Asie centrale.ll [8/1100, par. 80.]
Telle etait alors la position du Gouvernement indien.

15. According to the Commission, the Commander-inChief of the Pakistan Army informed it that:
"The purpose of sending Pakistan troops into
the State [was] the holding of the general line UriPoonch-Naoshera." 1
Now, the general line Uri-Poonch-Naoshera is in West
Kashmir, where these so-called" Azad " Kashmir forces
now are. This line runs from north to south along
western Kashmir. Thus, there was no suggestion in
1948, when the Commission's resolution was adopted,
that the northern areas were occupied by Pakistan
troops.

15. La Commission declare qu'elle a ete informee par
le Commandant en chef des troupes pakistanaises que :
« Si des troupes du Pakistan avaient ete envoyees
au Cachemire, c'etait pour tenir la ligne generale
Uri-Poonch-Naoshera. » 1
Or, la ligne generale Uri-Poonch-Naoshera se trouve
dans le Cachemire occidental, oil ces pretendues forces
du Cachemire cc azad» sont a present. Cette ligne va
du nord au sud le long du Cachemire occidental. Ainsi,
en 1948, lorsque la Commission a adopte sa resolution,
on ne parlait pas de I'occupation des regions du Nord
par les troupes pakistanaises.

16. The fact that there might have been insurrections
or even rebellions, discontent among the civilian population, if you like, or that there might have been
internal disturbances, even granting there was any
such state of affairs, would be no argument for a neighbouring, friendly State to take advantage of that
situation and establish its authority. It would be even
less of an argument for the Security Council to suggest
that someone else can do it. The Commission therefore
did not give particular consideration to the situation
which would arise in the northern area, because it was
considered as part of the whole State. In replying to
the Prime Minister of India, the Chairman of the
Commission stated:
" . . . due to the peculiar conditions of this area,
[it being mountainous and sparsely populated]
[the Commission] did not specifically deal with
the military aspect of the problem in the resolution
of 13 August 1948. It believes, however, that the
question raised . . . could be considered in the
implementation of the resolution." [8/1100, para. 81.]

16. Le fait que des rebellions ou meme des insurrections auraient pu avoir lieu ou qm::, si vous preferez,
du mecontentement, ou meme des troubles internes,
auraient pu eclater parmi la population civile, ne constitue nullement une raison pour qu'un Etat voisin,
un Etat ami, profite de cette situation et etablisne son
autorite, a supposer meme qu'un tel etat de choses ait
existe. Et c'est un argument que le Conseil de securite
peut encore moins retenir. La Commission n'a donc
pas specialement etudie la situation qui serait creee
dans la region du Nord, parce que celle-ci etait consideree comme une partie de I'Etat. En reponse au Premier Ministre de I'Inde, le President de la Commission
a declare:
« ••• qu'en raison de la situation particuliere de
cette region» - c'est une region montagneuse et
peu peupIee -, [la Commission] « ne s'est pas occupee
specifiquement de l'aspect militaire du probleme
dans sa resolution du 13 aoftt 1948. Elle estime
cependant que la question soulevee... pourrait
etre envisagee dans l'application de la resolution.»
[8/1100, par. 81.]
Toutes les questions se posant dans la region septentrionale etaient donc consideree comme liees a l'ensemble de la question de l'Etat de Jammu et Cachemire.
Si ce n'etait pas de cet Etat qu'il s'agissait, en effet,
duquel etait-ce ?

Therefore, the whole question of the northern area
was not decided in any other way except as being
part of the State of Jammu and Kashmir. If it was not
part of that State, whose State was it?
17. On 28 March 1949, the Government of India
proposed to the Commission that it should maintain
garrisons at selected points in the northern area. That
is referred to in paragraph 256 of document S/1430.
The Commission replied that it had given "serious
consideration to India's position, which was based on
legal claims." 2

17. Le 28 mars 1949, le Gouvernement indien proposait a la Commission d'avoir des garnisons en certains
points de la region du Nord. Il en est question au
paragraphe 256 du document S/1430. La Commission
a repondu qu'elle avait c( examine attentivement la
position du Gouvernement de l'Inde, qui se fondait
sur des arguments juridiques.» 2

18. If the Security Council and the United Nations
as a whole can afford to disregard the legal foundations
of a State, that would be a sad day. The Commission's
first truce proposals of 15 April provided that:
"In the sparsely populated and mountainous
region of the territory of Jammu and Kashmir to
the north, observers will be stationed [I want
note to be taken of this paragraph because we have
questions to ask of the Security Council.] . • . who,
in the event that the defence of this territory becomes

18. Si le Conseil de securite et l'Organisation des
Nations Unies tout entiere peuvent se permettre de
meconnaitre les fondements juridiques d'un Etat, il
y a lieu de s'affliger. Les premieres propositions dp.
treve emises par la Commission le 15 avril 1949 stipulaient ce qui suit :
« Dans les regions montagneuses et peu peupIees
du Nord de l'Etat de Jammu et Cachemire, seront
places des observateurs» - je voudrais que l'on
prenne note de ce paragraphe, parce que nous avons
des questions a poser au Conseil de securite (c qui, si la defense de ce territoire devient necessaire,

1 Official Records 01 the Security Council, Fourth Year, Special
Supplement No. 7, document 5/1430, para. 254.
I Ibid., para. 259.

1 Proces-verbaux officiels du
Conseil de securiU, quatrieme
annee, Supptement special nO 7, document 5/1430, par. 254.
I ,Ibid., par. 259.

5

necessary, will so advise the Commission. The Commission in this case, or [not "and"] at the
request of the Government of India, may agree that
the Government of India post garrisons at specified
points of this area." 3

en aviseront la Commission. Dans ce cas, ou» - je
dis bien « ou» et non pas « eh - « it la demande du
Gouvernement de I'Inde, la Commission pourra
accepter que le Gouvernement de I'Inde place des
garnisons en des points determines de cette zone.») 3

19. Now, are not the people of India and their Government entitled to inquire why it is that no observers
were stationed and why it is that after the time of
the negotiations, after the appointment of the Commission, the advancing of the Pakistan army into this
area came about? The Commission had undertaken the
responsibility of saying" observers will be stationed ".
It did not say "observers may be stationed ". There
are no observers. Therefore, the effect of the resolution
has been to permit the occupation and annexation
of considerable parts of the State soon after the negotiations began. The Commission put forward this as a
formula, and Mr. Lozano's correspondence on this
matter is clear. I submit, with great respect, that the
representative of Colombia has a very grave responsibility in this matter because we undertook all these
things on the assurances given to us by Mr. Lozano,
and afterwards by Mr. Korbel and various others who
were Chairmen of the Commission. They were not
private assurances, they were assurances given on
behalf of this Organization. Furthermore, the Commission has published the fact that all the assurances were
made public, and that one side has not been told
something that was concealed from the other.

19. Le peuple et le gouvernement indiens n'ont-ils
pas des lors le droit de demander comment il se fait
qu'aucun observateur n'a ete envoye dans la region, et
pourquoi, apres les negociations et la nomination de la
Commission, I'avance de I'armee pakistanaise dans cette
region s'est produite ? La Commission avait engage sa
responsabilite en disant : « des observateurs seron'~
places», plutot que : des observateurs pourront etre
places. Or, il n'y a pa.s d'observateurs. La resolution a
donc eu pour effet de perrnettre I'occupation et
l'annexion d'une partie considerable de I'Etat peu apres
le debut des negociations. La. Commission a formule hi
un principe, et la correspondance ecrite a ce sujet par
M. Lozano est claire. Avec tout le respect que je lui
dois, je considere que le representant de la Colombie
porte une responsabilite tres lourde dans cette affaire,
parce que toute notre action s'est fondee sur les assurances qui nous ont ete donnees par M. Lozano, et apres
lui par M. Korbel et les presidents succcssifs de la Commission. Il ne s'agissait pas d'assurances officieuses,
mais d'assurances donnees au nom de 1'0rganisation.
La Commission, qui plus est, a officiellement declare
que toutes ces assurances avaient ete rendues publiques
et que rien de ce qui avait ete affirme a I'une des parties
n'avait ete dissimule a I'autre.

20. Therefore, as I have stated, we were told that
there would be observers and that India need not push
its legal claims because, if it were necessary, the Commission would let us go there. That was a formula,
not a settlement formula, hut a formula which the
Commission regarded as "an equitable compromise
between the opposed views of the two Governments;
it minimized the possibility of the renewal of fighting,
yet took into consideration [these are the words of
the Commission] India's claim to responsibility for
the defence of the State 4." This is a claim which we
have never forsworn and which is inseparable from
the integrity and sovereignty of the Union of India.

20. Comme je I'ai dit, on nous a donc affirme qu'il y
aurait des observateurs, et que l'Inde n'avait pas a faire
valoir ses revendications juridiques parce que, si cela
etait necessaire, la Commission nous permettrait d'alIer
sur place. 11 s'agissait la d'une formule, non pas de
reglement, mais d'une formule que la Commission considerait comme « un compromis equitable entre les vues
opposees des deux gouvernements». Cette formule
cc rectuisait la possibilite d'une reprise des combats tout
en tenant compte» - tels sont les termes de la Commission - « des revendications de I'Inde selon lesquelles
la defe!lse de I'Etat lui incombait» 4. C'est la une revendication a laquelle nous n'avons jamais renonce et qui
est inseparable de I'integrite et de la souverainete de
I'Union indienne.

21. In the third interim report of the Commission it
is stated:
" In replying to the 15 April proposals the Government of India reaffirmed its request that it be allowed
to maintain garrisons at strategic points. It felt
[again as a compromise] that the question of
the administration of the area could be discussed
separately." 5

21. Dans le troisieme rapport provisoire de la Commission, il est dit :
« Dans sa reponse aux propositions du 15 avriJ,
le Gouvernement de I'Inde a de nouveau demande a
etre autorise it maintenir des garnisons aux points
strategiques. 11 a estime » - a titre de compromis,
une fois encore - C( que la question de I'administration
de la zone pourrait etre debattue separemep.t.» 5

22. The Commission informed us that the question
of sovereignty, as such, was not in challenge. It said:

22. La Commission nous a informes que la souverainete, en tant que telle, n'etait pas en question. Elle a
declare:

3 Official Records of the Security Council, Fourth Year, Special
Supplement No. 7, document S/1430/Add.1, annex 17, appendix.

3 Proces~verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite, quatrieme
annee, Suppllment special nO 7, document S/1430/Add.1, annexe
17, appendice.
, Ibid., document S/1430, par. 261.
5 Ibid., par. 264.

C

5

Ibid., document S/1430, para. 261.
Ibid., para 264.

"The Commission did not ignore India's claim to
the right to safeguard the security of the State, nor
did it put into question the legality of the Jammu
and Kashmir Government." 6

It La Commission n'ignorait pas que I'lnde revendiquait le droit d'assurer la securite de l'Etat et elle ne
mettait pas non plus en doute la legalite du Gouvernement de Jammu et Cachemire.ll 6

23. I ask the members of the Council whether there
is anything in the record of the Commission, anything
in the historical facts, anything in the practice of
Governments or in international law about when,
without any overt action, two States of Jammu and
Kashmir came into being. It is conceivable that the
Government of Jammu and Kashmir may be different
tomorrow. Sovereignty may change. The sovereignty of
places has changed from time to time in various parts
of the world, but at the time when this was being
considered, when the matter came before us, there
was only one State of Jammu and Kashmir.

23. Je le demande aux membres du Conseil: trouvet-on dans les rapports de la Commission, dans les faits
tels qu'ils se sont derou!es, dans les principes du droit
international ou dans les pratiques observees par les
gouvernements, le moindre element qui permette de
penser que en l'absence de toute decision publique, un
deuxieme Etat de J ammu et Cachemire a ete cree?
On conc;oit que le Gouvernement de Jammu et Cachemire puisse etre different demain de ce qu'il est aujourd'hui. La souverainete peut changeI'. Dans differentes
regions du monde, des territoires ont change de souverainete de temps a autre, mais au moment oil la presente affaire a ete examinee - lorsque nous en avons
ete saisis -, il n'existait qu'un seuI Etat de Jammu et
Cachemire.

24. The problem was dealt with in the Commission's
truce terms of 28 April 1949. Those terms state that:

24. Le probleme a ete traite dans les « conditions de
treve» proposees par la Commission ie 28 avril 1949;
je cite:
« Les observateuI's conseilleront la Commission ou
l'Administrateur du plebiciste, ou les deux a la fois,
au sujet de I'evolution de la situation dans la region
montagneuse et peu peupIee qui est situee dans le
Nord de 1'Etat de Jammu et CacheIl}ire. Sans prejudice des dispositions du paragraphe 8 de la resolution
du 5 janvier 1949, si la Commission ou I'Administrateur du plebiciste, ou les deux a la fois, concluent,
sur 1'avis des observateurs» - qui n'etaient pas sur
place - « ou sur le rapport du Gouvernement de
l'Inde, que la presence de garnisons indiennes en tel
ou tel point est necessaire a la defense de la region,
la Commission ou l' Administrateur du pIebiciste, ou
les deux a la fois, pourront adresser au Gouvernement
de 1'Inde une demande a cet efIet.1l 7
Je le demande aux membres du Conseil de securite : la
Commission, qui represente le Conseil de securite,
aurait-elle charge un gouvernement etranger de conserver des garnisons dans cette region ?

" Observers will advise the Commission and/or the
Plebiscite Administrator regarding developments in
the sparsely populated and mountainous region of
the territory of Jammu and Kashmir in the north.
Without prejudice to the provisions of point 8 of
the resolution of 5 January 1949, should the Commission and/or the Plebiscite Administrator conclude
upon advice from the observers, [who were not
stationed there] or upon reports from the Government of India, that it is necessary for the defence
of the area, the Commission and/or the Plebiscite
Administrator may request the Government of India
to post garrisons at specified points." 7
I ask the members of the Security Council: would the
Commission, representing this Council, have called upon
a foreign Government to retain garrisons in that area?
25.

The Commission also stated that:
" in its reply to the truce terms on 18 May 1949
the Indian Government repeated that the principle
that Indian troops should garrison important strategic
points should be accepted. The Government of India
suggested that the points to be so occupied be the
subject of discussion with the Commission, and again
proposed that the question of the administration of
this area be left over for the time being." 8

25.

La Commission a egalement declare :
« Dans sa reponse du 18 mai 1949 aux conditions

de treve proposees, le Gouvernement de 1'Inde a
reaffirme qu'il y avait lieu d'accepter le principe
selon lequel les troupes indiennes devraient placer
des garnisons en des points strategiques importants.
Il a propose de discuter avec la Commission les points
a occuper et a propose a nouveau de laisser en suspens
la question de 1'administration de la zone.» 8

26. All along, the Government of India has tried in
this matter not to press its rightful claims - even as
it is doing now - to the logical limits. We know that
there has been trouble; we have come here to offer a
conciliatory solution. There have been insurrections.
We were quite prepared, provided our legal claims,
our sovereignty, not were questioned, to try to find ways
and means not to aggravate the situation. I ask the

26. Sur ce point, le Gouvernement de I'Inde s'est toujours efforce, comme il le fait maintenant, de ne pas
pousser ses revendications legitimes jusqu'a leurs
limites logiques. Des difficultes ont surgi, nous le savons ;
nous sommes venus ici pour proposer une solution de
conciliation. Il y a eu des insurrections. Nous etions
tout prets, a condition qu'on ne mit pas en doute nos
revendications juridiques et notre souverainete, a

• Ibid., para. <Iba.
Ibid., document 5/1430/Add.1, annex 21, part I, para. D.

• Ibid., par. 265.
Ibid., document 5/1430/Add.1, annexe 21, premiere partie,
par. D.
8, Ibid., document 5/1430, par. 267.
7

7

8

Ibid., document 5/1430, para. 267.

7

Council, does not that approach to a problem call
from the Council for a far more responsive attitude
in regard to the claims of the sovereignty and integrity of the Union than has been expressed in the
various decisions or resolutions passed by the Council?

rechercher un moyen de ne pas aggraver la situation.
Je le demande au Conseil : cette falion d'aborder le probleme n'appelle-t-elle pas de sa part une attitude beaucoup plus comprehensive a I'egard des revendications
touchant la souverainete et I'integrite de I'Union que
celle qu'il a exprimee dans ses diverses decisions ou
resolutions ?

27. A practical solution and a practical arrangement
were what the Commission asked us to find. Even
further, our military advisers told us then that the
Indian garrison should be at least at fifteen strategic
points to protect the caravan roads.

27. Ce que la Commission nous a demande de trouver,
c'est une solution pratique et des dispositions pratiques.
Bien plus, nos conseillers militaires nous ont dit a
I'epoque qu'il fallait placer des garnisons indiennes au
moins a 15 points strategiques pour proteger les routes
des caravanes.
28. Par esprit de compromis, nous avons informe la
Commission le 17 juin 1949 que nous accepterions de
n'occuper que sept de ces points, dans I'espoir que
toutes les forces regulieres et irregulieres du Pakistan
seraient retirees du territoire de I'Etat. Or, ces forces s 'y
trouvent encore.
«Au cas oil cet espoir ne serait pas realise», - declarait la Commission dans son rapport - l( ou s'H devait
surgir de toute autre part une menace a la securite
de I'Etat ou au maintien de l'ordre interieur, le Gouvernement de nnde voulait etre libre d'occuper les
15 points precedemment mentionnes, ou certains
d'entr~ eux. L'lnde expliquait qu'elle se voyait
contrainte de formuler cette reserve car, a son avis,
certaines mesures prises par le Pakistan, notamment
la construction de routes,l'envoi d'armees et de materiel en des points comme Skardu, ne pouvaient signifier qu'une chose, a savoir que le Pakistan n'avait pas
l'intention d'evacuer le territoire ou, s'U l'evacuait,
voulait permettre a ceux qui y demeureraient de
creer des troubles. » 9
Ce ne sont pas la des idees qui nous sont venues apres
coup; on trouve ce qui precede dans le troisieme rapport provisoire de la Commission pour I'lnde et le
Pakistan.

28. As a matter of compromise, we Inhrmed the
Commission on 17 June 1949 that we would be willing
to occupy only l5even points in the expectation that
all regular and irregular Pakistan forces would be
withdrawn from the State. And they are still there.
"Should this expectation not be realized [the
Commission said, in its report] or should a threat
to the security of the State or the maintenance of
internal order arise from any other source, the
Government of India desired to be free to garrison
any or all of the fifteen points mentioned previously.
India explained that it felt compelled to make this
reservation because it believed that measures taken
by Pakistan 'such as the construction of roads and
the provision of arms and supplies to points like
Skardu could, in the view of India, mean only that
Pakistan did not wish to withdraw from the territory or, after withdrawal, intended that those who
stayed behind could create turmoil." 9
These are not afterthoughts; this appears in the third
interim report of the Commission for India and
Pakistan.
29. Finally, the question arises: what was the status
of these areas at the time when the resolutions were
passed by which the Security Council and the parties
are engaged? What was the status of these territories?
I take courage to think that any party, any Member
State whose approach to this problem, or understanding of the facts of the case are very different from
ours, will admit that the Security Council had laid
down - and it should be a part of international practice - that the period of negotiation should not be
used for further conquest and further consolidation.
This is a point that is relevant to what has been said
in the Council. Therefore, it is worth while, in view of
the present position of Pakistan, to consider what was
the status of this territory in fact in 1948. The Commission says that the northern areas were not, "in the
autumn of 1948, under the effective control of the
Pakistan High Command". When the 13 August
resolution was passed, according to the Commission,
these areas were not under the effective control of the
Pakistan High Command "in the sense that the
Commission understood the term "effective control ".
The report continues: "The Pakistan Government

29. Enfin, la question suivante se pose : quel etait le
statut de ces regions a I'epoque oil ont ete adoptees les
resolutions qui lient le ConseU de securite et les parties?
Quel etait le statut de ces territoires ? J'ose croire que
n'importe qui, n'importe quel Etat Membre, meme si sa
conception du probleme ou sa comprehension des faits
est toute difIerente de la notre, admettra que le Conseil
de securite a etabli un principe - qui devrait entrer
dans la pratique internationale - , suivant lequel on ne
doit pas profiter de la periode de negociations pour
etendre ou consolider les conquetes deja realisees. Cette
observation se rapporte a ce qui a ete <:iit au Conseil.
Par consequent, etant donne la position presente du
Pakistan, il est bon de voir quel etait en realite le statut
de ce territoire en 1948. La Commission dit que les
regions septentrionales ne se trouvaient pas (I en fait, a
I'automne de 1948, sous le controle « effectif») du haut
commandement pakistanais». Apres I'adoption de la
resolution du 13 aoftt, la Commission declarait que les
regions en question ne se trouvaient pas sous le controle
effectif du haut commandement pakistanais, l( au sens
que la Commission donnait au terme "controle effectif".
Il est indique ensuite dans le rapport : l( Le Gouverne-

9 Official Records of the Security Council, Fourth Year, Special
Supplement No 7, document 8/1430, para. 268.

9 Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseit de securite, quatrieme
annee, Supplement special nO 7, document 8/1430, par. 268.

8

stated that no Pakistan regular troops at any stage
were employed in the operations which took place
between May and December 1948. "10

ment du Pakistan a declare qu' aucune troupe reguliere
pakistanaise n'a ete employee, a aucun moment, lors
des operations qui ont eu lieu entre mai et decembre
1948.» 10

30. I would request the Council to note these dates.
Let us accept this statement as it stands. If there were
no troops between May and December 1948, then it
was not an occupied area. If it was not an occupied
area, it could not become an evacuated area. It was
still an integral part of the Union in fact and in law.
But, says the Commission, therefore it could not be
regarded as evacuated territory. The Commission
says:
"
. It was precisely because the Commission
understood 'evacuated territory' to mean that
territory in Western Kashmir [that is, in the UriPoonch area] where regular forces of the Pakistan
army were operating and assisting the "Azad"
Kashmir forces that the Commission in August
stated to the Prime Minister of India that the question of the military aspect of the territories in the
north of the State had not been dealt with in the
resolution of 13 August." 11
That is to say, if a certain military position in relation
to a territory which is part of the Union, according
to the resolutions, changes, does it mean that it belongs
to somebody else?

30. Je demande au Conseil de noter ces dates. Acceptons cette declaration telle qu'elle est. S'il n'y avait pas
de troupes entre mai et decembre 1948, la region n'etait
pas occupee. Si elle n' etait pas occupee, elle ne pouvait
pas devenir un territoire evacue. En fait et en droit,
elle etait encore une partie integrante de I'Union. La
Commission declare : on ne pouvait done la considerer
comme un territoire evacue. Elle a dit :
« ••• C' etait precisement parce que la Commission
estimait que I'expression « territoire evacue» se rapportait au territoire du Cachemire occidental oil les
forces regulieres de I'armee pakistanaise menaient
des operations et aidaient les forces du Cachemire
« azad» [il s'agit du secteur Uri-Poonch] qu'elle a
fait savoir an mois d'aollt au Premier Ministre de
l'Inde que la resolution du 13 aollt ne traitait pas le
cote militaire du probleme des territoires situes au
nord de I'Etat. » 11
Autrement dit, si, dans un territoire qui, aux termes
des resolutions, fait partie de I'Union, une position militaire donnee se modifie, en resulte-t-il que ce territoire
appartient a quelqu'un d'autre?

31.

31.

The paragraph continues:
" . . . The Commission was informed that it was
for the defence of the western area that the Pakistan
regular forces had entered the State of Jammu and
Kashmir."
In other words, if there was any justification, not
from a legal point of view, but from the point of view
of Pakistan, it was in regard to Western Kashmir.
Pakistan had not emerged at all in the northern area
at this time.

Le paragraphe en question se termine ainsi :
« D'apres des renseignements communiques a la

Commission, si les forces regulieres du Pakistan
etaient entrees dans I'Etat de Jammu et Cachemire,
c'etait pour defendre la zone occidentale.»)
En d'autres termes, s'il y avait une justification quelconque, non pas en droit certes, mais du point de vue
du Pakistan, c'etait au regard du Cachemire occidental.
A I'epoque, le Pakistan ne s'etait pas montre du tout
dans la zone du Nord.

32.

The Commission states further:
"When it drafted the 13 August resolution the
Commission did not consider the northern area in
the same light as it did western Kashmir.... " 12
In other words, no question of local authorities, no
question of "Azad" troops, no question of anything
but the sovereignty of the Union of India, arises in
regard to the northern territories. If there was insurrection, if we have internal difficulties, if there is resistance from local forces, no country is free from this,
least of all Pakistan. That would be no argument for
removing the territory from the sovereignty of the
Dominion. The Government of Pakistan, therefore,
in our submission, is in no doubt about this matter.

La Commission dit ensuite :
« Lorsqu'elle a redige la resolution du 13 aollt, la
Commission n'a pas considere la region nord sous le
meme angle que le Cachemire occidental... » 12
Ainsi, pour ce qui est des territoires du Nord. il n'est
question ni d'autorites locales, ni de forces «( azad », ni
de rien d'autre que de la souverainete de I'Dnion indienne.
Il pouvait y avoir une insurrection, des difficultes interieures, une resistance de la part des forces locales,
mais aucun pays n'est a I'abri de tels evenements, a
commencer par le Pakistan. On ne pourrait s'en autoriser pour exclure le territoire de la souverainete du
dominion. A notre avis, donc, le Gouvernement du
Pakistan ne peut nourrir aucun doute a ce sujet.

33. I would ask the Council to take note of the next
paragraph, which I, frankly, had not seen until relatively recently. It is a paragraph that leaves no room
for doubt. On 27 August 1948, the Czechoslovak Chairman of the Commission, Mr. Korbel, wrote a memorandum in reply to the letter and memorandum of

33. .re demande an Conseil de prendre note du paragraphe suivant, que, pour parler franchement, je n'avais
pas moi-meme remarque jusqu'a une date relativement
recente. Ce paragraphe ne laisse aucun doute. Le
27 aollt 1948, M. Korbel, representant de la Tchecoslovaquie, qui presidait la Commission, a redige un memo-

32.

Ibid., para. 272.
Ibid.
12 Ibid., para. 27 L

Ibid., par. 272.
Ibid.
12, I bid., par. 274.

10

10

11

11

9,

August 1948 from the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Pakistan. He says:
" Surveillance of territories of the State of Jammu
and Kashmir other than those now occupied by the
Pakistan Army and forces under its control is not
provided for in the resolution. [This only applies
to what is now wrongly called Azad Kashmir.]
" The administration of such areas [that is, the areas
other than those occupied by Pakistan] remains
under the jurisdiction of the Government of the
State." [8/1100, annex 27, appendix, para. 8.]
Therefore, if this is true, if this memorandum of
27 August 1948 is a communication from the Security
Council, then it means that any other position taken
thereafter would be a violation of the resolution, not
only a violation of the sovereignty.
34. But all this very soon changed in fact. The Pakistan Government said that no regular troops were in
this area from May to December 1948. By January
1949 what had happened? The Commission says:
" However, by January 1949 Pakistan undeniably
held militarj control over the northern areas; the
area was administered by local authorities, not
those of the Jammu and Kashmir Government, with
the assistance of Pakistan officials." 13

randum en rtlponse a la lettre et au memorandum du
Ministre des affaires etrangeres du Pakistan en date
du 19 aout 1948. M. Korbel declare :
( La resolution ne prevoit pas la surveillance de
territoires de l'Etat de Jammu et Cachemire autres
que ceux qu'occupent actuellement les troupes du
Pakistan et les forces armees placees sous leur
autorite.» - Cela s'applique seulement a ce que l'on
appelle maintenant a tort le Cachemire « azad I). « L'administration de ces regions [c'est-a-dire des
regions autres que celles qu'occupe le Pakistan]
reste de la competence du Gouvernement de l'Etat.»
[8/1100, annexe 27, appendice, par. 8.]
Si c'est vrai, par consequent, et si ce memorandum du
27 aout 1948 est une communication officielle du Conseil
de securite, il en resulte que toute autre position prise
par la suite constituerait une violation de la resolution,
et non pas seulement une violation de la souverainete.
34. Mais, en realite, la situation s'est modifiee tres
rapidement. Le Gouvernement du Pakistan a declare
qu'il n'y avait pas de troupes regulieres dans cette region
entre mai et decembre 1948. Qu'etait-il arrive en
janvier 1949? Voici ce que dit la Commission:
« Toutefois, en janvier 1949, il etait incontestable
que le Pakistan controlait militairement les regions
septentrionales; la region etait administree, avec
l'aide de fonctionnaires du Pakistan, par des autorites locales ne faisant pas partie du Gouvernement
de Jammu et Cachemire.» 13

35. I ask every member of the Council, particularly
the representative of the United Kingdom, whether
there can be any justification in international law and
equity for arguing the case or putting forward the point
of view that he has done, and that has been advanced
all along in this matter, when the period of negotiations and resolutions and the period immediately
following the period of trying to establish a cease-fire
line has been used for consolidation - because from
May to December 1948 there were no troops in there,
according to the Pakistan statement.

35. Je demande a chacun des membres du Conseil, en
particulier au representant du Royaurne-Uni, si le droit
international et l' equite perrnettent de justifier d'une
d'une fal;on ou d'une autre I'argurnent ou le point de
vue qui a ete presente et que nous avons entendu tout
au long de l'exarnen de cette affaire, alors qu'on a
profite de la periode des negociations et de I'adoption
des resolutions, ainsi que de l'epoque qui a irnrnediaternent suivi celle pendant laquelle on a essaye d'etablir une ligne de suspension d'arrnes, pour consolider
les conquetes deja realisees; en effet, d'apres la declaration du Gouvernement du Pakistan, il n'y avait pas
de troupes dans la region, de mai a decernbre 1948.

36. The Commission says:
" ... by January 1949, Pakistan undeniably held
military control over the northern areas; the area was
administered by local authorities, not those of the
Jammu and Kashmir Government, with the assistance of Pakistan officials."

36. La Comrnission dit ceci :
« ... En janvier 1949, il etait incontestable que le
Pakistan controlait militairernent les regions septentrionales; la region etait adrninistree, avec l'aide
de fonctionnaires du Pakistan, par des autorites
locales ne faisant pas partie du Gouvernement de
Jarnrnu et Cachemire.))
S'il s'agissait seulement d'autorites locales, on pourrait
cornprendre. II y avait une guerre civile, et on n'y
pouvait rien. Mais lorsque les forces d'un autre pays
penetrent sur le territoire d'un Etat souverain, c'est
une chose differente. C'est la ce qui s'est passe, et
sir Owen Dixon lui-rneme l'a confirrne par la suite,
cornrne on peut le constater.

If it were only local authorities, one could understand.
There was a civil war, and you could not do anything
about it. But when another country comes into a sovereign State, it is a different proposition. That is what
happened, and you will find this corroborated afterwards by no less a person than Sir Owen Dixon.

37. On 15 April 1949, the Commission repeated their
assurances to us when they said:

37. La Comrnission a reaffirrne les assurances qu'elle
nous avait donnees, lorsqu'elle a declare ce qui suit,
le 15 avril 1949 :

11 Official Records of the Security Council, Fourth Year, Special
Supplement No 7, document S/1430, para. 274.

11 Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite, quatrieme
annee, Supplement special nO 7, document S/1430, par. 274.

10

"In the sparsely populated and mountainous
region of the territory of Jammu and Kashmir in
tlie north, observers will be stationed who, in the
event that the defence of this territory becomes
necessary, will so advise the Commission. The Commission, in this case, or at the request of the Government of India, may agree that the Government of
India post garrisons at specified points of this
area." 14
This was not only written to us, but also to the Minister
for Kashmir Affairs in the Government of Pakistan.
The Government of Pakistan had then been informed
that if necessary Indian garrisons would take over.

(C Dans les regIOns montagneuses et peu peupIees
du Nord de I'Etat de Jammu et Cachemire seront
places des observateurs qui, si la defense de ce territoire devient necessaire, en aviseront la Commission.
Dans ce cas, ou a la demande du Gouvernement de
I'Inde, la Commission pourra accepter que le Gouvernement de l'Inde place des garnisons en des points
determines de cette zone.» 14

Ce texte a ete communique non seulement au Gouvernement de I'Inde, mais egalement au Ministre pour les
affaires du Cachemire du Gouvernement pakistanais.
Le Gouvernement du Pakistan avait donc ete avise
que, s'il etait necessaire, des garnisons indiennes seraient
place~s aux points voulus.

38. The United States Vice-Chairman of the Commission, in a letter of 16 April 1949 to the Pakistan
Ministry for Kashmir Affairs - whatever that may be
- writes the same month:
"I understand the intention of the Commission
to be that it may agree to the stationing of Indian
troops at specified points should it be convinced, in
the light of all the circumstances, that it is necessary
for the defence of that territory." 15

38. Le Vice-President de la Commission, qui etait
le representant des Etats-Unis, ecrivait le 16 avril 1949
dans une lettre adressee a ce que I'on appelle le Ministere
pakistanais pour les affaires du Cachemire :
« Je pense que la Commission a !'intention d'accepter que les troupes indiennes stationnent en des
points precis, si elle est convaincue, en prenant en
consideration toutes les circonstances presentes, que
la defense de ce territoire I'exige.» 15

39. This is the position as we see it in regard to the
northern areas. These northern areas were differently
administered at different times under British rule.
But at no time did they have a separate sovereignty.
When the British withdrew from India, when
paramountcy lapsed, when the British power was
withdrawn, the British did not as a matter of law leave
any authority behind in these places. Whether they
were called residents, agencies, administered areas,
whatever they might have been, they were all under
the suzerainty of the Maharajah of Jammu and Kashmir.
Therefore, there was no other territory there except
the State of Jammu and Kashmir. So I submit that
Pakistan's occupation of these nortern areas is part
of the annexation and therefore a violation of part I
of the resolution of 13 August 1948, a violation which
makes any further progress impossible.

39. Telle est la situation, seIon nous, en ce qui concerne
les regions du Nord. Ces regions ont ete administrees
de differentes fa«ons a differentes epoques, au temps
de la domination britannique. Mais jamais elles n'ont
joui d'une souverainete propre. Lorsque les Britanniques ont quitte I'Inde, lorsque la « souverainete»
«( paramountcy») a pris fin, ils n'ont laisse derriere
eux, dans ces regions, aucune autorite juridiquement
etablie. Toutes les residences, tous les territoires, toutes
les zones administrees, quel que f1lt leur nom et quelle
que fUt leur nature, se trouvaient sous la suzerainete
du maharajah de Jammu et Cachemire. Par consequent,
il n'y avait la qu'un seul territoire, celui de I'Etat de
Jammu et Cachemire. Ainsi, je soutiens que I'occupation de ces regions du Nord par le Pakistan rentre dans
I'annexion et constitue, par consequent, une violation
de la premiere partie de la resolution de la Commission
en date du 13 ao1lt 1948, violation qui rend impossible
d'aller plus loin dans son application.

40. More than that: Since the appeal has come from
the most friendly quarter of all both privately and
publicly, namely, from the United Kingdom, how can
the United Kingdom address an appeal to us for any
further progress in the way of what they call truce
negotiations when, not out of our suspicion but by the
facts established, every negotiation is used for the
spoliation of our territories? It is not a question of
how we can trust them because our minds are distrustful, but here are the facts before you. First of all, there
is concealment in the Security Council. Then, there is
this spurious explanation that the Council was not
informed that there was an invasion because the
Commis'12n had not been set up, which is contradicted
by the v..cts. Even if the Commission had not been
set up, the Council could have been informed. But the
Commission had been set up. Further, the w"'101e of

40. Je dirai plus: puisqu'un appel nous a ete adresse,
tant en prive que publiquement, par le pays qui entretient avec nous les relations les plus amicales, je veux
dire le Royaume-Uni, comment le Royaume-Uni peut-il
nous demander d'aller plus loin dans la voie de ce qu'il
appelle les negociations de la treve, alors que - et
cela n'est pas un soup«on de notre part, mais un fait
etabli - on profite de toutes negociations pour nous
spolier de nos territoires? Il ne s'agit pas de savoir
comment nous pourrions nous fier au Pakistan alors
que nous serions metiants, mais il s'agit de faits.
D'abord, on cache la situation au Conseil de securite.
Ensuite, on donne une explication mensongere, suivant
laquelle le Conseil n'aurait pas ete informe de !'invasion parce que la Commission n'avait pas ete constituee,
ce qui est contraire a la realite. Meme si la Commission
n'avait pas ete constituee, on aurait pu informer le

le
15

Ibid., document S/1430/Add.1. annex 17, appendix.
Ibid., annex 19.

le

15

11

Ibid., document S/1430/Add.1, annexe 17, appendice.
Ibid., annexe 19.

that period has been taken up by a further consolidation
both in the north and in the west. What is more, there
is the self-confessed admission of Pakistan that a
sister State, a neighbouring country, which has taken no
small part in historical terms in the emergence of
Pakistan itself, had been invaded, not because there was
invasion from its side, but as a protective operation.
That is the position.

Conseil - mais la Commission avait ete constituee.
D'autre part, pendant toute la periode consideree, on
a consolide les resultats obtenus tant au nord qu'a
I'ouest. Qui plus est, le Gouvernement du Pakistan a
avoue lui-meme que, s'il avait envahi un Etat frere,
un pays voisin, qui, du point de vue historique, a
beaucoup contribue a la naissance de I'Etat pakistanais,
c'etait non pas pour repousser une invasion, mais a
titre de mesure de protection. Telle est la situation.

41. The reasons, if any, given to Mr. Lozano, the
Chairman of the Commission, abnut the Pakistan
attitude in regard to a part of. these northern areas,
namely, the Gilgit Agency, are not without interest.
I hope the representative of the United Kingdom,
with all the expert knowledge that he will have available
at his disposal, will try to look at the evidence. On
18 July 1948, Sir Mohammed Zafrullah Khan said to
Mr. Lozano:
"In late October 1947, representatives of the
Gilgit Agency had requested accession to Pakistan,
but the Pakistan Government had not taken any
decision at that time." [8/1100, annex 8.]

41. Les raisons - si raisons il y a - que le Gouvernement du Pakistan a donnees a M. Lozano, president
de la Commission, touchant son attitude a I'egard d'une
partie de ces regions du Nord - le territoire de Gilgit ne sont pas sans interet. J'espere que le representant
du Royaume-Uni, compte tenu de tous les renseignements precis dont il disposera, s'efforcera de voir les
faits. Sir Mohammed Zafrullah Khan a dit a M. Lozano
le 18 juillet 1948 :
«A la fin du mois d'octobre 1947, des deIegues du
territoire de Gilgit ont demande que leur pays flit
admis dans le sein du Pakistan, mais le Gouvernement du Pakistan n'a pas pris de decision aI'epoque.»
[8/1100, annexe 8.]

42. If true, it is a very correct position. How could
they take any decision? The Gilgit Agency could no
more accede than a subdistrict in India or anywhere
else. So it is quite correct. But he goes on to say:

42. Si c'etait vrai, cette attitude etait parfaitement
correcte. Comment pouvait-il prendre une decision?
Le territoire de Gilgit ne pouvait pas plus decider de .,
son accession qu'un sous-district de I'Inde ou de n'im- :j
porte quel pays. Cette attitude etait donc parfaitement
correcte. Mais on nous dit ensuite :
m
"
«A maintes reprises, le territoire de GiIgit a donne
clairement a entendre que, si le Pakistan ne prenait
pas de decision, il solliciterait son admission dans le
sein de I'Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques.» [Ibid.]
Nous n'avons rec;u aucune communication a ce sujet,
ni de la population du territoire de GiIgit - a supposer
qu'elle flit autorisee a le faire -, ni de I'Union des
Republiques socialistes sovietiques. Meme si cette
population desirait l'accession a n'importe quel Etat,
je ne vois pas le moins du monde ce que cela aurait
a faire avec la question. En consequence, vous pouvez
constater qu'il y avait la une tentative pour essayer
de montrer a M. Lozano, president de la Commission,
ce qui arriverait si ces gens ne s'emparaient pas du
territoire de Gilgit.

I

f.·.·.ll

"There had been frequent requests from the
Gilgit Agency which had clearly indicated that, if
no action were taken by Pakistan, it would seek
accession to the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics."
[Ibid.]
We have had no communication about this either
from the Gilgit Agency people - if they are entitled
to do so - or from the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. Even if they had wanted to accede to anybody, I
do not see what that had to do with the matter at all.
Therefore, you can see there is an attempt to put
before Mr. Lozano, Chairman of the Commission, what
would happen if these people -did not take over the
Gilgit Agency.

43. On 26 April 1949, Mr. Gurmani, who was then
the Minister for Kashmir Affairs and a member of the
Pakistan Government - not now, I believe - in a
letter to the Chairman of the Commission, disclosed
that these areas were firmly under "Azad" control.
Now, how can that be? We were told by Pakistan
itself that between May and December 1948, there
were neither troops nor anybody there and that Pakistan had nothing to do with it. Four months later, in
1949, the responsible Minister of the Government
informs the Commission that these areas are firmly
t'nder "Azad" control. If "Azad" control means a
government that is part of the Government of West
Kashmir, it is even now not true. In any case, there
can be no other control there except what may arise
out of local insurrection or out of our willingness to

43. Le 26 avril 1949, M. Gurmani, qui etait alors
Ministre pour les affaires du Cachemire et membre du
Gouvernement du Pakistan - ce qu'il n'est plus maintenant, je crois - a reveIe dans une lettre adressee au
President de la Commission que ces regions etaient
fermement sous contre.Ie « azad ll. Or, comment cela
etait-il possible? Le Pakistan nous a declare lui-meme
qu'il n'y avait la ni troupes ni personne d'autreentre
mai et decembre 1948, et que le Pakistan ne :S,e melait
en rien de tout cela. Quatre mois plus tarqes ~n 1949,
le ministre responsable de ce gouvernement'lIlforme la
Commission que ces regions sont fermement sous
controle cc azad I). Si cc controle azad» signifie un gouvernement qui fait partie du gouvernement du Cachemire
occidental, ce n'est pas vrai, meme maintenant. En tout
etat de cause, il ne pouvait y avoir la d'autre controle

12

stay out, or out of the Commission's appeal not to do
anything that might lead to a renewal of conflict.

44. As I pointed out before: " Azad " control means,
according to them, local authorities under the direction
of the Pakistan Government. But Mr. Gurmani, the
Minister for Kashmir Affairs, Government of Pakistan,
enlightens the Commission on 26 April 1949, only four
months after they had said there was nobody there,
as follows in a letter to the Commission:
" Efforts are being made to make the route Gilgit
(Bunji) - Skardu also jeepablewithin a short
period. [This is supposed to be territory over
which we have no jurisdiction whatsoever.] . . .
There exist: a good all-weather Dakota strip
at Gilgit; a good all-weather Dakota strip at Skardu;
a Dakota strip at Chilas." III
We will hear more about Chilas if this matter comes up
again in a few months.
45. That these airstrips were constructed under
Pakistan occupation is also clear from the following
- and that is my statement: In addition to all that is
necessary for living there such as the usual consumer
goods, these strips and roads have been built in these
areas. We are not objecting to progress, but the question
is: Who has the authority to build these places? Is it
suggested that a handful of people living out there
could build airstrips and could construct these roads
and so on? Even if it is so suggested, it will be denied
by the Pakistan Minister himself who says that they
have built it. What is more, you can find items relating
to this expenditure in the Pakistan budget. The Pakistan budget for 1957-58 makes a provision under
demand No. 30 of capital outlay on civil aviation for
the construction of runways and terminal buildings
at Gilgit.

46. There are two or three matters to be considered.
First of all, that comes out of the Pakistan budget.
I have not examined carefully what demand No. 30
is, under what heading it comes. Let us assume that
it comes under civilian demand. What right does
Pakistan have to build these things in somebody
else's territory? Secondly, under the cease-fire agreement they are not permitted to do these things, even
assuming that this was an evacuated territory. Then
we come to the constitutional aspect of it on which I had
some respectful differences with my colleague, the
Foreign Minister of Pakistan, the other day, wiLh re,_ I"d
to the constitutional aspects arising from the Pakistan
Constitution. The Establishment of the West Pakistan
Act of 1955 includes some of the northern areas in its
territory. The annexation of other areas is covered
by section I, clause 2, sub-clause (c) of the Constitution
11 Official Records of the Securit!J Council, Fourth Year, Special
Supplement No 7, document 5/1430, annex 24, appendix, sections
" and 5.

que celui qui pouvait resulter d'une insurrection locale,
ou du fait que nous avions accepte de ne pas etre sur
place et que la Commission avait demande que 1'0n
ne fit rien qui fllt susceptible d'entrainer une reprise
du conflit.
44. Comme je l'ai deja fait remarquer, « controle
azad» signifie, d'apres eux, autorites locales sous la
direction du Gouvernement du Pakistan. Mais M. Gurmani, ministre pakistanais pour les affaires du Cachemire, eclaire la Commission le 26 avril 1949, quatre mois
seulement apres qu'ils avaient declare qu'il n'y avait
personne dans la region, en ecrivant ce qui suit a la
Commission :
«Des travaux en cours ont pour objet de rendre,
d'ici peu, la route Gilgit (Bunji)-Skardu egalement
accessible aux jeeps.» (C'est la un territoire sur
lequel on est cense ne pas avoir juridiction.)
«... Il existe : a Gilgit, uneb onne piste d'atterrissage
pour Dakotas, utilisable par tous temps; a Skardu,
une bonne piste pour Dakotas, utilisable par tous
temps; a Chilas, une piste d'atterrissage pour
Dakotas. »111
Nous entendrons reparler de Chilas si cette question
revient a 1'0rdre du jour dans quelques mois.
45. Je ferai observer qu'il est prouve aussi que ces
pistes d'atterrissage ont ete construites sous 1'0ccupation pakistanaise du fait meme que ces travaux ont
ete entrepris dans cette region, en dehors de tout ce
qui est necessaire a la vie comme les biens de consommation usuels. Nous ne trouvons pas a redire au
progres, mais la question est de savoir qui a autorite
pour entreprendre ces travaux. Veut-on nous donner
a entendre que c'est la poignee de gens qui vivent la
qui ont pu construire ces pistes d'atterrissage, ces
routes, etc. ? Meme si on le voulait, ce serait dementi
par le Ministre du Pakistan lui-meme, qui declare que
c'est le Pakistan qui a entrepris ces travaux. Qui plus
est, nous trouvons dans le budget du Pakistan des
postes relatifs aces depenses. Dans le budget du
Pakistan pour 1957-58, il est prevu, dans la demande
de credits nO 30 relative aux depenses en capital pour
l'aviation civile, une certaine somme pour la construction de pistes d'atterrissage et de batiments a Gilgit.
46. Il Y a ici deux ou trois points a considerer. Tout
d'abord, cette somme est inscrite au budget du Pakistan.
Je n'ai pas examine en detail ce qu'est cette demande
de credits nO 30, sous quelle rubrique elle figur~. Supposons qu'elle figure sous la rubrique des depenses civiles.
Quel droit a le Pakistan d'entreprendre ces travaux de
construction sur un autre territoire que le sien? En
second lieu, aux termes de l'accord de suspension
d'armcs, le Pakistan n'a pas le droit de le faire, meme
en supposant qu'il s'agisse d'un territoire evacue. Enfin,
il y a l'aspect constitutionnel de la question, apropos
duquel j'ai eu l'autre jour quelques respectueuses divergences d'opinion avec mon collegue, le Ministre des
afIaires etrangeres du Pakistan, au sujet de certains
points de la Constitution du Pakistan. D'apres ce que
prevoit la loi de 1955 sur l'etablissement du Pakistan
occidental, certaines des regions du Nord sont com-

I annee,Proces-verbaux
officiels du Conseil de securiU, qualrieme
Supplement special nO 7, document 5/1430/Add.l, annexe
11

24,. append ice, sect. 4 et 5.

of Pakistan, which refers to territories under the
administration of the Federation but not included in
either Province; that is to say, either the Pakistan
Government takes any territory under its administration, and then even if it is not one of its Provinces it
becomes part of Pakistan. That means annexation.

prises dans son territoire. L'annexion d'autres regions
est prevue par 1'article premier, paragraphe 2, alinea c,
de la Constitution du Pakistan, qui vise les territoires
qui sont sous 1'administration de la Federation, mais
ne sont pas compris dans rune ou 1'autre province;
autrement dit, le Gouvernement pakistanais s'empare
de tout territoire place sous son administration, et,
meme si ce territoire n'est pas une province du Pakistan,
il en devient partie. Cela equivaut a. une annexion.

47. What my Government is trying to convey to
the Security Council as best as it can is that you have
before you the fact that part of the territory of the
Union of India has been annexed by Pakistan which
has no status whatsoever in this matter except that
of a defendant, and whatever arrangements have been
made with Pakistan have been in order to stop the
fighting, in order to obtain the evacuation of the territory and so on. I could give you more evidence from
the statement of the present Foreign Minister of the
direct nature of the administration of these territories,
but it would not be necessary.

47. Ce que mon gouvernement essaie d'exposer de son
mieux au Conseil de securite, c'est que vous vous
trouvez en presence du fait qu'une partie du territoire
de 1'Union indienne a ete annexee par le Pakistan, qui
n'a d'autre qualite en la matiere que celle de defendeur, .
et que tous les arrangements qui ont ete conclus avec
lui ne 1'ont ete qu'afin d'arreter les combats, d'obtenir
1'evacuation du territoire, etc. Je pourrais vous donner
encore d'autres preuves du fait que ces territoires sont
administres directement en me fondant sur la declaration de 1'actuel Ministre des affaires etrangeres, mais
cela serait inutile.

48. Finally, I should like to say on this subject that
I have already pointed out Pakistan's stated position
as to why they had entered. I have also pointed out
that they have said that they were not in the northern
areas between May and December 1948. Now we come
to January 1949, when Pakistan held military control.
Therefore, it is clear that either Pakistan concealed
the presence of its troops in this area, which I think
is not an uncha.ritable or mischievous inference to
make, but a realistic one from the facts of the case,
because it has always done so - either Pakistan
concealed the presence of its troops in this area, as
it did in regard to the first entry of the troops and the
build-up of the "Azad " Kashmir forces, or this area
was occupied by Pakistan troops after the cease-fire
of 1 January 1949. Even if it entered there between
the period of May to December 1948, which it says
it did not, then it acted by way of concealment, and
the result is concealment of facts from the Security
Council. The resolutions of 13 August 1948 and 5
January 1949 were passed, as has been implied several
times and pointed out by the Commission, without
the knowledge of these facts, and several times material
changes have taken place. If the Commission had
known that, it would have put that in; if it had known
that, it would have done something else. Either, therefore. that was concealed or the entry of the Pakistan
army and its administration of this area came after
the cease-fire, in which case it is a violation of part I
- a further violation of part I - of the resolution
of 13 August 1948. The whole territory, comprising
several tens of thousands of square miles, was annexed,
occupied and militarily administered. That is a gross
violation of part I of the resolution and goes further
to strengthen the position established by Mr. Jarring
in his report.

48. Enfin, je voudrais ajouter sur ce point que j'ai
deja. signale quelle etait la position prise par le Pakistan
au sujet des raisons pour lesquelles leurs forces sont
entrees. J'ai deja. signaIe aussi qu'ils avaient dit qu'ils
ne se trouvaient pas dans les regions du Nord entre mai
et decembre 1948. Venons-en maintenant a. janvier 1949,
epoque a. laquelle le Pakistan detenait le controle militaire. Il est donc evident, ou bien que le Pakistan a
dissimuIe la presence de ses troupes dans cette region
- ce qui n'est pas, je crois, faire une deduction peu
charitable ou malveillante, mais une deduction realiste
tiree des faits de la cause, car le Pakistan a toujours
agi ainsi -, ou bien, dis-je, que le Pakistan a dissimule
la presence de ses troupes dans cette region, comme il
1'a fait en ce qui concerne la premiere entree de ses
troupes et la constitution des forces du Cachemire
« azad», ou bien que cette region a ete occupee par les
troupes pakistanaises apres la suspension d'armes du
1er janvier 1949. En tout cas, si le Pakistan est entre
dans cette region entre mai et decembre 1948, ce qu'il
declare ne pas avoir fait, alors il a agi en dissimulant
ses actes, et cela revient a. une dissimulation des faits
vis-a.-vis du Conseil de securite. Les resolutions du
13 aout 1948 et du 5 janvier 1949 ont ete adoptees,
comme cela a ete dit a. plusieurs reprises et signale
par la Commission, sans que ces faits fussent connus,
et la situation a ete modifiee de fal,(on considerable.
Si la Commission av.ait su cela, elle en aurait fait etat ;
si elle avait su cela, elle aurait fait autre chose~ Par
consequent, ou bien il y a eu dissimulation, ou bien
1'entree de 1'armee pakistanaise et la prise en charge
de 1'administration de cette region par le Pakistan se
sont produits apres la suspension d'armes et, dans ce
dernier cas, il y a eu - une fois de plus - violation
de la premiere partie de la resolution du 13 aout 1948.
Tout ce territoire, qui comprend plusieurs dizaines de
milliers de kilometres carres, a ete annexe, occupe et
administre militairement. C'est une violation flagrante
de la premiere partie de la resolution, et cela renforce
encore la position etablie par M. Jarring dans son
rapport.

49. Further, what I have read out sets out in the
Commission's own language the legal position of India

49. En outre, ce dont j'ai donne lecture etablit, dans
les termes memes employes par la Commission, quelle

14

I
(

I

~

in regard to the sovereignty of its territory, its right
to security, to establish garrisons and how important
it is from the point of view of geography, the international lay-out of this place, the trade routes of
Central Asia and how all along, in the interests of the
interests of the cessation of hostilities, the Government of India has played itself down in regard to
pressing its claims. It only asks for the minimum
assertion and exercise of its rights in order to protect
its own territory. That is the position with regard to
the northern areas. It may well be that further observations on this subject may come up which may require
answers, in which case the Government of India reserves
its position.

est la position juridique de l'Inde en ce qui concerne
la souverainete sur son territoire, son droit a la securite,
son droit a placer des garnisons, et combien e'est
important du point de vue de la geographie, de la
situation internationale de cette region, des routes
eommerciales de l' Asie centrale, et comment, dans
I'interet de la cessation des hostilites, le Gouvernement
de I'Inde n'a cesse de montrer une grande retenue
lorsqu'il a fait valoir ses revendications. Le Gouvernement de I'Inde ne demande qu'a affirmer et exercer
ces droits au minimum, afin de proteger son propre
territoire. Telle est la position en ce qui concerne les
regions du Nord. Il est fort possible que de nouvelles
observations soient faites sur cette question, qui exigeront peut-etre de nous une reponse, et le Gouvernement
de I'Inde reserve sa position en ce cas.

50. Now we come to the observations made mainly
by the United States and the United Kingdom followed
up by the others who all say, "If everybody agrees,
we have no objection." That is a topic which Sir
Pierson Dixon, I think it was, chooses in the first
instance to call "demilitarization". I personally
cannot find fault with him for using the word " demilitarization"; even if I could, I would not want to.
But it must be understood that the word "demilitarization" in connexion with Jammu and Kashmir
is used only in the context of the resolution, namely,
by agreement to diminish the number of troops and
the quantum of equipment, not demilitarization in
the sense of neutralizing a territory or anything of
that kind. In the course of the negotiations we ourselves have casually used this phrase, but not in the
sense of any abrogation of sovereignty. I am not
going to start from the va.rious statements made
before the Council with regard to demilitarization,
but let us take the problem by itself. What is meant
by demilitarization? We are for demilitarization in
the sense that if Pakistan will take away the troops,
take away the equipment, take away the organization,
take away everything that they are not entitled to
retain there in terms of part I of the resolution of
13 August 1948 - that would be progress towards
the implementation of part I and, if it were succeeded
by a continuous period of the observation of paragraph
E and no threat to the security of the Union, a new
situation would arise. Therefore, demilitarization cannot refer to the Union of India.

50. Je passe maintenant aux observations faites surtout par les Etats-Unis et le Royaume-Uni et reprises
par d'autres, qui ont tous dit : « Si tout le monde est
d'accord, nous ne nous y opposons pas». Il s'agit de ce
que sir Pierson Dixon, si je ne me trompe, a le premier
choisi d'appeler la « demilitarisation». Personnellement,
je ne puis lui reprocher de se servir du mot « demilitarisation» et, meme si je le pouvais, je ne le voudrais pas.
Mais il faut bien comprendre que, dans le cas du Jammu
et Caehemire, le terme « demilitarisation» ne s'emploie
que dans le contexte de la resolution, c'est-a-dire pour
designer la reduction, par voie d'accord, des effectifs
et des quantites d'equipement, et non dans le sens de
la neutralisation d'un territoire ou de rien de ce genre.
Au cours des negociations, il nous est arrive d'employer
nous-memes cette expression, mais non dans le sens
d'un abandon de souverainete. Je ne vais pas reprendre
les diverses declarations qui ont ete faites devant le
Conseil au sujet de la demilitarisation, mais je considererai la question en elle-meme. Qu'entend-on par demilitarisation? Nous sommes pour la demilitarisation en
ce sens que, si le Pakistan retirait les troupes, retirait
l'equipement, retirait l'organisation, retirait tout ce
qu'il n'a pas le droit de maintenir la en vertu de la
premiere partie de la resolution du 13 aout 1948, cela
constituerait un progres vers I'application de cette
premiere partie, et, s'il etait suivi d'une periode pendant
laquelle, de falion ininterrompue, le paragraphe E de
la premiere partie serait respecte et la securite de I'Union
ne serait pas menacee, on se trouverait alors dans une
situation nouvelle. Done, lorsqu'on parle de demilitarisation, il ne peut s'agir de l'Union indienne.

51. Since you, Sir, come from a new sovereign State
yourself, may I say this with great respect. This Security
Council, or indeed any part of the United Nations,
has no right under the Charter, under no resolution
of the United Nations so far, even apart from this
subject, to call upon one individual country to demilitarize itself for no reason. We all want demilitarization
of the whole world, and I wish that some of the statements made, for example, by my colleague, Mr. Walker
of Australia, had been made in some other place. We
were told by Mr. Walker that:

51. Et, venant vous-meme d'un Etat recemment
devenu souverain, Monsieur le President, puis-je vous
dire ceci avec grand respect. Le Conseil de securite,
ou tout autre organe des Nations Unies, n'a pas le droit,
en vertu de la Charte, en vertu d'aucune resolution
adoptee jusqu'a present par les Nations Unies, meme
en dehors de la question actueIle, de demander a un
pays particulier d'accepter sans motif valable la demilitarisation. Nous voulons tous que le monde entier
soit demilitarise, et je souhaiterais que certaines declarations qui ont ete faites ici, par exemple par mon
collegue de l' Australie, M. Walker, eussent ete faites
ailleurs. M. Walker nous a dit que :
« ••• la necessite de progres aussi rapides que possible dans le developpement eeonomique de I'Inde
.et du Pakistan fait que le maintien de forces armees

". . . the need for all possible progress to be
made in the rapid economic development of India
and Pakistan renders the maintenance of armed

15

forces on the present scale in relation to the Kashmir
situation an increasing handicap. There is also the
view, which has been so widely expressed in the
United Nations, that balanced reductions in armed
forces can contribute, pershaps more than anything
else, to an increase in mutual confidence between
countries suspicious of each other's intentions."
[798th meeting, para. 12.]

sur le pied actuel en raison de la situation au Cachemire constitue un handicap toujours plus lourd. Il y
a aussi l'idee, qui a ete si souvent exprimee a l'Organisation des Nations Unies, qu'une reduction equilibree des forces armees peut contribuer, plus peut-etre
que n'importe quelle autre mesure, a accroitre la
confiance mutuelle entre des pays dont chacun
soupl;0nne l'autre de mauvaises intentions.»
[798e seance, par. 12.]

52. We are all looking forward to seeing how
Mr. Walker will vote tomorrow, but why the problem
of disarmament should be singled out in its application
to us we do not understand. So, to a sovereign State
there can be no demand for demilitarization. We are
entitled to maintain what troops we can afford. If
they violate international law, the consequences will
fall upon us, but no appeal can be addressed to any
country in the form of a unilateral injunction to demilitarize. And, if I may say so, I am rather surprised
at the wording used in some of the resolutions which
Dr. Graham has carried to India where the Security
Council asked Dr. Graham to effect the demilitarization.
How Dr. Graham can effect demilitarization I do not
know. He can recommend demilitarization to us, but
he cannot effect it. It is impossible. Therefore, any
request to any sovereign State for demilitarization,
without any other circumstances binding it, would,
I submit, not be in consonance with the present state
of affairs in the world or with any provision of the
United Nations Charter or with any resolution. But
if any country has made a specific agreement with
regard to its troops, the situation is different. Supposing we made a proclamation by an instrument that
we wanted to be treated as an international instrument
- shall we say as in the case of the Egyptian Declaration on the Suez Canal of 24 April 1957 [S/3818] we would have an international obligation to do whatever was in that instrument.

52. Nous sommes curieux de voir comment M. Walker
votera demain, mais nous ne comprenons pas pourquoi
l'on nous vise particulierement dans cette application
du desarmement. On ne peut exiger la demilitarisation
d'un Etat souverain. Nous avons le droit d'entretenir
les effectifs que nous pouvons nous permettre d'avoir.
Si nos troupes violent le droit international, les consequences en retomberont sur nous, mais on ne peut
adresser a aucun pays un appel qui ressemble a une
injonction unilaterale d'avoir a demilitariser. Et je puis
dire que je suis assez surpris des termes employes dans
certaines des resolutions que M. Graham a apportees
avec lui lorsqu'il est venu dans l'Inde et dans lesquelles
le Conseil de securite demandait a M. Graham d'operer
la demilitarisation. Comment M. Graham peut-il
operer la demilitarisation, je ne le sais pas. Il peut nous
recommander la demilitarisation, mais il ne peut pas
l'operer. C'est impossible. En consequence, toute
demande de demilitarisation adressee a un Etat souverain, sans que rien d'autre ne l'y oblige, ne serait pas,
selon moi, conforme a l'etat actuel des choses dans le
monde ou a une disposition quelconque de la Charte
des Nations Unies, ou a une resolution quelconque. Mais
si un pays a conclu un accord expres au sujet de ses
effectifs, la situation est differente. Supposons que nous
fassions une proclamation au moyen d'un instrument
que nous voudrions voir considerer comme un instrument international - par exemple, comme dans le cas
de la declaration egyptienne du 24 avril 1957 relative
au canal de Suez [S/3818] - alors nous serions tenus,
par une obligation internationale, de faire ce qui serait
prevu par cet instrument.

53. Therefore, it comes to this. The so-called demilitarization - that is, any problem affecting either
the quantum, the weight, the quality, the augmentation or whatever it may be of military strength - is,
as far as we are concerned, strictly bounded by any
undertakings that we may have given. And that is
what we have been discussing for a long time. What
are the undertakings of 13 August 1948 and 5 January
1949, and where do they take us? And if Mr. Jarring's
position is to be taken as being that he has established
that a deadlock has been reached with regard to the
implementation of part I of the resolution of 13 August
1948, then the question of demilitarization applies
only to our friends from Pakistan. It is a question
that ought to be addressed to only one place, and to
nobody else.

53. Par consequent, tout se ramee it ceci. Ce qu'on a
appele la demilitarisation, c'est-a-dire toute decision
portant sur !'importance, le poids, la qualite, l'augmentation ou tout autre facteur de la force militaire, depend
strictement, en ce qui nous concerne, des engagements
que nous pouvons avoir pris. Et c'est la ce dont nous
discutons depuis longtemps. Quels sont les engagements
du 13 aout 1948 et du 5 janvier 1949, et a quoi sommesnous engages? S'il faut considerer que la position
adoptee par M. Jarring est qu'il a etabli que l'on est
arrive dans une impasse pour ce qui est de l'application
de la premiere partie de la resolution du 13 a,out 1948,
alors la question de la demilitarisation ne vise que nos
amis du Pakistan. C'est la une question qui doit etre
posee a un seul destinataire, et a personne d'autre.

54. There is no title resting anywhere to call upon
a sovereign State to demilitarize - however weak it
may be, however humble, however poor or however
backward. We are still all Member States of the United
Nations. But if r"y State, however powerful, has given
an undertakin~ then that undertaking has to be
carried out, and in this particular case the under-

54. Rien n'autorise en droit a inviter un Etat souverain a proceder a la demilitarisation, si faible, si humble,
si pauvre ou si arriere soit-il. Nous sommes encore tous
des Etats Membres des Nations Unies. Mais si un Etat
quelconque, si puissant soit-il, a pris un engagement,
alors cet engagement doit etre execute et, dans le cas
qui nous occupe, cet engagement - pretendu tel et a

16

taking - so-called and if any - can only be by the
engagement of these resolutions. So we come back to
resolutions, and when we come back to the resolutions
one cannot read the resolutions from the top upwards.
The resolutions are so constructed that certain things
happen, and then a new situation arises. When that
new situation arises, some other action is performed.
Then something else happens. India has undertaken,
on its side, to carry out some undertakings.

supposer qu'il existe - ne peut decouler que desdites
resolutions. Nous revenons donc a ces resolutions, et,
quand nous revenons aux resolutions, nous devons les
lire en commen<;ant par le haut. Les resolutions prevoient que certaines chases se produisent, et qu'alors
une nouvelle situation se presente. Quand cette nouvelle situation se presente, on accomplit une certaine
action. Puis quelque chose d'autre se produit. L'Inde
s'est obligee, pour sa part, a executer certains
engagements.

55. So, at the present moment, this question of socalled demilitarization, in the sense of dehydrating
troops anywhere, can apply only to our friends across
the border who have their troops inside our borders.
The appeal cannot be addressed to us. If, on the other
hand, the position taken up by the representative of
the United Kingdom, followed by the representatives
of the United States and Australia, relates to part II
of the resolution of 13 August 1948 - and if, what
is more, the latter part of part II of the resolution
has to be performed before the initial part and before
part I - I think we have given our answer at length.

55. Actuellement, cette question de ce que 1'0n appelle
la demilitarisation, au sens d'une reduction des effectifs
oil que ce soit, ne peut donc s'appliquer qu'a nos amis
de l'autre cote de la frontiere, qui ont des troupes a
l'.interieur de nos frontieres. L'appel ne peut s'adresser
a nous. Si, d'autre part, la position adoptee par le
representant du Royaume-Uni et reprise a sa suite par
les representants des Etats-Unis et de l'Australie se
rapporte a la deuxieme partie de la resolution du
13 aotit 1948, et, qui plus est, s'il est question que la
fin de la deuxieme partie de la resolution doive etre
mise en ceuvre avant le debut et avant la premiere partie,
je crois que, sur ce point, nous avons repondu
longuement.

56. Not only have we given our answer at length. We,
as a people, whatever our position may be as a State
in the world, have the obligation and the natural
desire of a nation to maintain our independence and
our integrity, and we cannot be called upon to permit
the security of our territory to be violated. I have
said all along, and even at the risk of repetition I say
again, that the purpose of the other side has been to
make use, for the purpose of military consolidation,
of every act of negotiation and everything that is
done to send someone to make any request. Therefore,
when we are asked for demilitarization, at the present
moment my Government does not desire to go into
this proposition any further than is necessary out of
courtesy to the Security Council and to enable it to
acquaint itself with the facts of the position, because
there are no proposals before us. When those proposals
come it will be time for my Government to take them
into account, in the light of what I am saying today.

56. Nous n'avons pas seulement repondu longuement.
En tant que peuple, quelle que puisse etre notre position en tant qu'Etat dans le monde, nous avons 1'0bligation et le desir, naturel chez une nation, de sauvegarder notre independance et notre integrite territo:riale, et 1'0n ne peut pas nous demander de laisser violer
la securite de notre territoire. Je n'ai cesse de dire - et,
meme au risque de me repeter, je redis - que le but de
la partie adverse est et a ete de consolider sa position
militaire en tirant parti de toute negociation et de
toute decision prise d'envoyer quelqu'un presenter une
demande. Par consequent, lorsqu'on nous demande
d'accepter la demilitarisation, mon gouvernement ne
desire pas pour le moment approfondir cette eventualite plus que ne l'exigent la courtoisie due au Conseil de
securite et la necessite de le mettre au courant des faits
de la cause, parce que nous ne sommes saisis d'aucune
proposition. Lorsque cette proposition viendra, il
sera temps pour mon gouvernement de l'envisager,
compte tenu des considerations que je presente
aujourd'hui.

57. What would demilitarization mean, and when
will it take place? One hundred per cent of the demilitarization is in the territory of India. Whether it
be on this side of the cease-fire line or on that side,
the demilitarization is in India and the militarization
is in Pakistan. And let us not forget that even Mr. Jarring, a neutral observer, has been obliged to point
out to the Council- I do not remember his exact
words now - that the changing situation in the world,
and the various political alignments, relationships and
so on in South-East Asia all have to be taken into
account.

57. Que signifierait la demilitarisation et quand
aurait-elle lieu? Elle se ferait a raison de 100 pour 100
sur le territoire de l'Inde. Qu'elle se fasse de ce cote-ci
ou de ce cote-la de la ligne de suspension d'armes,.la
demilitarisation se fait dans l'Inde, et la militarisation
est au Pakistan. Et n'oublions pas que meme M. Jarring,
un observateur neutre, a ete oblige de signaler au
Conseil - je ne me souviens pas maintenant de ses
paroles exactes - que revolution de la situation dans
le monde, les divers alignements politiques, les relations
entre puissance dans l'Asie du Sud-Est, etc., doivent
etre pris en consideration.

58. I have no desire, on the one hand, to repeat what
I have said - in order not to touch upon any factor
on which other countries are sensitive with regard to
the augmentation of the military strength of Pakistan but when a country is called upon to take down its

58. Je ne voudrais pas repeter ce que j'ai deja dit,
afin de ne pas toucher a des points qui eveillent la susceptibilite d'autres pays pour ce qui est de l'augmentation de la force militaire du Pakistan, mais le Conseil
de securite assumerait une tres grave responsabilite

17

defences, well, the Security Council takes a very grave
responsibility. And I say that we see no basis for it
whatsoever. In the terms of the resolutions of 13 August
1948 and 5 January 1949, all we have before us is,
first, paragraph E and then paragraph B of part I
of the resolution of 13 August 1948 - because, knowing our friends as we do, we would first like at least
to see some difference of behaviour in regard to words
and psychological warfare, even before guns are removed.

s'il demandait a un pays de demanteler son organisation defensive. Je declare que nous ne voyons a cela
aucune raison. Selon les termes des resolutions du
13 aout 1948 et du 5 janvier 1949, tout ce que nous
avons devant nous est d'abord le paragraphe E, puis le
paragraphe B, de la premiere partie de la resolution du
13 aout 1948, parce que, connaissant nos amis comme
nous les connaissons, nous voudrions d'abord constater
tout au moins une attitude un peu differente quant aux
mots et a la guerre psychologique, avant meme que l' on
retire les canons.

59. We regret that with one or two exceptionsnotably Sir Pierson Dixon - very little notice has
been taken by members of the Security Council in
their public statements of the fact that a new phase
of aggression has begun, even on the territory within
the cease-fire line. Are we to put ourselves in a position
to be able to tell our people that the discussions in
the Security Council are to be used again as a facade
or an opportunity for violating the integrity of our
territory and creating upset and trouble in the country?
Is it suggested that a country like the United Kingdom
seriously thinks that an accredited representative of
the Government of India, speaking under instructions,
would place before the Council - with its intimate
knowledge of our administration and with its member's
knowledge of the facts about what is going on - facts
and matters of this kind if they were not so?

59. Nous regrettons qu'a une ou deux exceptions pres,
notamment a I'exception de sir Pierson Dixon, les
membres du Conseil de securite n'aient guere pris note,
dans leurs declarations publiques, du fait qu'une nouvelle phase de I'agression a commence, meme sur le territoire qui se trouve a I'interieur de la ligne de suspension d'armes. Devons-nous nous mettre dans une situation telle que nous pourrons annoncer a notre peuple
que les discussions au Conseil de securite vont servir
une fois de plus de fa':(ade ou de pretexte a une violation de I'integrite de notre territoire et a des bouleversements et des troubles dans le pays? Veut-on faire croire
qu'un pays comme le Royaume-Uni pense serieusement
qu'un representant accredite du Gouvernement de
I'lnde, parlant selon les instructions qu'il a re':(ues,
exposerait au Conseil - qui connait si bien notre
administration et dont les membres sont au courant de
ce qui se passe - des faits et des questions de ce genre
s'il n'en etait rien?

60. Would we come here and j,ioint out that a new
phase of this war had begun? Are we not entitled - to
put it at its lowest - to have legitimate suspicions,
which in this case are something more than suspicions,
in view of the facts of the past? Therefore, when it
comes to demilitarization, my Government would
like to say, first of all, that as an ad hoc or de novo
proposition by itself it cannot be addressed to any
single country. In the context of Kashmir, if it is to
be addressed to anybody in the interests of international peace and security and the interests of international good behaviour, it ought to be addressed to
our neighbours, asking them to remove the accoutrements of war from the territory of a neighbour State.

60. Viendrions-nous declarer ici qu'une nouvelle
phase de cette guerre a commence? Ne sommes-nous
pas fondes, etant donne les evenements du passe, a
nourrir pour le moins de Iegitimes soup':(ons (et, dans
ce cas, il s'agit meme de plus que des soup':(ons)? C'est
pourquoi mon gouvernement tient tout d'abord a faire .
remarquer, s'il est question de demilitarisation, que,
toute proposition speciale ou nouvelle a ce sujet ne
peut s'adresser a un seul pays. Dans le cas du Cachemire,
si cette proposition doit etre adressee a quelqu'un, dans
I'interet de la paix et de la securite internationales et
dans celui des bonnes relations entre nations, c'est a
nos voisins qu'il faut I'adresser, en les invitant a faire
disparaitre tous leurs dispositifs de guerre du territoire
d'un Etat voisin.

61. If it is to be addressed in terms of the resolution,
then we are to pursue the line Mr. Jarring pursued, so
far as you are concerned, strictly to confine yourself
to that and come to the position where you find a
deadlock - the report is a report in our favourthe deadlock in relation to part I of the resolution of
13 August 1948. How can there be the taking down of
our defences when the period of the twelve months or
so that followed the negotiations, the establishment of
the Commission, has, according to Pakistan's admissions,
been used to invade our country - not even to protect
what they regarded as their co-reIigionists but in order
to protect their own frontiers - that is to say, for the
alleged protection of their territory, to come and invade
ours? Well, that belongs to a century that bas long
been left behind. No country in the world would be
safe, if the Security Council subscribed to that
proposition.

61. Si cette proposition doit etre faite dans le cadre de la
resolution, il faut adopter, en ce qui vous concerne, la position prise par M. Jarring, vous y tenir strictement et
aller jusqu'au point oill'on aboutit a une impasse - ce
rapport est un rapport en notre faveur -, a I'impasse
relative a la premiere partie de la resolution du 13 aout
1948. Comment pourrions-nous abattre nos .defenses
alors que, de leur propre aveu, les Pakistanais ont profite de la periode d'une douzaine de mois qui a suivi
les negociations et la creation de la Commission pour
envahir notre pays -, non meme pour proteger ceux
qu'iIs consideraient comme leurs coreligionnaires mais
pour proteger leurs frontieres -, alors qu'iIs ont
envahi notre territoire sous pretexte de proteger le
leur? Cette fa':(on d'agir appartient a un siecle revolu.
Si le Conseil de securite souscrivait a de telles theories,
aucun pays au monde ne se trouverait en securite.
18

62. Therefore, we would beg the Security Council to
take into account the political, the moral, the psychological results of pronouncements it makes. Obviously,
:if both parties do not agree to a resolution, that resolution remains where it is so far as the facts are concerned.
That has been so with many resolutions. But that is
not the whole of the story. Is it right that a great many
peoples in the world - our own people, for example should come to the belief that, irrespective of performances in the past, we are called upon to throw the
consideration of the defence of our motherland to the
winds, open the floodgates of invasion to marauding
peoples on our frontiers. That request, however wellintentioned, is not justified by previous history. This
problem will come up, no doubt - and I am instructed
to deal with this matter only when we have a definite
proposition before us - but, out of courtesy to the
Council and my desire not to hold anything up ou r
sleeve, we have put our position before you.

62. C'est pourquoi nous prions le Conseil de tenir
compte des repercussions politiques, morales et psychologiques que peuvent avoir ses decisions. II est evident
que, s'il n'y a pas d'accord des deux parties sur une
resolution, cette resolution restera lettre morte. II en
a ete ainsi de nombreuses resolutions. Mais ce n'est pas
tout. Est-il normal que de nombreux peuples, le notre
par exemple, en viennent a croire qu'on les invite, malgre leur passe heroique, a renoncer a la defense de leur
mere patrie, a ouvrir la porte de I'invasion aux peuples
maraudeurs de I'autre cote de la frontiere ? Dne telle
invitation, meme si elle est inspiree par de bonnes
intentions, n'est pas justifiee par I'histoire. Cette question sera sans aucun doute soulevee par la suite, et j'ai
pour instructions de n'en traiter que lorsque nol',s serons
saisis d'une proposition precise; toutefois, par deference envers le Conseil et par desir de ne rien tenir
cache, j'ai tenu a preciser notre position.

63. References have been made to Mr. Graham. We
are told that various commissions have in the past
tried to look at the demilitarization - that is to say,
tried to reduce the military strength on either side in
order to make a plebiscite possible - this, that and
the other - starting from the time of Sir Owen Dixon.
I stand subject to correction. And I do not want to
rely on this statement as part of any procedures which
may have to be taken in the future. But if you read
Sir Owen Dixon's report [8/1791], the main impression
you get is that he was not pursuing that resolution as
such; he was trying to see in his own way whether anything could be done about it for a conciliatory settlement. And that is why Sir Owen Dixon said that there
had been a violation of international law.

63. On a cite M. Graham. On nous a dit que diverses
commissions ont essaye dans le passe d'envisager la
demilitarisation, la reduction des effectifs militaires
des deux parties, afin de rendre possible un plebiscite;
cela remonte a sir Owen Dixon. Si je me trompe, qu'on
me le dise. J e ne veux pas me fonder sur cette declaration dans toutes procedures que l' on pourrait adopter
par la suite. Mais I'imp~ession que I'on retire avant tout
de la lecture du rapport de sir Owen Dixon [8/1791],
c'est qu'il ne s'attachait pas a I'application de la resolution elle-meme et qu'il essayait de voir par lui-meme
si l' on pouvait faire quelque chose pour faciliter un
reglemcnt par une solution de conciliation. C'est pour
cette raison que sir Owen Dixon a dit qu'il y avait eu
violation du droit international.

64. But it is true that the Government of India did
agree, without any prejudice to any other positions,
to explore the possibilities of the implementation of
part II of the resolution of 13 August 1948. It did agree
to explore the possibilities. Is that wrong? Because a
Government, in spite of what it considers well established rights, which are easily proved by the documents
before you, is prepared to facilitate the process of
conciliation - is it to be penalized for that reason ?
You cannot penalize us, because we have not at any
time abandoned anything in this matter.. What is more,
we have been very careful, in view of all the circUInstances and of the general necessities of political discussion, to state our position.

64. Mais il est vrai que le Gouvernement de I'Inde a
accepte, sans prejuger ses positions sur tous autres
points, d'etudier les possibilites d'application de la
deuxieme partie de la resolution du 13 aout 1948.
A-t-il eu tort? Convient-il de penaliser un gouvernement pour avoir accepte de faciliter la conciliation
malgre ce qu'il considere comme ses droits bien etablis,
droits qui sont amplement prouves par les documents
dont le Conseil est saisi? Vous ne pouvez pas nous
penaliser, parce que nous n'avons jamais fait abandon
d'aucun de nos droits en cette affaire. De plus, nous
avons pris grand soin, etant donne les circonstances et
les necessites generales de la discussion politique, de
definir notre position.

65. When Mr. Graham was first coming to India, we
participated in some discussions, and the Prime
Minister wrote to Mr. Graham - to whose courtesy
and kindness and general friendliness toward all
concerned we are only too ready to bear witness - a
letter dated 11 September 1951, in which he said:

65. Lorsque M. Graham est venu dans I'lnde pour la
premiere fois, nous avons pris part a divers echanges de
vues et, le 11 septembre 1951, le Premier Ministre a
adresse a M. Graham dont nous sommes heureux de
reconnaitre la courtoisie, I'amabilite et I'attitude amicale qu'il a eue envers tous les interesses - une lettre
dans laquelle on lit notamment :
« Comme Votre Excellence le sait, nous etions
heureux de nous rencontrer avec elle et ses associes,
car nous desirons ardemment trouver une voie qui
mene a un reglement pacifique de la question du
Cachemire. Toutefois, des le debut de nos discussions,
qui etaient simplement officieuses, nous avons clairement indique a votre Excellence que, pour les
raisons que notre representant permanent, sir Benegal
N. Rau, avait exposees au Conseil de securite, nous

" As you are aware, we were glad to meet you
and your associates, as we are eager to find a way to a
peaceful settlement of the Kashmir question. We
made it clear to you, however, at the very outset
of our discussions, which were informal, that for the
reasons explained by our permanent representative
to the Security Council, Sir Benegal N. Rau, we have
found ourselves unable to accept the Council's
resolution dated 30 March 1951, and that our discus19

sions were without prejudice to this stand of the
Government of India. The views that my Government are submitting now on your proposals are
similarly without prejudice to that stand." [8/2375,
annex 3, para. 2.]
That is to say, anything we have said to Mr. Graham
at any time, any memorandum we might have exchanged
at any time, any memorandum we might have
exchanged, any consideration of any problem, is purely
exploratory.

etions dans l'impossibilite d'accepter la resolution
adoptee par le Conseil le 30 mars 1951 et que nos
pourparlers ne sauraient modifier la position prise
par le Gouvernement de l'Inde. De meme, l'opinion que mon gouvernement exprime maintenant sur
vos propositions ne saurait modifier sa position.»
[8/2375, annexe 3, par. 2.]
En d'autres termes, tout ce que nous avons pu dire
it M. Graham, tous les memoires que nous avons pu
echlmger, tout examen de toute question, tout cela
n'avait que le caractere de simples etudes.

66. What is more, in municipal law, in international
law - not so much perhaps in international law,
because it is not nearly so formal - an agreement
means the consensus of minds. And those minds must
meet not on the periphery of the proposition but on
the core of the proposition. Although it has not been
put in those legal terms, it appears, in Mr. Graham's
report. Unless there is essential agreement, a meeting
of minds on the core of a proposition, there is no agreement. Mr. Jules Moch, a distinguished representative
- with whom, I am sorry to ..ay, one is not always
in agreement - speaking on 22 October 1957 in the
first Committee of the General Assembly on disarmament, said: "In building a bridge, unless the whole
thing is complete, there is no bridge." No international
negotiation - indeed, no private negotiation - would
be possible, if it were thought that to say " Yes, that
is all right" about any part of it would be regarded as a
binding contract. And, what is more, in this particular
case of the five reports of Mr. Graham, the same story
runs. I submit that you cannot judge these things
merely by placing proposals as points 1 to 12 and then
arguing that all facts are free and equal. There is no
disagreement on eleven and a half points, and there
is no agreement on half a point, but it is the half point
that is important. That is how it is.

66. Qui plus est, en droit interne et peut-etre, it un
degre moindre, en droit international, qui est moins
formel, un accord suppose l'agrement des parties,
et cet agrement doit etre donne non sur les details
accessoires de la proposition, mais sur ses points essentiels. C'est cette verite qui ressort du rapport de M.
Graham, bien qu'elle n'y soit pas exprimee en termes
juridiques. S'il n'y a pas accord sur le fond, agrement
des parties sur les points essentiels d'une proposition,
il n'y a pas accord. Parlant le 22 octobre 1957 du
desarmement it la Premiere Commission de l' Assemblee
generale, un distingue representant - avec lequel,
je l'~voue, je ne suis pas toujours d'accord -, M.
Jules Moch, a dit : « Quand on construit un pont,
tant qu'il n'est pas acheve, il n'y a pas de pont».
Aucune negociation internationale, que dis-je, aucune
negociation privee, ne serait possible si l'on estimait
que le consentement donne sur un point particulier
au cours de la negociation a force obligatoire. J'ajouterai qu'en l'espece on retrouve la meme chose dans
les cinq rapports de M. Graham. Je considere qu'on
ne peut juger des choses en numerotant simplement
des propositions de 1 it 12 et en disant ensuite qU'elles
sont independantes et d'egale valeur, qu'il n'y a pas
de desaccord sur 11 points et demi et ql' ';1 y a pas
accord sur un demi-point : c'est precisement ce demi- i
point qui est important. Voila ce qu'il en est.

67. But that is not the only position. The Council is
somewhat allergic, I think, to our disadvantage, when
we quote legal authorities. But the Council cannot
disregard the findings of the Permanent Court of International Justice on these matters. There are scores of
cases, but the majority of them - or a good many of
them - would be cases in which either the United
Kingdom or the United States of America is involved.
They have contributed so much, by case law, to the
establishment of principles of international law. Therefore, we have avoided quoting them and we have tried
to find a case which does not, for once, apply to these
two countries. In its judgement in tlie case concerning
the factory at Chorzow - a case brought by Germany
against Poland - this is what the Court said:

67. Mais ce n'est pas la seule chose it considerer.
Malheureusement pour nous, les membres du Conseil
n'aiment pas beaucoup, je crois, que nous citions des
autorites en matiere juridique. Pourtant, ils ne peuvent
faire abstraction des conclusions de la Cour permanente de Justice internationale en cette matiere.
Nous avons le choix entre des vingtaines d'affaires,
mais les Etats-Unis d'Amerique ou le Royaume-Uni
etaient en cause dans la plupart d'entre elles. Ces deux
pays ont apporte une grande contribution, par la
jurisprudence, it l'elaboration des principes du droit
international. Nous avons done evite de citer une
affaire oil ils etaient en cause et nous en avons cherche
une qui, pour une fois, ne concerne pas ces deux pays.
Dans son arret dans l'affaire relative it l'usine de
Chorzow (affaire qui opposait I'Allemagne et la Pologne), voici ce que la Cour a declare :
« La Cour, avant d'aborder l'expose des motifs
pour lesquels elIe doit rejeter l'execution preliminaire
soulevee par la Pologne contre sa competence pour
connaitre de ces conclusions, constate qu'aux fins
de cet expose, comme aux fins de son futur jugement
sur le fond, elle ne saurait faire etat des declarations,
admissions ou propositions qu'ont pu faire les parties
au cours des negociations directes qui ont eu lieu

"Before proceeding to set out the reasons for
which it must overrule the preliminary objection
taken by Poland to its jurisdiction to deal with
these submissions, the Court would observe that,
for the purposes of this statement of reasons, as also
for the purposes of its future judgement on the merits,
it cannot take account of declarations, admissions or
proposals which the Parties may have made in the

20

I

course of direct negotiations which have taken place
between them, declarations which, moreover, haY'..;
been made without prejudice in the event of the
points under discussion forming the subject of judicial
proceedings. For the negotiations in question have
not, as acknowledged by the representatives before
the Court of the Parties themselves, led to an agreement between them." 17

entre elles, declarations d'ailleurs faites sous toutes
reserves au cas oules points en discussion viendraient
a faire l'objet d'une procedure judiciaire. Car les
negociations en question, de l'aveu meme des representants des parties devant la Cour, n'ont pas abouti
a un accord entre elles.» 17

68. If the whole of the Graham proposals had been
agreed to by the two parties and then if either party
went back on them, there would be a breach of agreement. But what has happened in this matter is this.
An attempt was made to find some method of passing
over to part III of the resolution of 13 August 1948.
Part Il, therefore, was interpreted as - and, for the
purpose of exploration, we did not object - contrary
even to the Commission's findings. The Commission
had definitely laid down that there could be neither
simultaneity nor synchronization. The resolution definitely placed the responsibility for non-augmentation,
and so on, on both sides - which now rests only on the
other side - and the removal of troops in two stages
on Pakistan before a single Indian soldier is removed.
It does not anywhere call upon us to agree to the arming
in any way of what have been called "Azad " forces.
The Pakistan Government refused to recognize the
" Azad " Government. I do not know whether it does
now or not. The Security Council has never done so.

68. Si toutes les propositions de M. Graham avaient
ete acceptees par les deux parties et si l'une de ees
parties les remettait en question, il y aurait rupture
de l'aceord. Mais voici, dans le cas qui nous interesse,
ee qui s'est produit. On a essaye de trouver un moyen
de passeI' a l'application de la troisieme partie de la
resolution du 13 aout 1948. A cet effet, on a interprete
la deuxieme partie d'une fa~on qui etait contraire aux
conclusions memes de la Commission - et, s'agissant
d'une etude, nous ne nous y sommes pas opposes.
Cependant, la Commission avait etabli formellement
qu'il ne pouvait y avoir ni simultaneite ni synchronisme. La resolution stipulait expressement que c'etait
aux deux parties qu'il incombait de ne pas augmenter
le potentiel militaire, etc. - cela n'incombe plus
maintenant qu'a l'autre partie -, et qu'il incombait
au Pakistan de retirer ses troupes en deux etapes avant
qu'un seul soldat indien fut deplace. Cette resolution
ne nous invitait nullement a accepter la constitution
et l'armement de ce que l'on a appeIe les forces « azad.»
Le Gouvernement du Pakistan a refuse de reconnaitre
le Gouvernement « azad.» Je ne sais s'il le reconnait
maintenant. Le Conseil de securite ne l'a jamais reconnu.

69. We did all this by way of exploration, but there
has been in the five reports at no time any agreement
on the crucial matters. In fact, Dr. Graham has, with
great integrity and a great deal of painstaking, set out
an exposition of the two points of view - I am only
concerned with that of my Government - which makes
it impossible for there to be a bridging on that basis.
In fact, what Mr. Graham's fifth report does point out
is the impossibility of proceeding to part 11. Further,
if I may say so with respect, but for the overwhelming
emotional feeling inside Dr. Graham for finding a
settlement by conciliation, the logical conclusion to be
drawn from his reports is that part 11 cannot be implemented except by resolving the block in part I.

69. Nous avons fait tout cela parce qu'il s'agissait
d'une etude, mais aucun des cinq rapports n'a fait
etat d'un accord qui serait intervenu sur les questions
essentielles. En fait, M. Graham, avec beaucoup d'integrite et avec le plus grand soin, a expose les deux
points de vue - je ne m'occupe ici que de celui de mon
gouvernement - d'une maniere qui rend impossible
une interpretation abusive. En realite, ce que le cinquieme rapport de M. Graham fait ressortir, c'est qu'il
est impossible de passeI' a l'application de la deuxieme
partie de la resolution. En outre, je me permets de le
dire avec beaucoup de respect pou!' le si profond desir
qui anime M. Graham d'aboutir a un reglement par
une solution de conciliation, la conclusion logique it
tirer de ses rapports est que la deuxieme partie de la
resolution ne peut etre appliquee ~i l'on ne sort d'abord
de l'impasse qui resulte de la premiere partie.

70.

70. Dans son cinquieme rapport, M. Graham concluait
en ces termes :
« Apres avoir examine attentivement les communications susmentionnees et avoir proeede a de
nouveaux pourparlers avee les representants de
l'lnde et du Pakistan, le representant des Nations
Unies a juge qu'il n'y avait plus de terrain d'entente
qui permette de poursuivre la conference; d'accord
avec les representants des deux Etats, il a done
decide de la declarer close.» [8/2967, par. 52.]

In his fifth report, Dr. Graham concluded:

" After thorough consideration of these communications and further conversations with the representatives of India and Pakistan, the United Nations
representative felt that there was no ground left at
that stage on which to continue the conference and
therefore, with the agreement with the two representatives, he decided to conclude it." [8/2967, para. 52.]

17 See Collection of Judgments, Series A, No. 9, Publications
of the Permanent Court of International Justice, A. W. Sijthofi's
Publishing Company, Leyden, 1927, p. 19.

17 Voir Publications de la Cour permanente de Justice internationale, Recueil des arrets, serie A, nO 9, Leyde, Societe d'editions A. W. Sijthofi, 1927, p. 19.

21

That is merely an abandonment of that procedure. If
you like to be courteous, he suggested postponement
sine die.

Cela revenait a mettre purement et simplement fin
a la procedure en question. Par euphemisme, disons

71. On 15 February 1957, under instructions - it is
not necessary for me to say "under instructions",
because it cannot be anything else, but in this case
under specific instructions - from the Government of
India, I made the following statement:

71. Le 15 fevrier 1957, conformement aux instructions
que j'avais revues - je n'ai guere besoin de dire « conformement aux instructions», car il ne peut en etre
autrement, mais, dans le cas present, il s'agissait d'instructions expresses - du Gouvernement de I'Inde,
j'ai declare ce qui suit :
({ Puisque je traite de ce point» (c'est-a.-dire des
entretiens qui ont eu lieu avec M. Graham), ({ je
pourrais parler d'une autre question. Mon gouvernement desire beaucoup - et il s'en preoccupe
vivement - que ron ne considere pas nos declarations ou toute erreur d'action ou d'omission comme
constituant un engagement de notre part. Notre
moderation nous a fait du tort. Nous nous sommes
comportes au Conseil d'une maniere raisonnable et
nous en avons souffert. Chaque "fois que nous avons
examine une proposition de caractere hypothetique,
chaque fois que nous avons accepte de proceder a. des
investigations, on a considere que nous avions pris
des engagements. C'est pourquoi je tiens maintenant
a. dire ici que, quels que soient les calculs mathematiques que I'on ait faits au cours des diversesnegociations anterieures (qu'il s'agisse de 6.000, de 3.000,
de 12.000 ou de 21.000), ils ne sont plus valables,
car une offre qui n'est pas acceptee ne constitue
pas une convention liant les parties. Cela est vrai
pour les individus comme pour les nations. Autrement,
il y aurait beaucoup d'engagements pris, et aucun
Etat ne saurait oil il en est. On fait toutes sortes d' offres
au cours de longues negociations. Si le Secretaire
general devait etre lie par les nombreuses suggestions
qu'il aura faites durant les 60 derniers jours... il
se trouverait dans une situation embarrassante.»
(Cela se passait pendant la crise du Moyen-Orient.)
« La meme chose est vraie pour un gouvernement.
«( C'est pourquoi ~'~ tiens a dire aujourd'hui, Monsieur le President, que si vous alliez dans l' Inde»
(c'est au moment oil il etait question de la visite de
M. Jarring) ( ou si quelqu'un d'autre y allait, il
serait inutile de nous dire : ( Vous avez accepte
ceci et cela a. une certaine epoque et par consequent
vous etes engages». Nous n'acceptons rien; nous
discutons toutes ces propositions. Il faut les examiner
toutes, comme n'importe quel probleme, en tenant
compte des conditions de I'epoque. Nous acceptons
ce a. quoi nous sommes parties.» [76ge seance, par.
70 et 71.]

"While I am on this point [that is, the Graham
discwiiJions] I might deal with one other matter,
because my Government is very anxious and very
concerned that no statement of ours or any errors
of omission or commission should afterwards be
charged up to us as a commitment. We have suffered
by moderation. We have suffered by reasonableness
in our proceedings before this Council. Every time
we have considered a hypothetical proposition and
every time we have agreed to embark upon an exploration, it has been charged up against us as a commitment. Therefore, I want to say here and now that
whatever mathematical calculations were made with
regard to 6,000 or 3,000 or 12,000 or 21,000 in the
various previous negotiations, these no longer hold
true, because no offer that is not accepted is a binding
contract, either in the case of individuals or in the
case of nations. Otherwise we should have a number
of floating commitments, and no country would
know where it stood. In the course of long negotiations, all kinds of offers are made. If the SecretaryGeneral were to be committed to the many suggestions which he must have made in the past sixty days
- then he would be in an awkward position. [That
was during the Middle East troubles.] The same
thing is true with respect to a government.

"Therefore, I want to say here and now, Mr. President, that if you were to go to India [that was
when Mr. Jarring's visit was mooted] or if anyone else were to go, it would be no use telling us
that we agreed to this and that at the time and that
• now therefore you are committed to it '. We agree
to nothing - we discuss all these proposals. They
must all be considered, as with any problem, in the
context of the time. We agree to things to which we
are parties." [769th meeting, paras. 70 and 71.]

72. On 20 February 1957 the same matter was raised
again. The Government of India desired this to be
placed on the record, and I stated:
" What is more important - and we want to put
this into the record - the Government of India is
no longer committed by any intermediate discussions that have taken place, by any hypothetical
propositions that have been put to them, or by any
mathematical calculations made by Mr. Graham
at various times. All these things 'were part of the
procedures to find a settlement.
"If the bargain had been closed, we would be
bound by it. We have been bitten so many times

que M. Graham proposait de surseoir sine die a I'application de cette procedure.

72. Le 20 fevrier 1957, la meme question a ete soulevee
de nouveau. Le Gouvernement de I'Inde a tenu a. faire
consigner ce qui suit, et voici ce que j'ai declare:
({ Qui plus est - j'insiste sur ce fait - le Gouvernement de l'Inde n'est plus lie par les debats qui ont
eu lieu dans l'intervalle, par les propositions hypothetiques qui ont pu etre presentees ou par les
calculs mathematiques auxquels M. Graham a pu
se livrer a. tel ou tel moment. Il s'agissait uniquement
de tentatives en vue de parvenir a. un reglement.
Si ces tentatives avaient abouti, nous serions
lies. On nous attaque a maintes et maintes reprises
l(

(especially when we just heard the representative
of the Philippines, on whose statement I shall
comment in a moment) we have no desire at all for
the Security Council to misunderstand our position.
It is wrong to say that some advance has been made
in regard to demilitarization. The only advance that
has been made in regard to demilitarization - and
it would be useful for the Council to know it - is the
voluntary withdrawal of the Government of India
of large numbers of troops from Kashmir since cessation of hostilities - for which the Council has not
been gracious enough to say one word of appreciation - w,ithout any conditions whatsoever.
"With regard to these references to a single and
continuous process, simultaneous withdrawals, synchronized arrangements, all these things and all
these words have been differently interpreted by
the United Nations Commission for Indian and
Pakistan, by the United Nations representatives
afterwards; and whatever discussions may have
taken place, either in New York, Geneva, New Delhi,
Karachi, Paris or anywhere, they are all today only
part of historical material; they do not commit the
Government of India to anything, because there was
no closing of any bargains, and it should not be said
afterwards that where it is advantageous to one side
that is taken as a commitment, and where it is not
advantageous, it is pointed out against us.
" Therefore, the only engagements from which we
can proceed, in so far as we can do so, are the engagements to which we are parties, in the context of
all the circumstances submitted. Therefore, I would
like this particular factor to be written into the record
so that in the event of the matter coming up again
[as it has now] or having anyone else intervening, whether it is your distinguished self, Mr. President, it should not be thought that now we have gone
back on something else, because unless this attitude
is taken, it is impossible to discuss anything, any
pro tem proposition, any exploration; any thinking
aloud becomes dangerous because at that moment we
will be pinned down to it. What is more, the whole
surrounding circumstances have to be taken into
account." [773rd meeting, paras. 60 to 63.]

(je songe tout particulierement au discours que
vient de prononcer le representant des Philippines,
sur lequel je reviendrai dans quelques instants),
et nous ne voulons pas que le Conseil de securite se
meprenne sur notre attitude. Il est inexact de dire
que la demilitarisation a progresse. La seule mesure
qui ait ete prise dans ce domaine - le Conseil devrait
en prendre note - a ete le retrait volontaire par le
Gouvernement de l'Inde, depuis la cessation des
hostilites, de forces importantes qui se trouvaient
au Cachemire. Ce retrait n'etait soumis it aucune
condition, mais le Conseil n'a pas formule un seul
mot d'approbation it ce sujet.
« Par consequent, toutes les mesures dont il a ete
question - le processus unique et continu, les retraits
simultanes, les mesures synchronisees - ont ete
interpretees differemment par la Commission des
Nations Unies pour l'Inde et le Pakistan et, plus
tard, par les representants des Nations Unies ; toutes
les discussions qui ont pu avoir lieu it New York,
it Geneve, it New Delhi, it Karachi, it Paris ou ailleurs
n'ont plus aujourd'hui qu'un interet historique;
elles n'engagent en aucune maniere le Gouvernement
de l'Inde, car aucun marche n'a ete conclu, et il ne
faut pas que l'on puisse dire it l'avenir que ce qui
etait avantageux pour l'une des parties a ete considere
comme un engagement, et ce qui n'etait pas avantageux comme un argument contre nous.
« En consequence, parmi toutes les circonstances
qui ont ete signaIees, les seuls engagements dont
nous puissions tenir compte, dans la mesure des
possibilites, sont ceux auxquels nous sommes parties.
Je tiens it ce que cette condition figure dans le compte
rendu, de maniere que, si la question etait de nouveau
soulevee» - comme c'est le cas aujourd'hui -, « ou
s'il y avait d'autres interventions it ce sujet - meme
de votre part, Monsieur le President - on ne puisse
penser que nous avons change notre position. En
effet, si nous n'adoptons pas cette attitude, il est
impossible d'examiner aucune question, aucune
proposition provisoire, ou d'entreprendre aucun
travail d'approche ; il devient dangereux d'emettre
la moindre opinion, car on peut l'interpreter comme
une prise de position. D'ailleurs, il est necessaire
de tenir compte de tous les facteurs qui interviennent
dans la question.» [773 e seance, par. 60 a 63.]

73. That was the position that was stated by the
Prime Minister to Dr. Graham, both orally and afterwards in writting, in September 1951, and that is our
position today.

73. Telle etait la position que le Premier Ministre a
exposee it M. Graham, verbalement, puis par ecrit,
en septembre 1951, et telle eIle est encore aujourd'hui.

74. What is more, these reports refer to the situation
five years ago. I have no desire to pursue this matter
further, because if there is no progress along these lines
there is no necessity for me to weary the Council with
more detail. On the other hand, if the countries usually
associated with this venture are going to bring up
proposals, that will be the time for them and for us
to speak about it.

74. Il convient d'ajouter que ces rapports concernent
la situation qui existait il y a cinq ans. Je ne veux pas
insister, car, s'il n'y a pas progres dans cette direction,
il est inutile que j'accable le Conseil de details. D'un
autre cOte, si les pays qui ont coutume de prendre
des initiatives dans cette affaire ont l'intention de
presenter des propositions, le moment est venu pour
eux et pour nous d'en parler.

75. I want to say here and now that, before we can
state a final position on any proposals that may come
before this Council, we shall have to see the proposals
in writing, we shall have to hear the arguments for or
against them, and we shall have to submit them to
the Government of India for its views. That, I think,

75. Je tiens it dire des maintenant qu'avant que nous
paissions prendre position de maniere definitive sur
les propositions qui viendraient it etre deposees devant
le Conseil, il faudra que nous en ayons le texte ecrit,
que nous entendions les arguments pour et contre, et
que nous les transmettions au Gouvernement de

is an extremely reasonable position. This problem has
been before the Security Council for ten years. To the
Security Council it is probably only one of the many
problems in the world. To us, however, it is a problem
that vitally concerns the integrity, the honour and
the self-respect of our people. It is a problem that
recalls to our mind the spoliation of our territory and
the plunder that has been committed by our neighbours
- in the first instance, without admitting it and,
afterwards, admitting it. Today, to our knowledge,
members of the Pakistan Government are inviting
rebellion in our country. Are we to be told by the
Security Council that, owing to some mistaken conceptions of commitments which we have not made, we
should pull down our fences and throwaway the
hard-won independence of our people? I am sure that
that is not a proposition which the nations of the world
would address to us.

l'Inde, qui donnera son avis. Voila, me semble-t-il,
une attitude des plus raisonnables. Il y a dix ans que
le Conseil est saisi du probleme. Pour le Conseil, ce
n'est sans doute qu'un des multiples problemes qui
se posent dans le monde. Pour nous, c'est un probleme
d'un interet capital pour notre integrite territoriale,
pour l'honneur et la dignite de notre peuple. C'est un
probleme qui nous rappelle les spoliations dont notre
territoire a ete l'objet, le pillage commis par nos voisins,
nie d'abord, avoue ensuite. Aujourd'hui, nous le
savons, les membres du Gouvernernent du Pakistan
incitent a la rebellion dans notre pays. Le Conseil de
securite va-t-il nous dire, s'appuyant sur certaines
conceptions erronees concernant des engagements que
nous n'avons pas pris, que nous devrions abattre nos
defenses et renoncer a l'independance cherement acquise
de notre peuple ? Je suis sur que ce n'est pas la une
proposition que les nations du monde pourraient nous
faire.

76. The position of the Government of India is put
very faithfully by Mr. Graham. He says in his fourth
report:
" Constitutionally the defence of the entire State
of Jammn and Kashmir is the concern of the Government of India, and it alone is entitled to maintain
a military armed force for the purpose. India maintains that this is the only position consistent with
the assurance given by the Commission and the
practice observed hitherto by the United Nations
authorities of giving recognition to the sovereignty
of the Indian Union and the State which derived
originally from the Instrument of Accession and has
since been embodied in the Constitution of India."
[8/2783 and Corr. 1, para. 25.]
In other words, if we were to be asked to carry out any
contrary decision, we should be scrapping our entire
Constitution.

78. M. Graham a expose tres fidelement la position
du Gouvernement de l'Inde. Il a dit ce qui suit dans
son quatrieme rapport :
« C'est au Gouvernement de l'Inde qu'incombe
constitutionnellement la defense de I'Etat de Jammu
et Cachemire, et il est seul fonde a entretenir a cette
fin des forces militaires armees. Seule cette position
est conforme aux assurances donnees par la Commission et a la pratique suivie jusqu'a present par les
autorites des Nations Unies qui ont reconnu la
souverainete de l'Union indienne et de l'Etat, souverainete qui procede a l'origine de l'instrument d'accession et a ete depuis incorporee dans la Constitution
de l'Inde. D [8/2783, par. 25.]
En d'autres termes, nous demander de nous conformer
a une decision quelconque de sens contraire serait
nous demander de demanteler toute notre Constitution.

"The Government of India maintains that the
administration of t"i,s area would, under paragraph 3
of part II of the UNCIP resolution of 13 August 1948,
vest in local authorities to be established or recognized
for the purpose; to these iocal authorities under the
same resolution only local administrative functions
have been assigned. In the very nature of things
such authorities can be in charge only of local l~w
and order whether in the area or with reference to
the cease-fire line. To give them any armed force
equivalent to troops would not be consistent either
with their status or with their functions and would
be a violation of the sovereignty of the Union of
India and the Jammu and Kashmir State. In the
very nature of things, therefore, these local authorities can be entrusted only with a civil armed force."
[8/2783 and Corr. I, para. 22.]

77. Dans le rapport de M. Graham, nous lisons egalement ce qui suit :
« Le Gouvernement de l'Inde affirme qu'aux termes
du paragraphe 3 de la deuxieme partie de la resolution adoptee le 13 aout 1948 par la Commission
des Nations Unies pour l'Inde et le Pakistan l'administration de la region serait assuree par des autorites
locales qui seraient creees ou reconnues a cet effet;
aux termes de cette meme resolution, ces autorites
locales ne sont investies que de fonctions administratives locales. Il est dans l'ordre des choses que
de telles autorites ne soient responsables que du
respect de l'ordre public dans la region en ce qui
concerne la ligne de suspension d'armes. Leur accorder
des forces armees quelconques assimilables a des
troupes ne serait compatible ni avec le caractere
de ces autorites ni avec leurs fonctions et constituerait une violation de la souverainete de I'Union
indienne et de I'Etat de Jammu et Cachemire. En
consequence, de par la nature des choses, ces
autorites locales ne doivent disposer que d'une force
armee civile.)) [8/2783, par. 22.]

78. Later, the Government of India said in a memorandum forwarded to Mr. Graham:
"The Government of India are unable to agree
to the retention of any military force in the so-called

78. Ulterieurement, le Gouvernement de l'Inde a
declare, dans un memoirc adresse a M. Graham :
« Le Gouvernement de "lnde est dans l'impo5sibilite de souscrire au maintien de forces militaires

77. We also read the following in Mr. Graham's report:

24

"

I

" Azad" Kashmir territory. Not only would this
be contrary to the assurance given by UNCIP to
India that the resolution of 13 August should not
be interpreted, or applied in practice, so as to bring
into question the sovereignty of the Jammu and
Kashmir Government over the portion of their territory evacuated by Pakistan troops, or to enable
this territory to be consolidated in any way during
the period of truce to the disadvantage of the State,
but the presence of such a force which, by reason of
its association with the Pakistan Army, constitutes
a link with that Army, would be a threat to the
security of the State.

or • • • the Government of India consider that the
question of local authorities has to be dealt with in
the light of the assurances given to the Government
of India by the United Nations Commission for India
and Pakistan." [8/2967, annex IV, paras. 2 and 3.]

We regard the proposals, the assurances and the commitments made by the Commission - and these are
not secret; they are part of the documents of this
case - as proposals, assurances and commitments made
by the Security Council.
79. I continue to quote from the Government of
India's memorandum:
" For this purpose it is essential that local authorities should not be so evolved, nor so function in
practice, as to bring into question the sovereignty of
the Jammu and Kashmir Government over the
evacuated territory or to let it be consolidated in
any way to the disadvantage of the State. In the
opinion of the Government of India this makes it
necessary: (i) that the so-called "Azad" Kashmir
Government shall not be allowed to function in this
area either collectively or individually through their
Ministers; (ii) that all officials appointed by the
Pakistan Government shall cease to function; (Hi) that
no connexion shall be maintained between the local
authorities and the Pakistan Government. . . ."
[ibid., para. 3.]

All of these quotations are part of the record of this
case, and much of the position reflected therein is still
the same today.
80. Since this series of Security Council meetings
began, evidence has not been lacking that responsible
Ministers in Pakistan have been making provocative
statements. Fortunately for us, the Foreign Minister
of Pakistan is here in New York so he cannot be making
speeches in Karachi. The following report appeared in
the Hindustan Times on 5 November 1957:

"Mr. Yusuf Haroon, Pakistan's Minister for
Kashmir Affairs, is reported to have told a
public meeting on Saturday [I believe that was
2 November] that Pakistan itself 'has lost the

quelconques dans ce que l'on appelle le territoire
du Cachemire « azad». Ce maintien serait, d'une
part, contraire a l'assurance donnee it l'lnde par
la Commission des Nations Unies pour l'lnde et le
Pakistan, selon laquelle la resolution du 13 aout
ne devait pas etre interpretee ni appliquee de maniere
a mettre en doute la souverainete du Gouvernement
de Jammu et Cachemire sur la partie de son territoire qui sera evacuee par les troupes pakistanaises,
ou a permettre, pendant la periode de treve, un
rattachement quelconque de ce territoire qui se
ferait au detriment de I'Etat; d'autre part, la presence de ces forces qui, en raison de leur association
avec l'armee pakistanaise, constitueraient un lien
avec cette armee, serait une menace pour la securite
de l'Etat...
« ••• Le Gouvernement de I'lnde estirne que la
question des autorites locales doit etre traitee compte
tenu des assurances que la Commission des Nations
Unies pour l'lnde et le Pakistan a donnees au Gouvernement de l'Inde.» [8/2967, annexe IV, par. 2
et 3.]
Nous considerons les propositions faites, les assurances
donnees et les engagements pris par la Commission
- et il n'y a la rien de secret, il s'agit de documents
qui sont dans le dossier de l'affaire - comme des
propositions, des assurances et des engagements du
Conseil de securite.
79. Je continue la citation du memoire du Gouvernement indien :
« A cet effet, il est indispensable que les autorites
locales ne risquent pas, par la fac;on dont elles seront
constituees et dont elles s'acquitteront de leurs
fonctions, de mettre en doute la souverainete du
Gouvernement de Jammu et Cachernire sur le territoire evacue ou de laisser ce territoire faire l'objet
d'un rattachement quelconque qui se ferait au
detriment de l'Etat. De l'avis du Gouvernement
de l'Inde, il est done necessaire : i) que le pretendu
Gouvernement du Cachemire « azad)) ne soit autorise
a exercer des pouvoirs dans cette region ni collectivement, ni individuellement en la personne de
ses ministres ; ii) que tous les fonctionnaires nommes
par le Gouvernement du Pakistan cessent d'exercer
leurs fonctions ; ill) qu'aucun lien ne soit maintenu
entre les autorites locales et le Gouvernement du
Pakistan... ) [I bid., par. 3.]
Tous les textes que je viens de citer sont tires du dossier
de l'affaire, et la'position qui y est exprirnee demeure,
dans ses grandes lignes, la meme aujourd'hui.
80. Depuis que la presente serie de reunions du
Conseil de securite a commence, les preuves n'ont pas
manque du fait que les ministres pakistanais responsables tiennent un langage provocateur. Heureusement
pour nous, le l\finistre des affaires etrangeres du Pakistan est ici a New York, de sorte qu'il ne peut prononcer
des discours a Karachi. Le 5 novembre 1957, le ({ Hindustan Times) a publie la nouvelle suivante :
« M. Yusuf Haroon, ministre du Pakistan pour
les affaires du Cachemire, aurait declare samedi au
cours d'une reunion publique)) - je crois que c'etait
le 2 novembre que le Pakistan lui-meme» a
(£

25.

spirit and the warmth which it had at the time of
independence (partition) for getting Kashmir'....
"Kashmir could not be got for Pakistan,
Mr. Haroon said [at a Muslim League ward meeting]
through the help of foreign countries. Only if the
people were prepared for action and sacrifices could
it be had. If people 'are determined to get Kashmir
there is no reason why they cannot succeed, as the
example of the creation of Pakistan is very much
before their eyes'. . . ."

perdu l'elan et l'ardeur qu'il avait au moment de
(du partage) pour reclamer le
Cachemire »...
« Ce n'est pas l'aide de l'etranger, a dit M. Haroon
[a une reunion locale de la Ligue musulmane], qui
pourrait donner le Cachemire au Pakistan. Le Pakistan ne pourrait l'emporter que si le peuple etait
pret a l'action et aux sacrifices. Si le peuple est
resolu a obtenir le Cachemire, il n'y a pas de raison
pour qu'il ne reussisse pas, puisqu'il a toujours
sous les yeux l'exemple de la creation du Pakistan... »
« l'independance

"The only alternative left for the Government of
Pakistan would be to either go to war with India or
withdraw its international commitments to maintain
the cease-fire line and maintain order in 'Azad'
territory. . . ."

81. Cependant, le sardar Abdul Qaiyum Khan,
ancien chef de la partie du Cachemire occupee par le
Pakistan, declarait :
cc Il ne resterait plus au Gouvernement du Pakistan
qu'a entrer en guerre contre l'Inde ou a denoncer
ses engagements internationaux de respecter la
ligne de suspension d'armes et de maintenir l'ordre
dans le territoire « azad» ... »

82. Thus, I have dealt with this question of demilitarization. Perhaps some specific proposals will be
forthcoming here. We have heard some references to
such proposals in private conversations and in lobby
talk, and we have no doubt that there are numbers of
draft resolutions in various people's pockets. No doubt,
we shall be given some precise information in this
regard.

82. J'en ai ainsi termine avec cette question de la
demilitarisation. Des propositions precises seront peutetre presentees. Nous avons entendu des allusions a
ce sujet au cours d'entretiens prives et dans les couloirs,
et il est pour nous hors de doute qu'un certain nombre
de gens ont des projets de resolution en poche. On nous
donnera certainement des indications precises a cet
egard.

83. I should like to conclude my statement today by
summarizing the observations I have made.

83. Je voudrais terminer aujourd'hui ma declaration
en resumant les observations que j'ai presentees.

84. First, I would request the President very earnestly
to take into account the facts that I have set forth,
because it is a matter of real hurt to our people that
on behalf of the people of Iraq, it should be stated that
we would produce before this Council afterthoughts,
spurious arguments, which have no foundation in fact.
We would request the President to convey to the
people of Iraq that the reflection which was made was
an attribution of motives. We are quite prepared to
recognize the fact of military alliances, but we would
ask to be allowed the freedom and luxury of believing
in other international relations.

84. En premier lieu, je vous demanderai, treli serieusement, Monsieur le President, de prendre en consideration les faits que j'ai exposes, car notre peuple
est vraiment blesse que l'on ait pu dire, au nom du
peuple irakien, que nous presentions au Conseil des
idees qui nous seraient venues apres coup, des arguments faux qui ne reposeraient pas sur des faits. Nous
voudrions vous demander, Monsieur le President, de
dire au peuple irakien que la critique qui a ete formuIee
nous attribuait des mobiles qui ne sont pas les notres.
Nous sommes entierement prets a reconnaitre le fait
qu'il existe des alliances militaires, mais nous voudrions
que nous soient accordes le droit et le luxe de croire
a d'autres formes de relations internationales.

85. Our position is that the only engagements by
which we are committed are the general rules of international law; our obligations under the United Nations
Charter to defend the sovereignty of our country, not
to interfere in other people's affairs and not to brook
any interference in ours; and the obligations arising
fr0m the resolutions of 17 January 1948, 13 August 1948
and 5 January 1949. If we wished to be punctilious and
very logical, it would not even be necessary to refer
tf) the resolutions of 13 August 1948 and 5 January 1949.
Morally speaking, it would be entirely correct for us
to base ourselves on the resolution of 17 January 1948.
For if neither we nor Pakistan is willing to carry out
the very stdct instructions and fervent appeals of
the Security Council, the demands of human conscience
and international law, not to commit aggression, then
the"e is no value in any other commitments. If we
wished to be strictly logical and punctilious - some
people might use the word "obstreperous" - we

85. Pour nous, les seuls engagements qui nous lient
sont les regles generales du droit international, nos
obligations, dans le cadre de la Charte des Nations
Unies, de defendre la souverainete de notre pays, de
ne pas intervenir dans les affaires d'autrui et de ne
souffrir aucune intervention dans les notres, et les
obligations qui decoulent des resolutions des 17 janvier 1948, 13 aoftt 1948 et 5 janvier 1949. Si nous
voulions etre pointilleux et parfaitement logiques, il
ne serait meme pas necessaire que nous rappelions les
resolutions des 13 aoftt 1948 et 5 janvier 1949. Du
point de vue moral, nous serions entierement fondes
a nous appuyer s,ur la resolution du 17 janvier 1948.
Car, si ni nous-memes ni le Pakistan n'etions disposes
a tenir compte des recommandations tres strictes et
des appels instants du Conseil de securite et des imperatifs de la conscience humaine et du droit international,
qui nous invitent a ne pas commettre d'agressi m
aucun autre engagement n'aurait alors de valeur. Si

81. Meanwhile Sardar Abdul Qaiyum Khan, former
head of Pakistan-occupied Kashmir, said in a statement:

26

11

I,I;

really could base ourselves only on the resolution of
17 January 1948.

nous voulions etre parfaitement logiques et pointilleux - certains pourraient employer le mot « obstines» - , nous pourrions effectivement nous en tenir
a la seule resolution du 17 janvier 1948.

86. Even without sticking to that resolution, we are
entitled to beg of each one of you - whether you are
going to remain members of the Security Council or
not - to see to it that the appeals made by the Security
Council are not made a cover, a cloak or an instrument
for further aggression. But if we turn to the position
taken by Mr. Jarring, that what he is considering is the
situation as arising from the engagements entered into
- and I purposely use the word "engagements"
because commitments arise only when commitments
have been made by Pakistan - in the resolutions of
17 January 1948 and the supplementary resolutions
of 13 August 1948 and of 5 January 1949, this last
resolution has no existence whatsoever except in the
context of the resolution of 13 August 1948. It is not
an independent resolution, the Commission definitely
says so. It is supplementary, subsidiary to the other
resolutions, according to the Commission. Part III of
the resolution of 13 August 1948 has never seen the
light of day, although we tried to make it see the
light of day, and when, in view of the kind of approach
made to us from the other side, to the non-implementation of these things made it possible after three or
four years for us to do something, we did not think
it right to withhold from the peoples of Kashmir the
benefits of economic, political or moral development, as
far as it was possible for us to extend them. So it is
that free elections take place, parliament sits, debates
go on, newspapers function, universities exist and
economic development goes on. Seventy thousand
people went into Kashmir in the last holiday season,
of whom at least 10 per cent were Europeans or
Americans. No country which is shut off from civilization
permits that. It is our position that these resolutions
must be considered.

86. Sans meme nous attacher a cette seule resolution,
nous sommes en droit de demander a chacun de vous,
que vous deviez rester membres du Conseil de securite
ou non, de veiller a ce que les appels lances par le
Conseil ne servent pas de pretexte, de couverture ou
d'instrument pour une nouvelle agression. Mais si
nous considerons la position adoptee par M. Jarring,
qui estime que la situation qu'il examine resulte des
engagements pris (et ~'est a dessein que j'emploie le
mot « engagements », car des obligations ne sont creees
que lorsque le Pakistan a assume des obligations)
dans les resolutions du 17 janvier 1948 et les resolutions compIementaires des 13 aout 1948 et 5 janvier
1949, la resolution du 5 janvier 1949 n'a absolument
aucune valeur si ce n'est dans le contexte de la resolution du 13 aout 1948. Il ne s'agit pas d'une resolution
independante : la Commission I'a dit expressement.
C'est une resolution complementaire, corollaire des
autres resolutions, selon la Commission. La troisieme
partie de la resolution du 13 aout 1948 est restee lettre
morte, bien que nous nous soyons efforces d'en permettre I'application, et lorsque, etant donne I'attitude
adoptee par I'autre partie a notre egard et la nonapplication de ces points, nous avons estime possible,
apres trois ou quatre ans, d'entreprendre une action,
nous avons juge qu'il etait injuste de priver la population du Cachemire des bienfaits du developpement
economique, politique et moral que nous pouvions
lui apporter. C'est ainsi que des elections libres ont
lieu, que le Parlement siege, que des debats se tiennent,
que des journaux paraissent, que des universites fonctionnent, que le developpement economique se poursuit. Soixante-dix mille personnes se sont rendues au
Cachemire au cours de la derniere periode de vacances,
et 10 pour 100 au moins de ces personnes etaient des
Europeens et des Americains. Aucun pays coupe de
la civilisation ne permet une telle chose. Nous affirmons
que ces resolutions doivent etre prises en consideration.

87. So, if we want to repeat the facts, today it is 87. Done, si nous voulons repeter ce qu'il en est, il
not only a question of removing what was put in there ne s'agit pas seulement aujourd'hui de retirer ce qui
after 25 December 1948, when Pakistan agreed to a ete apporte la-bas apres le 25 decembre 1948, lorsqde
the resolutions - we agreed to them long before - it is le Pakistan a accepte ces resolutions - nous les avions
also a question of not adding to it. I was very surprised acceptees longtemps avant cette date - ; il s'agit
to hear my friend Sir Pierson Dixon say that the army egalement de ne rien y ajouter. J'ai ete tres etonne
is being modernized and that new equipment is d'entendre mon ami sir Pierson Dixon dire que I'armee
coming in, but in the circumstances that obtain, unless se modernisait et que du materiel neuf arrivait, mais
we are to accept the implied proposition - which is dans les circonstances presentes et a moins que nous
inseparable in some minds - that we are two peas n'acceptions la proposition sous-entendue (et qui en
in a pod, we are not, we are a self-respecting nation est inseparable dans I'esprit de certains), suivant
who obeys the dictates of international law. We have laquelle nous serions sur le meme plan - ce qui n'est
committed no aggression on any country, we have pas -, nous sommes une nation qui se respecte et qui
dishonoured no bond, we owe no money to the British se conforme aux preceptes du droit international. Nons
or anybody else which we will not pay, we have honoured n'avons commis d'agression contre aucun pays, nous
every obligation, but on the other side is a country n'avons manque a aucun engagement, nous ne devons
that invaded our territory and what is more stood pas aux Britanniques ni a qui que ce soit de I'argent
up in this Council and told everyone that it had com- que nous ne voudrions P;lS rembourser, nous avons
mitted aggression and had invaded the territory of fait honneur a toutes nos obligations - mais, de l'autre
India to protect its frontiers.
cote, il y a un pays qui a envahi notre territoire et, qui
plus est, s'est presente devant le Conseil pour dire a tout
le monde qu'il avait commis une agression et avait envahi
le territoire de 1'lnde pour proteger ses frontieres.

27

88. Are we to be told that we are the aggressors? We,
who are the victims of aggression and who have responded to the appeals that have been made, we, who
have carried out the principles of self-determination in
the context that exists, we, who 'above anybody else
have carried the situation to extremes in respect of
thL vulnerability of our frontiers, in spite of the imperative necessity to protect our limited trade in the
north? Are we to be told that we are to be placed on
the same footing as the defendant, as the country that
has committed rapine and plunder, the country that
has violated international law, the country which according to Sir Owen Dixon committed a breach of international law when it crossed the frontier? It is not
necessary to go so far back as Sir Owen Dixon. The
resolution of 13 August 1948 lays down the sovereignty of the Jammu and Kashmir State.

·88. Va-t-on nous dire que nous sommes les agresseurs ? Nous, qui sommes les victimes de l'agression
et qui avons repondu aux appels qui nous ont ete
adresses, nous qui avons applique les principes du
droit des peuples a disposer d'eux-memes compte tenu
de la situation actuelle, nous qui, plus que quiconque,
avons pousse les choses a l'extreme en ce qui concerne
la vulnerabilite de nos frontil~res, malgre la necessite
imperieuse de protegeI' notre commerce deja peu actif
dans le Nord? Va-t-on nous dire que nous serons
places sur le meme plan que le defendeur, que le pays
qui s'est livre aux rapines et au pillage, que le pays
qui a agi en violation du droit international, que le
pays qui, selon sir Owen Dixon, a commis une violation
du droit international lorsqu'il a franchi la frontiere ?
Il n'est pas necessaire de remonter jusqu'a sir Owen
Dixon. La resolution du 13 aout 1948 etablit la souverainete de l'Etat de Jammu et Cachemire.

89. All of us here are sufficiently familiar with the
idea of the integrity of States to know that sovereignty
in regard to a neighbouring territory is excluded except
in the context of international authority. There was
never any question here of two States disputing on
the Same territory. There were not two Jammu and
Kashmir Governments to come before the Security
Council; it was the Government of India which came
here with a complaint that aggression had been committed on the territory of the Union in the area of
Jammu and Kashmir and requested the Security
Council to use its good offices to prevent bloodshed and
to find a conciliatory settlement. Willy-nilly we have
moved on to the position of agreeing that the ceasefire line exists, but it has been stated very many times
in the Commission's reports that that line is not a
political boundary - otherwise we would not have gone
in there. It was merely a matter of convenience, for
the purpose of carrying on negotiations, that we spoke
of the Pakistan side of Kashmir. There is no Pakistan
side of Kashmir; the Pakistan side of Kashmir is on
our side of the international frontier. As I said the
other day, although I think my statement was misunderstood, we have no military forces and are carrying on
no military operations of any kind there; we have only
armed police ill the whole place. After these ten years
of going forwards and backwards, the Government of
India appeals to the Security Council in the interests
of the Charter, and in the interests of convincing the
vast majority of peoples in India and in every other
country in the world that what President Eisenhower
said the other day about aggression is true about India
as it is about any other country. After all, great countries have committed aggression and the United Nations
has come down heavily on them. Why should there
be any difference with another country?

89. Tous, ici, nous connaissons suffisamment bien la
notion de l'integrite des Etats pour savoir qu'il ne peut
etre question de souverainete sur un territoire voisin,
sauf dans le cas d'une autorite internationale. Il n'a
jamais ete question ici de deux Etats se disputant le
meme territoire. On n'a pas vu venir devant le Conseil
de securite deux gouvernements de J ammu et Cachemire; c'est le Gouvernement de l'Inde qui est venu id
se plaindre qu'une aggression avait ete commise sur le
territoire de l'Union, dans la region du Jammu et
Cachemire, et qui a demande au Conseil de securite
de preter ses bons offices afin d'eviter l'effusion de sang
et de parvenir a une solution de conciliation. Bon gre
mal gre, nous en sommes venus a accepter l'existence
d'une ligne de suspension d'armes, mais la Commission
a declare a maintes reprises dans ses rapports que cette
ligne n'est pas une frontiere politique; sinon, nous ne
l'aurions pas acceptee. C'est simplement par commodite, pour la conduite des negociations, que nous avons
parle de la partie pakistanaise du Cachemire. Il n'y a
pas de partie pakistanaise du Cachemire; la partie
pakistanaise du Cachemire se trouve en dec;a de la
frontiere. Comme je l'ai dit l'autre jour, bien que, je
pense, ma declaration ait ete mal comprise, nous n'avons
pas de forces militaires en cette region et nous n'y
effectuons aucune operation militaire; nous n'avons
dans toute la region qu'une police armee. Apres ces
dix annees de tergiversations, le Gouvernement de
l'Inde fait appel au Conseil de securite, dans l'interet
de la Charte et afin de convaincre l'immense majorite
des populations, dans l'Inde et dans tous les pays du
monde, que ce que le president Eisenhower a dit l'autre
jour au sujet de l'agression vaut autant pour l'Inde
que pour tout autre pays. Apres tout, de grands pays
ont commis nne agression, et l'Organisation des Nations
Unies les a condamnes avec force. Pourquoi eri serait-il
autrement a l'egard d'un autre pays?
!
!
90. We seek the way of conciliation, the way of 90. Nous cherchons la voie de la conciliation, la voie ~
understanding, the way to a settlement of relations de la comprehension, la voie qui mene it un reglement
with our neighbour - I d::> not say a settlement of the du probleme des relations avec notre voisin - je ne dis
Kashmir problem, because there is no problem. We pas a un reglement du probleme du Cachcmire, car il
seek greater stability in our area and tha avoidance n'y a pas de probleme du Cachemirc. Nons cherchons
of unnecessary misunderstandings arising from such a obtenir une plus grande stabilite dans notre region
statements as those I have quoted which were made by et a eviter les malentendus inutiles qui peuvent resulter
the Ambassadors of Turkey and Iraq to their Govern- I de declarations semblables a celles que j'ai citees et
ments. All that calls for the vacation of aggression qui ont ete faites par les ambassadeurs de Turquie et
in Kashmir. Ten years is a long time for a country to d'Irak a leur'> gouvernements. Tout exige que I'on mette

I

28

r'C"'~e invaded and still to rest content in the faith that

"

law will assert itself. The only'thing that can destroy
the force of law is a disregard of law, for the sake of
expedience, by those in power. I am sure that that will
not be the case with members of the Security Council.

fin a I'agression au Cachemire. Dix annees sont bien
longues pour un pays qui a ete envahi et qui continue
a ne pas douter que le droit triomphera. Le droit ne
perd sa force que lorsque, pour des raisons d'apportunite, ceux qui detiennent le pouvoir ne respectent
pas le droit. Je suis sur que ce ne sera pas le cas pour
les membres du Conseil de securite.

91. After we have submitted to you the circumstances
in Kashmir I think I am entitled to say to you as a
responsible Minister that I was in the place myself
before I came here and we are interested in internal
order, we are interested in good India-Pakistan relations and in communal harmony and more than all,
strange as it may seem, we are anxious not to arouse
in our people any kind of warlike feelings, because
though we have an army we do not want to encourage
it. We have played down the whole of this business of
this new aggression in Kashmir. I have been in Kashmir,
in the different parts of the State where these things
have happened, and I am familiar with the investigations which have been made, and I would ask the
Security Council to accept, as from a responsible representative of an accredited State, that we have used
the utmost restraint. I wish to convey to the members
of the Security Council who are close to us and to
the Council as a whole that action taken without taking
these matters into account' may well be playing with
fire.

91. Apres vous avoir expose la situation au Cachemire,
je crois etre en droit de dire, en ma qualite de ministre,
que je me suis rendu personnellement sur place avant
de venir ici et que nous voulons y faire regner l' ordre,
que nous tenons a cc qu'il existe de bonnes relations
entre l'Inde et le Pak~stan et I'harmonie entre les communautes religieusee, et que par-dessus tout, si etrange
que cela paraisse, !YlUS tenons a ne pas eveiller chez
notre peuple des sentiments belliqueux - bien que
nous ayons une armee, nous ne voulons pas encourager
de tels sentiments. Nous avons modere notre ton
sur toute cette question de cette nouvelle agression
au Cachemire. Je me suis rendu au Cachemire, dans les
differentes parties de l'Etat oil ces evenements se sont
produits, et je suis au courant des enquetes qui ont eM
effectuees. Je demanderai au Conseil de securite de
croire, comme venant d'un representant responsable
d'un Etat Membre, que nous avons exerce la plus grande
moderation. J e tiens a declarer aux membres du Conseil
qui comprennent notre position et au Conseil tout entier
que prendre des decisions sans tenir compte de tous ces
points serait peut-etre jouer avec le feu.

92. Terrorism, incitement to violence, the use of
money from another Government to create subversion,
the use of its intelligence services, some of whose
members are in our hands - and proceedings are being
taken against them in public trials in India, and since
we have separated the executive from the judicial,
there is no direction from the Government itself - all
these facts have to be taken into account. Therefore,
we beg of the Security Council to take into account
that this is not one of those routine discussions about
a matter that, like a hardy annual, comes up every
time. We are dealing with a problem concerning a
country with a considerable population, with no desire
either to proclaim or to assert its strength by the
quantum of its arms or by talking in military terms,
that does not believe that finally any settlements can
be brought about by war, either short-term or longterm, because no country, however powerful, can be
sure of the consequences of war.

92. Le terrorisme, I'incitation a la violence, I'utilisation de fonds provenant d'un autre pays a des fins de
subversion, l' emploi de ses services d'espionnage, dont
certains membres sont entre nos mains (ils passent en
jugement public devant les tribunaux indiens et,
puisque le pouvoir executif et le pouvoir judiciaire sont
separes, il n'y a pas d'instructions donnees par le
gouvernement lui-meme) - tout cela doit etre pris en
consideration. C'est pourquoi nous demandons au
Conseil de securite de ne pas oublier qu'il ne s'agit pas
d'une de ces discussions habituelles sur une question
qui, comme une plante vivace, renait tout le temps.
Il s'agit d'une question qui interesse un pays dont la
population est importante et qui n'a nul desir de
proclamer ou d'affirmer sa force par I'etalage de son
armement ou en employant un langage belliqueux, et
qui ne croit pas qu'en definitive la guerre puisse imposer
un reglement, que ce soit a court ou a long terme, car
aucun pays, si fort soit-il, ne peut prevoir avec certituue
les consequences d'une guerre.

93. We are also anxious that these developments
should not lead to a deterioration in our relations with
our close neighbours, such as our friends across the
water - a few miles of it - in Australasia or here or
in other places. We are anxious that the peoples of
Kashmir, only half of whom today have political rights,
educational opportunities, the opportunity of a better
way of living and of industrial development, should,
as a whole people, be enabled to have all this. What
is preventing that is the occupation and annexation.
Therefore, it is not merely the performance of part I
of the resolution of 13 August 1948, not merely the
removal of the guns, not merely the removal of
the" Azad" forces, and not merely the removal of the
Pakistan army - because Pakistan can go forty to

93. Nous tenons egalement a ce que ces evenements
n'amenent pas pour nous de mauvaises relations avec
nos proches voisins, nos amis de I'autre cote de la mer
- quelques milles nous en separent - en Australasie,
ici ou ailleurs. Nous souhaitons que les habitants du
Cachemire, dont la moitie seulement jouissent aujourd'hui de droits politiques, de possibilites de s'instruire,
de possibilites de vie meilleure et de developpement
industriel, puissent tous beneficier de tout cela. Ce qui
s'y oppose, c'est I'occupation et I'annexion. Par consequent, ce n'est pas seulement I'application de la
premiere partie de la resolution du 13 aout 1948, ce
n'est pas le seul retrait des canons, le seul retrait des
forces « azad», et non plus le seul retrait de I'armee
pakistanaise (car le Pakistan peut reculer de 70 ou
29

sixty miles across the frontier and come back again but it is the process of de-annexation that would
change the situation. Under what title, under what
right, under what law, under what conception does
Pakistan have any de facto or de jure authority in the
territory it has taken from India and conquered by
force? What answer are we to give to our people, what
answer are we to give to ourselves in defence of the
Charter?

100 kilometres· de l'autre cote de la frontiere et revenir),
qui changeront quelque chose a la situation, mais la
desannexion. A quel titre, en vertu de quel droit, de
quel regime juridique, d'apres queUe conception, le
Pakistan a-t-il, en fait ou en droit, une autorite quelconque sur le territoire qu'il a arrache a l'Inde et
conquis par la force? QueUe reponse devrons-nous
donner a notre peuple, quelle reponse donnerons-nous
si nous voulons defendre les principes de la Charte?

94. LJt us take for the sake of argument that we;are
a tyrannical or bad Government. If that were the case,
we should not be the only one in the world. Let us
say, for argument's sake, that we are an undemocratic
Government. Let us say we are an inefficient Government. But there is nothing in the resolution that ever
speaks about the question of sovereignty. At best, it
is where future sovereignty should lie. Sovereignty
means authority, nothing else.

94. Admettons, pour les besoins de la cause, que nous
soyons un gouvernement tyrannique ou mauvais (si tel
etait le cas, ce ne serait pas le seul au monde). Admettons, pour les besoins de la cause, que nous soyons un
gouvernement non democratique. Admettons que nous
soyons un gouvernement incapable. Mais il n'est en
rien question, dans la resolution, de souverainete.
Il est question, tout au plus, de la devolution future de
la souverainete. Souverainete veut dire autorite, rien
de plus.

95. There may be arguments as to how the future
may be settled, but there has been no argument about
the present state of affairs, which has its origin in
possession, and out of possession, despoliation has
taken place. Therefore, de-annexation must take place.
Part I, paragraph E of the resolution of 13 August 1948
must be implemented, there must be no more cries
of "Jehad", no more cries of holy war, no more
proclamations that the military alliances of other
parts of the world are intended against us or on account
of us, and no more threats to us from that quarter.

95. On peut discuter sur le reglement qui doit intervenir en ce qui concerne I'avenir, mais il n'y a aucune
contestation sur I'etat actuel des choses, qui decoule
de la possession, possession qui s'est transformee en
spoliation. Il faut done mettre fin a l'annexion. Le
paragraphe E de la premiere partie de la resolution du
13 aout 19~8 doit etre applique, il ne doit plus y avoir
de cris de « Jehad I», plus d'appels a la guerre sainte,
plus de proclamations affirmant que les alliances militaires d'autres parties du monde sont dirigees contre
nous ou conclues a cause de nous, et plus de menaces
contre nous de ce cote.

96. In this connexion, I have repeatedly stated about
the military aid given by the United States of America
to Pakistan, whatever its consequences may be - and
the consequences are very onerous and very heavy
for us - that we have accepted the motives so far
as the United States is concerned. We are not challenging its motives. We accept the statement on the
motives, not the correctness or otherwise, but the
facts are that the weight of these arms are a potent
quantity in the impeding of the development of our
country. It is also a potent factor, if I may say so without impertinence, in the impeding of the development
of Pakistan itself, which is very necessary for us. It
is standing in the way of the resolving of large numbers
of problems which inherently have difficulties apart
from any obstreperousness either they or we may
possess.

96. A cet egard, j'ai souvent dit, au sujet de I'aide
militaire des Etats-Unis d'Amerique au Pakistan,
quelles qu'en puissent etre les consequences - et ces
consequences sont tres onereuses et tres lourdes pour
nous -, que nous en avons accepte les mobiles en ce
qui concerne les Etats-Unis. Nous ne contestons pas
leurs mobiles. Nous acceptons ces mobiles tels qu'ils
ont ete exposes, sans en juger la valeur ; mais la verite
est que le poids d.e ces armes est un facteur puissant qui
entrave le developpement de notre pays. C'est egalement un element important, si je puis le dire sans
paraitre impertinent, qui entrave le developpement du
Pakistan lui-meme, dont nous avons egalement grand
besoin. Il barre la voie a la solution d'un grand nombre
de problemes qui presentent deja de grandes difficultes
par eux-memes, en dehors de toute mauvaise volonte
qui pourrait exister chez eux ou chez nous.

97. Therefore, in the consideration of this question
at the next stage, the Security Council, in its wisdom,
",ill take what steps it wishes to take, but it would
not expect a country to come here as to Canossa and
to surrender. No Government in India could surrender
the sovereignty of any part of its territory. No argument can argue people into bondage, and that phrase
must be familiar to my friend from the United Kingdom.
We shall not be wanting in any step that does not
sully our honour, does not touch our integrity, does
not place us in the same position as the invader, and
which does not call upon us to break faith with the
peoples of India and the world.

97. Lors de la prochaine phase de I'examen de cette
question, le Conseil de securite, dans sa sagesse, prendra
les mesures qu'il voudra, mais il ne doit pas attendre
qu'un gouvernement vienne ici, comme a Canossa, faire
sa soumission. Aucun gouvernement indien ne peut
renoncer a sa souverainete sur une quelconque partie
de son territoire. Aucun argument ne peut faire accepter
la servitude a un peuple - cette phrase doit rendre un
son familier pour mon ami du Royaume-Uni. Nous
accepterons toute mesure qui ne portera pas atteinte
a notre honneur, qui ne mettra pas en cause l'integrite
du pays, qui ne nous placera pas dans la meme position que l'envahisseur et qui ne nous invitera pas a
manquer a notre parole envers le peuple de I'Inde et
envers le monde.
30

'~'_.'" ..

. 98. I ask anyone - I do not use any stronger word
•. than "ask" - friend or otherwise, to look into any of
! these documents. statements, assurnnces and memoI1 randa submitted by the Government of India, its
:1 Prime Minister or anyone else, and say whether each
lone of these documents does not breathe this sentiment,
, even up to the last day. Are you going to dismiss
these as hypocritical? If that is so, then compare these
statements with the performances on the other side.

98. Je demande a tous, amis ou non (je n'emploie
pas de terme plus fort que « demandell), d'examiner
ces documents, ces declarations, ces assurances et ces
memoires presentes par le Gouvernement de I'Inde,
son Premier Ministre ou toute autre personne, et de
dire si chacun de ces documents n'est pas inspire par
ce sentiment, jusqu'au tout dernier jour. Les rejetterezvous sous pretexte qu'ils sont une marque d'hypocrisie ?
S'il en est ainsi, comparez ces declarations a ce qu'a
produit I'autre partie.

99. It gives us no pleasure periodically to come befbre
the Security Council at the behest of Pakistan. We
have neither the energy nor the people to do this. It
does not help at the other end, because it only creates
J unsettlement. There is no other problem - I say this
in all conscience - not even any of those stomachtouching problems of our economic development,
which so deeply touches the population of India from
Cape Comorin to the Himalayas. Every class of society
is deeply concerned and, I dislike saying this because
much has been said about religion; no religious section
of India is more disturbed by this business than are
the Moslem populations of India, because they are
patriotic Indians who have taken their part and who
],' carry'their burden and their responsibility for economic
!,1 and political developments, and who have suffered
11 imprisonment and suffered whatever there was to be
suffered in the past. On looking back, the British
11 Government was a comparatively liberal Government,
11 even though it was unpleasant at times.

99. Nous n'eprouvons aucun plaisir a venir periodiquement devant le Conseil de securite a la demande
du Pakistan. Nous n'avons, pour le faire, ni l'energie
ni le personnel suffisants. D'autre part, cela ne sert a
rien, car c'est seulement un facteur de trouble. II n'y a
pas d'autre question (je le dis en mon ame et conscience),
pas meme un de ces problemes vitaux de notre developpement economique, qui touche aussi profondement la
population de I'lnde, du cap Comorin a l'Himalaya.
Chaque classe de la societe est profondement touchee
et j'hesite a le dire parce qu'on a beaucoup parle
de religion, aucune communaute religieuse de 1'Inde
n'est plus troubIee par cette affaire que la popUlation indienne musulmane, car elle est composee d'lndiens patriotes qui ont fait leur devoir, qui portent
leur fardeau et leur charge dans le developpement
economique et politique, qui ont dans le passe ete
emprisonnes et ont subi toutes les souffrances possibles.
A la reflexion, le Gouvernement britannique etait un
gouvernement relativement liberal, quand bien meme
il etait parfois desagreable.

"

1

']
100. Therefore, there is no problem that so deeply
touches our people. That is no excuse for breaking
any kind of international law. We would not ask the
Security Council to do so. We only seek that the complaints we have brought, the commitments made by
the Security Council, the aggression by Pakistan,
which is the reverse of the assertion of our sovereignty
in the resolutions, shall be dealt with and that the
assurances shall be implemented, and that step by
step we shall not be inched along into a position of
subservience to aggression. I beg the Security Council
not to be deflected from this path by the inability
of the representative of the Government of India to
present a case which should need no argument with
the strength, the facility or the finesse that is required.

100. II n'est donc pas de probleme qui touche aussi
profondement notre peuple. Ce n'est pas une raison
pour se rendre coupable d'aucune violation du droit
international. Nous ne le demanderions pas au Conseil
de securite. Nous demandons seulement que les plaintes
presentees par nous, les engagements pris par le Conseil
de securite, l'agression commise par le Pakistan, au
mepris de l'affirmation de notre souverainete dans les
resolutions, soient examines et que les assurances
donnees soient mises en pratique, que nous n'en soyons
pas reduits peu a peu a accepter de subir I'agression.
Je demande au Conseil de securite de ne pas se laisser
ecarter de cette voie par le fait que le representant
du Gouvernement de I'Inde n'a pas ete capable de
soutenir avec la force, I'aisance ou la subtilite necessaires une cause qu'il ne devrait y avoir besoin d'etayer
d'aucun argument.

101. If, in the course of these submissions, I have
made any observations relating to any other country,
not one of them has any reference to their domestic
policies, not one of them has any reference to the
peculiar character of Governments or of individuals.
Wherever we have been able to express our appreciation, we have done so.

101. Si, au cours de ma declaration, j'ai fait des
observations relatives a un pays quel qu'il soit, aucune
n'avait trait a sa politique interieure, aucune n'avait
trait au caractere particulier de gouvernements ou de
personnes. Chaque fois que nous avons pu exprimer
notre gratitude, nous I'avons fait.
.

102. We are sometimes a little rough with the United
Kingdom - that is the only way we get on - but
we are not half as rough as they are with us. We agree
with a great part of Sir Pierson Dixon's statement,
and a great part of it is animated by a desire that
somehow or other, by a magic wand, this thing will
be resolved. But I ask him, in the name of all his
country's history and traditions, is it a solution if it

102. Nous sommes quelquefois un peu durs envers le
Royaume-Uni (ce n'est qu'ainsi que nous nous entendons), mais nous ne sommes pas a moitie aussi durs
qu'il ne I'est envers nous. Nous sommes d'accord sur
une grande partie de la declaration de sir Pierson
Dixon, et cette declaration est surtout inspiree du
desir de voir cette question resolue, d'une maniere ou
d'une .autre, d'un coup de baguette magique. Mais, je

L.

31

has no justice in it, if it is a '\;olation of the Charter,
if it is something where we accepted the assurances
given on behalf of this Council through Mr. Lozano,
Mr. Korbel, or the American gentleman who was the
Vice-Chairman? We did not look at their nationalities;
to us they were the Security Council. They were honourable gentI""len performing international duties, and
they made no reservations. And where an attempt
has been made to establish that something was said
to us that was different from what was said to Pakistan,
I say that is a very sad thing to say, because that was
not the case. In one matter, with regard to the disbanding and disarming of the "Azad " forces, there have
been some contradictions, but those contradictions
are easily solved because one must look at the last
assurances. The assurances were given by the same
people, and the last assurances are those given to the
Government of India and communicated to Pakistan.
What is more, in many cases, assurances were asked
for by the other side which were not given.

le lui demande au nom de I'histoire et des traditions de
son pays, peut-on parler de solution si cette solution
est depourvue de justice, si elle constitue une violation
de la Charte, alors qu'il s'agit de points sur lesquels
nous avions accepte les assurances donnees au nom
du Conseil par M. Lozano, par M. Korbel ou par le
Vice-President americain d'alors ? Nous ne nous sommes
pas inquietes de savoir quelle etait leur nationalite;
a nos yeux, ils etaient le Conseil de securite. C'etaient
des personnes honorables qui remplissaient des fonctions
internationales et qui n'ont pas fait de reserves. On a
cherche a demontrer que quelque chose nous avait ete
dit qui d:fferait de ce qui avait ete dit au P~kistan;
c'est la une allegation tres regrettable, car il n'y a
rien eu de tel. Sur un certain point, en ce qui concerne
le licenciement et le desarmement des forces {{ azad n,
il y a eu quelques contradictions, mais ces contradictions
sont aisement re"' 01 ues, car il faut s'en tenir aux dernieres assurances U(.lllnees. Ces assurances emanaient
des memes personnes, et les dernieres assurances
donnees I'ont ete au Gouvernement de l'Inde et ont ete
communiquees au Pakistan. D'ailleurs, dans de nombreux cas, I'autre partie a demande des assurances
qu' on ne lui a pas donnees.

103. If the Security Council really desires, as it does,
to deal with this matter with justice, in consonance
with its own principles, it will be necessary for it to
go into the documents point by point. It is not as
though, as the representative of Iraq said, we are
reopening closed issues. In all respect, I submit that
those who are reopening closed issues are those who
try to justify annexation, because the issue of sovereignty'is a closed issue. The resolutions are based on
that. The right of defence is a closed issue. The fact
that Pakistan has no place in Kashmir is a closed
issue. That there are no two States of Jammu and
Kashmir is a closed issue. We are not reopening them.
It is those who by lack of knowledge or because they
have been wrongly briefed are reopening closed issues,
who are creating new issues out of going back on
what are closed issues.

103. Si le Conseil de securite desire vraiment, comme
c'est le cas, regler cette question en toute justice, en
conformite avec ses propres principes, il lui faudra
examiner chacun des documents en detail. Ce n'est
pas comme si, pour reprendre ce qu'a dit le representant
de 1'lrak, nous remettions en cause des questions deja
reglees. Qu'il me soit permis de dire que ceux qui
remettent en cause des questions deja reglees sont ceux
qui essaient de justifier I'annexion, car la question de
la souverainete est une question reglee. Les resolutions
partent de ce principe. La question du droit de defense
est egalement une question reglee. De meme, le fait
que le Pakistan n'a rien it faire au Cachemire est une
question regIee. Le fait qu'il n'y a pas deux Etats de
Jammu et Cachemire est une question reglee. Nous ne
remettons en cause aucune de ces questions. Ce sont
ceux qui, mal informes ou mal conseilIes, remettent
en cause des questions deja reglees qui sont en train de
creer ainsi de nouveaux problemes.

104. I should like someone not merely to say: We
agree to a plebiscite, or to this or that or the other.
Under what conditions? What about the sequence?
We live in a world of time, and someone has said: If
you analyse time it becomes a sequence in duration.
You must take into account sequence: when a party
is told that if so and so does sO"'llething, then you have
to do so and so, and if that party agrees, you cannot
read a resolution upside down.

104. J'aimerais qu'on ne dise pas simplement : ({ nous
acceptons un plebiscite, nous acceptons ceci ou cela ».
A quelles conditions? Quel ordre suivra-t-on? Nous
vivons dans un monde regi par le temps, et quelqu'un
a dit : {{ Le temps est une suite de moments qui se
succedent dans la duree. n Il faut tenir compte de I'ordre
a suivre : lorsqu'une des parties est informee que si un
tel fait ceci, alors elle doit faire cela, et qu'elle I'accepte,
on ne peut lire une resolution a I'envers.

105. What is more, we have :;I. lot of floods in Kashmir
and the rest of India. In the early part of this year
there were certain estin:ntes with regard to the height
of flood control arrang..-:ments. They came to X feet.
These were calculations made over an average of
twelve years ending three years ago. This is pertinent;
this is not an anecdote. But the floods have been heavy.
We have made new calculations on the averages of
more recent years. It would be very foolish for us to
try to stop those floods, basing the heights of our

105. Il Y a beaucoup d'inondations au Cachemire
et dans le reste de I'lnde. Au debut de cette annee,
on a calcuIe la hauteur que devaient avoir les ouvrages
de protection contre les inondations. On a etabli qu'ils
devaient avoir tant de pieds de haut. Ces calculs etaient
fondes sur la moyenne des cotes observees au cours
d'une periode de douze ans qUi se terminait il y a
trois ans. Ce que j'expose se rapporte bien a la question
et n'est. pas une simple anecdote. Or, les inondations
ont ete graves. Nous avons refait les calculs d'apres la

32

~'W'--'

t barriers
on the calculations of the flood watf""; . . moyenne des cotes observees au cours d'annees plus
recentes. Il serait stupide d'essayer d'arreter ces inonare likely to come.
dations en calculant la hauteur de nos digues d'apres
le volume des inondations qui pourraient eventuellement
se produire.

I

J
106. In 1947, Pakistan relied upon irregulars. To- 106. En 1947, le Pakistan comptait sur les forces
~ day,
it does not have to rely on irregulars. In 1947, irregulieres. Aujourd'hui, il n'a plus a compter sur ces
ill

,i,

Pakistan had not taken the attitude that we were not
to exist in peace and friendship. In 1947, Pakistan
had not for seven years continuously refused to enter
into agreement with India that all problems should
be settled without war. In 1947, Pakistan had a different approach to the whole of this problem.

forces. En 1947, le Pakistan ne s'opposait pas a notre
coexistence pacifique et amicale. En 1947, le Pakistan
ne refusait pas constamment depuis sept ans de conclure
avec l'Inde un accord prevoyant le reglement de tous
les problemes sans recours a la guerre. En 1947, le
Pakistan avait une attitude differente sur l'ensemble
de la question.

107. We think that, if the Security Council will use
its good offices, will step back a little and throw its
weight fully - as it desires to do, as it always does on the side of commitments, of morality, of international law and of the Charter, it will find a solution.
But no solution by which a country is called upon to
disgorge its sovereign territory can be a solution. The
mistake arises entirely from thinking that the State
of Jammu and Kashmir is some foreign State that
we have sought to annex. If we had gone to Jammu
and Kashmir without accession, at the request of
Sheikh Abdullah, under international law our position
would have been morally, politically and legally indefensible. But we have not argued that. What appertains
to Kashmir appertains to 560 other places in India
which today have lost their identity in the mainland
of another country. We are not going to unscramble
these eggs. It may be a sin, but a pardonable sin, but,
being a young country, there probably exists an expression of feelings in this way. All of you have a great
deal to give Hway - we have very little. After all,
I make this final appeal to you at this stage that the
progress on this matter must proceed on the basis of
the full vacation of aggression, which means deannexation, the removal of everything that has come
there from 20 August 1948, the stoppage of hostile
propaganda, and some assurance which you or I can
accept that this will continue.

107. Nous estimons que si le Conseil de securite veut
bien preter ses bons offices, prendre un peu de recul et
faire jouer au maximum son influence, comme il en
a le desir et comme il le fait toujours, pour faire respecter les engagements pris, la morale, le droit international et la Charte, il parviendra a une solution.
Mais une solution suivant laquelle on inviterait un
pays a renoncer a une partie de sa souverainete territoriale ne serait pas une solution. Toute l'erreur consiste
a penser que l'Etat de Jammu et Cachemire est quelque
Etat etranger que nous avons essaye d'annexer. Si
nous etions entres dans l'Etat de Jammu et Cachemire
sans qu'il y ait eu accession, a la demande du cheik
Abdullah, notre position en droit international aurait
ete indefendable moralement, politiquement et juridiquement. Mais ce n'est pas l'argument que nous
avons soutenu. Ce qui est vrai du Cachemire est vrai
de 560 autres parties de l'Inde qui ont aujourd'hui
perdu leur identite en s'integrant au territoire d'un
autre pays. Il ne peut etre question de rechercher dans
une riviere l'eau des ruisseaux. C'est peut-etre une faute,
encore que pardonnable, mais, en tant que pays jeune,
nous ne pouvons Sans doute pas nous empecher de
manifester nos sentiments a ce sujet. Tous ici, vous
pourriez vous permettre d'abandonner beaucoup de
choses ; nous, nous en avons trop peu. Je vous adresse
done maintenant un dernier appel en demandant que
toute nouvelle mesure 1;,/ cette affaire parte du principe qu'il doit etre m~", intalement fin a l'agression,
c'est-a-dire qu'il doit el,r,.: mis fin a l'annexion, que
tout ce qui est entre la-ba::. depuis le 20 aout 1948 doit
en etre retire, que la propagande hostile doit cesser,
et qu'il y ait une assurance acceptable pour vous et
pour moi-meme que cela sera permanent.

108. Finally, there should be assurance that our
relations are going to be settled on the basis of the
United Nations Charter, and that the Security Council
is concerned with the complaint that is before it, the
complaint of aggression committed by Pakistan, which
has been denied here totally but which, after all, is
found in fact to be true. We do not ask for any condemnation; we do not ask for any strictures; we do
not ask for any commendation. We do not even say:
Leave us alone and we will fight it out.

108. Enfin, il doit y avoir une assurance que nos
relations se regleront conformement a la Charte des
Nations Unies, et le Conseil de securite doit s'occuper
de la plainte dont il est saisi, plainte pour agression
commise par le Pakistan, qui se revele en fin de compte
fondee, bien que les faits aient ete entierement nies
ici meme. Nous ne demandons pas une condamnation,
nous ne demandons pas une critique, nous ne cherchons
pas une approbation. Nous nf' disons pas non plus
« Laissez-nous regler la question par les armes.»

109. I submitted to this Council on behalf of my
Government the other day, irrespective of moral,
legal, political and every dg:1.t with regard to the
cease-fire line, that our Government as at present
constituted, our people, are not likely to be moved

109. J'ai declare l'autre jour devant le Conseil, au
nom de mon gouvernement, independamment de tout
droit moral, juridique, politique ou autre relatif a la
ligne de suspension d'armes, qu'il n'y a pa.s lieu de
croire que notre gouvernement actuel ou notre peuple

..

,
i

33.

into any action which, however justifiable the assertion
of a right, might lead to conflict - and conflict in
any part of the world can lead to conflict in other
parts of the world. We have had great patience with
regard both to the cease-fire line and to the interior
of our territory - I have not said anything about
the rest of it because that is not before the Council
and, with its experience, it is not necessary for us to
bring it here. We are not, as a people, in a hurry to
pursue mere logic and law at the expense of peace,
and the appeal which we make to the Security Council
in this matter is not a begging appeal, is not an argument for mercy, for special treatment, for a partisan
approach or anything of that kind, but for sheer
justice, the application of agreements and what is
necessary in the interests of stability, peace and order
in our part of the world.

se laisse entrainer a une action qui, quelque fonde
que soit le droit qu'il pourrait invoquer, risquerait
de conduire a un conflit - et un conflit, oil qu'il eclate
dans le monde, peut provoquer un conflit dans le reste
du monde. Nous avons fait preuve d'une grande patience
en ce qui concerne tant la ligne de suspension d'armes
que l'interieur de notre territoire; je n'ai pas parte
des autres questions, car elles n'ont pas ete soumises
au Conseil, qui a assez d'experience pour que nous
n'ayons pas besoin de le faire. Nous ne sommes pas
un peuple qui tienne avant tout a faire valoir la logique
et le droit, d11t la paix en souffrir, et l'appel que nous
adressons au Conseil de securite au sujet de cette
affaire n'est pas une imploration, un plaidoyer pour
obtenir une grace, un traitement particulier, une mesure
de faveur ou rien qui y ressemble, mais nous demandons
la simple justice, l'application des accords et ce qui
est necessaire a la stabilite, la paix et 1'0rdre dans la
partie du monde a laquelle appartient notre pays.

110. Mr. JARRING (Sweden): In my statement on
the India-Pakistan question at the 798th meeting of
the Council, I indicated that, in the opinion of the
Swedish Government, certain legal aspects of this
question might usefully and at an appropriate time be
referred to the International Court of Justice for an
advisory opinion. I also said that my Government
would be interested to learn the attitudes, in principle,
of the parties to this suggestion. In his statement at
the 800th meeting of the Council, the representative
of India has asked me to let him know what these
certain legal aspects are.

110. M. JARRING (Suede) [traduit de l'anglais]
Dans ma declaration sur la question Inde-Pakistan a
la 798 e seance du Conseil, j'ai dit que le Gouvernement
suedois estimait qu'il pourrait etre utile de demander
en temps voulu a la Cour internationale de Justice
un avis consultatif sur certains aspects juridiques de
cette question. J'ai dit egalement que mon gouvernement aimerait savoir quelle serait la position des
parties, en principe, a l'egard de cette suggestion. Dans
la declaration qu'il a faite a la 800e seance du Conseil,
le representant de l'Inde m'a demande de lui faire savoir
quels sont ces aspects juridiques.

111. My Government has two questions in mind for
an advisory opinion by the Court.

111. Mon gouvernement envisagerait que l'on demande
un avis consultatif de la Cour sur deux questions.

112. The first question deals with the legality of
the accession and is divided into three parts:
(1) Did the accession of the Princedom of Jammu
and Kashmir to India become legally valid in virtue
of the declaration of accession signed by the Maharaja
in 1947?
(2) If this declaration did not constitute a definite
accession, did it have the import of a legally valid,
conditional accession?
(3) In the latter case, is the accession, as a result
of the declaration by India on accepting the accession
or for other reasons, conditioned by being confirmed
through a plebiscite?

112. La premiere question a trait a la legalite de
l'accession et comprend trois parties:
1) L'accession de la principaute de Jammu et Cachemire a l'Inde est-elle devenue juridiquement valable
en vertu de la declaration d'accession signee par le
maharajah en 1947 ?
2) Si cette declaration ne constituait pas un acte
d'accession definitive, avait-elle la portee d'une accession conditionnelle, juridiquement valable ?
3) Dans ce dernier cas, l'accession est-elle, par suite
de la declaration de l'Inde relative a l'acceptation de
cette accession ou pour toute autre raison, subordonnee
a sa confirmation par un plebiscite?

113. The second question is the following: If a confirming plebiscite is a condition for the accession, to what
extent have India and Pakistan assumed precise
obligations in respect to the manner in which the
plebiscite should be arranged and to the prerequisites
for a plebiscite?

113. La seconde question est la suivante : si la confirmation par un plebiscite est une condition de l'accession,
dans quelle mesure I'Inde et le Pakistan ont-ils assume
des obligations precises quant a la maniere 'dont le
plebiscite doit etre organise et aux conditions prealables a un plebiscite?

114. Mr. NOON (Pakistan): I have listened with
close attention to the statements of the members of
the Security Council, as well as to the lengthy dissertations made by the Defencp. Minister of India.
There is little, if anything, that he has said that he
has not said before and which has not already been
answered. His interventions this afternoon and at
the previous meetings of the Security Council seem to
me to constitute a major attempt to confuse the issues

114. M. NOON (Pakistan) [traduit de l'anglais] : J'ai
ecoute tres attentivement les declarations des membres
du Conseil de securite, ainsi que les longues dissertations
du Ministre de la defense de I'Inde. Dans ce que ce
dernier a dit, il y a eu peu de chose, si tant est qu'il
y ait eu quoi que ce f11t, qu'il n'ait dit auparavant
et qui n'ait deja re<;u reponse. Ses interventions de
cet apres-midi et des seances precedentes du Conseil
de securite me paraissent constituer une tentative carac-

34

in the Kashmir dispute. The precise issue before the.
Security Council is the demilitarization of the State
of Jammu and Kashmir in order that a free and fair
plebiscite way be held under the auspices of the United
Nations, in compliance of the resolutions adopted by
the United Nations Commission for India and Pakistan
in 1948 and 1949, which guarantee the right of selfdetermination to the people of the State to determine
their own future.

terisee de brouiller les questions .soulevees dans le
differend du Cachemire. La question precise dont le
Conseil de securite est saisi est celle de la demilitarisation de l'Etat de Jammu et Cachemire, qui doit
permettre d'organiser, sous les auspices des Nations
Unies, un plebiscite libre et impartial, conformement
aux resolutions adoptees en 1948 et 1949 par la Commission des Nations Unies pour 1'Inde et le Pakistan,
qui garantissent au peuple de l'Etat son droit a disposer de lui-meme et a determiner son propre avenir.

115. The representative of India has tried to confound 115. Le representant de 1'Inde a essaye d'induire en
world opinion, both in regard to facts, as well as law. erreur I'opinion mondiale, tant pour <:e qui est des
- He has tried to deflect attention from the central faits que pour ce qui est du droit. 11 a essaye de detourner
issue before the Security Council by raising contro- l'attention de la question centrale soumise au Conseil
versies over matters which have nothing whatsoever de securite en soulevant des controverses sur des questo do with the questions of demilitarization and ple- tions qui n'ont absolument rien a voir avec la demibiscite. I shall refrain, at this stage, from being drawn litarisation et le plebiscite. Je ne me laisserai pas mainfurther into a wordy warfare by arguing with the tenant entrainer plus avant dans cette joute oratoire
representative of India about his interpretation of en discutant avec le representant de I'lnde de l'interinternational law on arbitration, sovereignty, para- pret~.tbn qu'il donne du droit international au sujet
mountcy, accession and the question of succession, de l'arbitrage, de la souverainete, de la suzerainete,
which have been argued ad nauseam and answered de l'accession et du droit de succession, points qui
many times before. Nor will I enter into the compa- ont ete discutes a satiete et sur lesquels il· a deja ere
rative merits of the Pakistan and Indian Constitutions repondu a maintes reprises. Je n'entrerai pas non plus
and the treatment by our two countries of religious dans une comparaison des merites des constitutions du
minorities. I will not take up the time of the Council Pakistan et de l'Inde et de la maniere dont nos deux
by trying at this stage to set the record straight on pays traitent leurs minorites religieuses. Je n'abuserai
the many errors of fact and interpretation with which pas du temps du Conseil en essayant a present de
the representative of India has attempted to cloud redresser les nombreuses erreurs de fait et d'interprethe whole question. My reply to the various contentions tation par lesquelles le representant de nnde a chercM
made by the Indian representative is ready, but, as . a jeter un voile de confusion sur l'ensemble de la
I have said, I shall refrain from making it now since question. Je suis pret a repondre aux diverses alleit is my desire that the Security Council should proceed gations du representant de I'lnde, mais, je le repete,
with considerations of the case. I reserve the right je m'abstiendrai de le faire maintenant, car je desire
to do so later at the appropriate time.
que le Conseil de securite puisse poursuivre l'examen
de l'affaire. Je me reserve le droit de le faire plus
tard, en temps opportun.
116. My Government has a right to expect that the
Security Council will not permit the reopening on any
pretext of issues that are already closed. It is my
Government's hope that the Security Council will
proceed in accordance with the dictates of justice and
equity to ensure that the obligations incurred by
India under an international agreement are fully and
speedily implemented and that the people of Kashmir
are enabled to exercise their inalienable right of free
expression of their will without fear and without
further obstruction from any quarters.

116. Mon gouvernement est en droit d'attendre du
Conseil de securite qu'il ne permette sous aucun pretexte la remise en cause de questions deja reglees.
Mon gouvernement egpere que le Conseil de securite
agira conformement aux imperatifs de la justice et de
I'equite pour faire en sorte que l'Inde s'acquitte pleinement et promptement des obligations qu'elle a
contractees en vertu d'un accord international et que
le p,'uple du Cachemire puisse exercer son droit inalienable a exprimer librement sa volonte sans crainte
et sans nouvelle obstruction de la part de quiconque.

117. Mr. Krishna MENON (India): If there are no
other members of the Council who wish to speak, I
should like to make a brief observation in reply to
the representative of Sweden.

117. M. Krishna MENON (Inde) [traduit ae l'rmglais] :
Si aucun autre membre du Conseil ne d.esire prendre
la parole, j'aimerais repondre au representant de la
Suede par une breve observation.

118. The PRESIDENT: I have no more speakers
on my list, so the representative of India may proceed
with his reply.

118. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de i'angiais) 11 n'y
a plus d'orateur inscrit; le representant de I'lnde
peut donc repondre.

119. Mr. Krishna MENON (India): There have been
two sets of observations since I finished speaking, one
from the representative of Sweden and the other from
my friend from Pakistan. This is not the time to answer
or to speak further on the statements made by the
representative of Pakistan. As for trying to confound,

119. M. Krishna MENON (Inde) [traduit de l'angiais] :
Deux series d'observations ont ete presentees depuis
que j'ai fini de parler, l'une par le representant de la
Suede et l'autre par mon collegue du Pakistan. Ce
n'est pas le moment de repondre aux declarations faites
par l~ representant du Pakistan ou de revenir sur son
35

I' plead not guilty. My observations were addressed
to the members of the Security Council. They are
not easily confused.

intervention. Pour ce qui est de son accusation d'essayer
d'induire en erreur l'opinion, je plaide non coupable.
Mes observations etaient adressees aux membres du
Conseil de securite, qui ne se laissent pas facilement
induire en erreur.

120. My main purpose in speaking is to answer the 120. Si je prends la parole, c'est essentiellement pour
representative of Sweden. As I said the other day, the repondre au representant de la Suede. Comme je l'ai
Government of India does not turn down or turn a dit l'autre jour, le Gouvernement de l'Inde ne rejette
deaf ear to any counsel of conciliation, which is not ni ne refuse d'entendre aucun conseil en faveur de la
affected by what I said before. We have today a slight conciliation, principe que rien de ce que j'ai dit preelaboration of what was in the mind of the Government cedemment n'atteignait. Nous venons d'avoir un aperl(u
of Sweden. We shall communicate this to the Govern- de ce qu'envisage le Gouvernement de la Suede. Nous
ment of India and, if it should so happen that the en ferons part au Gouvernement de l'Inde et, si le
Government of Sweden considers that the appropriate Gouvernement de la Suede estime que le moment est
time has arrived, we will give the answer. I am sure venu, nous lui donnerons notre reponse. Je suis sur
that Mr. Jarring, the representative of Sweden, would que M. Jarring, representant de la Suede, ne souhaite
least expect us to speak at an inappropriate time. certainement pas que nous repondions a un moment
Therefore, when the appropriate "'ime arrives, we will inopportun. Par consequent, quand le moment opportun
be willing to answer the question. But I wanted to sera venu, nous serons prets a repondre a la question
place on record that we have not said that an advisory posee. Mais je voulais qu'il soit bien entendu que nous
opinion may not be sought. But there are certain n'avons pas dit qu'on ne pourrait pas demander un
conditions attached to it which I referred to last time, avis consultatif. Toutefois, certaines conditions, dont
but for the present I would like him to communicate j'ai parM la derniere fois, doivent etre remplies a ce
to his Government that the details that he has put sujet ; pour le moment, je voudrais que ce representant
before the Security Council were faithfully commu- informe son gouvernement que les precisions qu'il a
nicated; and so far as Sweden is concerned, it will exposees devant le Conseil de securite ont ete fidelement
hear about it through diplomatic sources or otherwise transmises et que la Suede recevra une reponse, par
immediately or soon. At the appropriate time, so far la voie diplomatique ou autrement, immediatement ou
as the Security Council is concerned, we will be prepared a bref delai. Pour ce qui est du Conseil de securite,
nous serons prets a lui faire connaitre notre reponse
to answer.
en temps opportun.
121. The PRESIDENT: As I said previously, I have
no speakers on my list. Before adjourning this meeting,
I should like to say that in view of the consultations
which I have had regarding the consideration of this
question by the Council, I am in a position now to
suggest, with your approval, that the Council should
meet on Friday afternoon. As there is no objection to
this suggestion, the next meeting of the Security
Council will be held on Friday at 3 p.m.

121. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais) : Comme
je l'ai deja dit, il n'y a plus d'orateurs inscrits. Avant de
lever la seance, je voudrais dire qu'a la suite d'echanges
de vues auxquels j'ai pris part au sujet de l'examen
de cette question par le Conseil, je puis a present
proposer, si vous le voulez hien, que le Conseil se
reunisse vendredi apres-midi. Puisqu'il n'y a pas
d'opposition, la prochaine seance du Conseil de securiM
se tiendra vendredi a 15 heures.

The meeting rase at 5.35 p.m.

La seance est levee a 17 h. 35.

SALES AGENTS FOR UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
DEPOSITAIRES DES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES
ARGENTINA·ARGENTlNE

Editorial Sudamericana S.A., Alsino 500,
Buenos Aires.
AUSTRALlA·AUSTRALlE
H. A. Goddard, A.M.P. Bldg., 50 Miller
St., North Sydney;
90 Queen St., Melbourne.

FIIANCE
Edition' A. Pedone, '13, rue Saufflet,
Pari' (Ve).
GERMANY·ALLEMAGNE

R. Eisenschmidt, Kaiserstrasse 49, Frankfurl/Main.

Elwert &.Meurer, Haupstrasse 101, Berlin-

PAKISTAN
The Pakislan ClHlperaliYe look Sociel)',
Dacca, Ea'l Pakislan (and at Chitlallonll).
Publi,hers United Ltd., Lah"re.
Themas & Thomas, Karachi, 3.
PANAMA
Jose Men'ndez, Plaza tie Aralllll, PI'

Melbourne University Press, Carhan N.3,
Victoria.

Schoneberg.

.nama.

Alexander Horn, Spiegelgasse 9, Wies-

AUSTRIA·AUTRICHE
Gerold & Co., Graben 31, Wien, 1.
B. WuJlerstorff, Markus Sillikusslrasse 10,
Salzburg.
BELGIUM·BELGIQUE

baden.
W. E. Saarbach, Gereonslra... 25-29,
Koln (22c).
GKEECE·GIIECE
Kauffmann loak'hop, 29 Stadion Slreel,
Athene,.
GUATEMALA

PAIIAGUAY
Agencia de Librena' tie Salvador Nlzzl,
Calle PIe. Franco No. 39-43, Asuncion.
PERU·PEROU
libreria Internacional d.1 '.ru, S.A.,
Lima and Araqulpa.
PHILIPPINES
Alemar', Boak Slare, 7,(9 Rixal Avo.uo,
Menila.
PORTUGAL
Livraria Rodriguo.. 186 Rue Aure., U.
boa.
.
SINGAPORE·SINGAPOUR
The City Bo'ok Slore, Ltd., Winchester
Hou,e, Collyer Quay.
SPAIN·ESPAGNE
Libroria Bo.ch, 11 IIond. Universld.t1,
Barcelona.
Librerfa Mundl·Pronso, Laga... 38, Madrid.
SWEDEN·SUEDE
C. E. Fritn'. Kungl. Hovbokhandel A·B,
Frod,gatan 2, Slockholm.
SWITZERLAND.SUISSE

Agence et Messageries de la Press. S.A.,
14·22, rue du Persil, Bruxelfes.
W. H. Smith & Son, 71.75, boulevard
Adolph..Max, Bruxelle,.
BOLlVIA·BOLlVIE

Libreria Selecciones, Casilfa 972, la Pa%.
BRAZIL.BRESIL

Livraria Agir, Rio de Janeiro, sao P'aulo
and Belo Horizonts.
CAMBODIA·CAMBODGE

Papeterie.Librairie Nouvelr., Albert Portail, 14, avenue Boulloche, Pnom·Penh.
CANADA

Ryerson Press, 299 Queen St. West,
Toronto.
CEYLON·CEYLAN
Lake House Book'hop, The Associaled
Now,papers of Ceylon, Ltd., P. O. Box
2,(4, Colombo.
CHILE·CHILI
Editorial del Pacifica, Ahumada 57,

Santiago.
librerra Iven!, Casilla 205, Santiago.

Sodedad Econc5mico Financiero, Edificio
Briz. Despacha 207, 6a Avenida 1.01-33,

Zona 1, Guatemala City.
HAITI

librairie "A la CaraveU.", Boite postal.
, 11·8, Port-ou·Prince.
HONDURAS

libreria Panamericana, Tegucigalpa.
HONG KONG·HONG-KONG
The Swindon look Co.,25 Nalhan Road,

Kowloon.
ICELAND.ISLANDi

8okoverzlun Sigfusar Eymundssonar H.
F., Austurslraeli lB, Reykjavik.
INDIA·INDE

Orient Longmani, Calcutta, Bombay, Madra, and New Delhi.
Oxfard Buok ... Slationery Co., Now
Delhi and Calcutta.
P. Varadachary & Co., Madros.
INDONESIA·INDONESIE

Pembangunan, Ltd., Gunung Sahari .~,

CHINA·CHINE
The World Book Co., Ltd., 99 Chung

Djakarta.
IRAN

king Road, 1st Section, Taipeh, Taiwan.

"Guity", 482, Clvenue Ferdowsi, Teheran.

Tha Commercial Press Ltd., 211 Honan

Libreria Nacional Ltdo., Barranquillo.

IIIAQ·IIIAK
Mackanzie'. Boekshop, Baghdad.
ISRAEL
Blum.lein's Book'lores Ltd., 35 Allenby
Road, Tel·Aviv.
ITALY.ITALlE

COSTA RICA.COSTA.RICA
Traio. Herm!'no" Apartado 1313, San

Libreria Commissionaria Sensani, Via
Gina Capponi 2', Firenz••

Rd., Shanghai.
COLOMBIA.COLOMBIE

libreria America, MedeJltn.
Ubreria Buchholz Galeria, Bogol6.

Jose.

.

Ceskostovensky Spisovatel, Noredni Trida
9, Praha 1.

UNITED ARAB REPUBLICIIEPUBLlQUE ARABE UNIE

Librairia "La RenailsancI d'!IYPf.", ,
Sh. Ad/y Pa,ha, Cairo.

Librairi. Univer,.Ue, Damas.

Librairie Univ.rseU., Beyrcuth.

lnt.roation.' Document. Servil', Colum-

L1BEKIA

Libreria Dominicana, Mercedes 49, Ciu-

~1,

dad Trujillo.
ECUADOR·EQUATEUR

NETHEKLANDS.PAYS.BAS
N.V. Martinus Nijhoff, lange Voorhout
9, Is.Grav.nhage.
NEW ZEALAND·NOUVELLE·ZELANDE
United Nations Ass.dation of New Zea·
land, C.P.O. 1011, Wellinglon.
NOIIWAY·NORVEGE
Johan Grundt Tanum Forlag, Kr. Augustsgl. 7A, 0,10.

libreria Cientifica, Guayaquif and Quito.

724, Pr.toria.

Nihonba'hi, Tokye.
LEBANON-L1SAN

Maruzen Company, Ltd., • T.ri·Nichom.,

DENMARK·DANEMARK
J. Momolu Kamara, Menr.via.
Einar Munksgaard, Ltd., NllJrregode 6,
LUXEMBOURG
I«Jbenhavn, K.
Librairie J. Schummer, Luxembourg.
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC. MEXICO·MEXIQUE
REPUBLlQUE DOMINICAINE
Editorial Hermes S.A., Ignacio Mariscal

EL SALVADOR·SALVADOR
Manuel Novas y Cia., 1a. Avenida sur
37, San Salvador.
FINLAND·FINLANDE
Akateeminen Kirjakauppa, 2 Keskuskatu,
Helsinki.

Hon. Raunhardl, Kirchga..e 17, Zurich 1.
THAILAND-THAILANDE
Promuan Mit Ltd., 55 Chakrawat Ilaad,
Wet Tuk, Bangkok.
.
TURKEY.TURQUIE
Libr"irie Hachette, 469 Isllklal Cadd..i,
Beya.lu, Islanbul.
UN.ION OF SOUTH AFIlICA.
UNION SUD.AFRICAINE
Van !lchaik', Bookslore (Ply.), Ltd~ Box

UNITED KINGDOM.ROYAUME-UNI
H. M. Slatlonery Office, P.O. Box 5",
London, S.E.l (and al H.M.S.O••hep.).
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.
ETATS.UNIS D'AMERIQUE

JAPAN·JAPON

CUBA·
la Ca,a Belgo, O'R,!iIIy 455, La Habana.
CZECHOSLOVAKIA·TCHECOSLOVAQUIE

libroiril PaYet S."'., lausann., a.nlve.

Mexico, D.F.

bin Univeraity Pre.., 2960 Sroadway,
New York 27, N. Y.
URUGUAY
Repr.sentacion d. Etliforial.s, Prof. H.
D'Elia, Av. 18 do JuJie 1333, Mont..

video.
VENEZUELA
Libreria del Este, Av. Mirancla, No. 52,

Edf. Galipon, Caracas.
VIET·NAM

Jl'apeterie.Librairie Nouvelle, Albert Portail, 80ite postal. 283, Saigon.
YUGOSLAVIA·YOUGOSLAVIE
Cankarieva Zalozba, Ljubljana, SI!lvenia:

Orzavno

freduzece,

Jugeslevensk.

Knjiga, Ter.xiie 27/11, aeegrad.
(5IB2)

Orders and inquiries from counlries wher" sales agenfs have
not yet been appoinled may b. sent fa: Sales and Circulalien
Section, Uniled Nalions, New York, U.S.A.; or Sal., Section,
United Nations Office, Palais des Nations, Geneva, Switzerland.

Printed in France

Les commancles et aemandes cl. 'e"seign.menl, 'nu.nanf Je
pays ou it n'exisfe pas encore cl. clepositaires p.uv.nt ",.
aclressee, • la Sedion des venles .t de I" Jisf,iIJlIlion,
Organisation des Nations Unie., New·York (Elaf~Unis .'Ame.
rique), ou a la Section des venles, Organi.ation J.J Nations
Unies, PalaiJ des Nations, Geneve (Suiue). .

Price : $U.S. 0.30 ; 2/- stg.; Sw. fr. 1.25
(or equivalent in other currencies)

9869-September 1958-1,800
