UNITED

NATIONS

TWENTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1711) . . . , . . . . . . . . . , . I . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

... ....,,.. .. .. .. . . . .. .. ... .... ... ... .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 12 April 1973 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/10913) . . , . , . , . . . . . . . , . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . , . . . . . . . , .

1

Adoptionoftheagenda

SIPVl711

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document,
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. , .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SEVENTEEN

HUNDRED

Held in New York

AND ELEVENTH

on Saturday,

Prclsident: Mr. Javier PEREZ DE CUELLAR (Peru).

21 April

MEETING

1973, at 10 a.m.

dan) took the places reservedfor them at the sideof the
Council chamber.

Preset& The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, China, France, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America and Yugoslavia.

3. The PRESIDENT (interpretation front Spanish):Before
we continue our work, I shouldlike to draw the Council’s
attention to the text of the revised draft resolution in
document S/10916/Rev.l, submitted at the 1710th meeting by the representativeof France.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l71 1)
4. I shall now call on those representativeswho wish to
explain their votes before the vote.

1. Adoption of the agenda

5. Mr. SEN (India): Without touching on the innumerable
instancesof rumour, speculation,gossipandkite-flying, and
also severaldiplomatic movesof the last 36 hoursor so-all
of which represent different lessonsto different delegations-1 should like briefly to indicate how India will vote
on the presentjoint France-British draft before us.

2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 12 April 1973 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/10913)
The meeting was called to order at IO. 45 a.m.

6. We find that the changesthe French and British
delegationshave made in their original draft have significantly modified the great principleswe andother members
of the Council have repeatedlystatedand emphasized,such
as the principle that there can be no equation or balance
between violence, however politically motivated and encouraged, and State-controlled marauding and punitive
raidsinto other States, or the principle that this Council has
to draw a sharpdistinction betweenthosewho take the law
into their own hands and thosewho come to the Council
for redresswhenever possibleand feasible.There are many
other principles involved. The present draft also blurs, to
someextent at least, the perspectiveof the total picture of
the situation in the Middle East. However, we acknowledge
that the two delegationsthat have worked so strenuousIy
and seriously towards bringingabout a usefulconclusionto
our present debate must have had weighty reasonsfor the
changesthey have introduced in their original draft.

Adoption of the agenda
T%eagenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 12 April 1973 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/IO91 3)
1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): In
accordance with the decision taken by the Council [I 705th
~?~eetirlg/, and with its consent, I shall invite the representatives of Lebanon, Israel and Egypt to take places at the
Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. E. Ghorra (Lebanon), Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel) and Mr. A. Abdel Meguid
(Egypt) took places at the Council table.

7. We ourselveswould have much preferred the first text
(S/l 09161 together with the amendment moved by
Guinea, India, Indonesiaand Yugoslavia(S/109I7/. Such a
formulation would have reflected more fully and less
faultily the principles which we have accepted.It would
also have prescribed more correctly and with greater
urgency what, in our opinion, was required of the Council
to meet the presentLebanesecomplaint. Wewere therefore
encouragedwhen we heard that both the United Kingdom
and France would accept our amendment.We thank the
representativeof France for his acceptanceof the proposed
amendment, even to the revised France-British draft.
Presumably, similar understandingwould also have been
forthcoming from the British delegation if the represen-

2. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): Again
in accordance with previous decisions of the Council
[1705th, I706th, 1708th and 1710th meetingsj, I shall
invite the representatives of Saudi Arabia, Algeria, the
Syrian Arab -Republic, Tunisia and Jordan to take the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber,
on the understanding that they will be invited to be seated
at the Council table when they wish to address the Council.
At the invitation of the President,Mr. J. BaroodJJ(Saudi
Arabia), Mr. A. Rahal (Algeria), Mr. H. Kelani (Qrian Arab
Republic), Mr. R. Driss (Tunisia) and Mr. A. Sharuf (Jor1

expression “deploring all . . . acts of violence” has been
included in the sixth preambular paragraph, and particularly the wording “condemns all acts of violence” in
operative paragraph 1. These expressions are very ambig
uous. They have failed to draw a distinction between tlie
right and the wrong and between the aggressor and the
victim of aggression and, therefore, might be used by the
Zionists and imperialists to oppose the Palestinian people
who have been subject to aggression and victimized or to
oppose the other Arab peoples in their just struggle to resist
aggression and recover their lost territories and national
rights. We are firmly opposed to it. The Chinese delegation
has made active efforts to rectify these above two erroneous expressions, but unfortunately our efforts have not
achieved the expected results. In these circumstances, the
Chinese delegation cannot but decide to abstain in the
voting on the said draft resolution.

tative of Guinea had not withdrawn, with our full support
and concurrence of course, the proposed amendment
which, in our view, had lost its linkage with the disappearance of the last paragraph of the original text. The
womb having been destroyed, the foetus could not stay.
8. In these circumstances, the logical attitude of the
Indian delegation would have been to abstain from voting
on the present draft, but we cannot ignore the fact that
Lebanon is the complainant and if, for whatever reasons
and however reluctantly, it finds the present text in
document S/l 09 1h/Rev. 1 something it can accept-or more
correctly, but colloquially, can live with-it would not be
right, in our view, to fail to support the draft and so bring
whatever little comfort we can to Lebanon in its hour of
trial and distress.
9. We shall therefore vote for the draft resolution submitted by France and the United Kingdom and moved by
Mr. de Guiringaud yesterday in so businesslike a fashion.

15. Finally, the Chinese delegation reaffirms that the
Chinese Government and people strorgly condemn the
Israeli Zionists for their aggressive acts against Lebanon and
other Arab countries. We will, as always, firmly support the
Palestinian, Lebanese and other Arab peoples in their
struggle to resist aggression and to recover their lost
territories and national rights. We are deeply convinced that
their struggle is just, that a just cause will triumph in tlie
end and that no force on earth can obstruct it.

10. Mrs. Jeanne Martin CISSE (Guinea) (interpretation
fro?~ Frenclz): My delegation would like very briefly to
explain its vote before the vote.
11. Throughout the debate, as we explained in our
statement in the general debate (I 708th meeting], the
Republic of Guinea has always supported the cause of
Lebanon and the cause of all the Arab States, and indeed
the cause of those who are struggling for their integrity and
their national independence. In our statement, in renffirming the integrity of Lebanese territory and the right of
Lebanon to fight against attacks from a militarily strong
State, from a State which enjoys the support of great
Powers, a State which is confident of its impunity, we have
always, for our part, affirmed the right of the peoples of
Palestine to fight for the reconquest of their national
territory. What we have already reaffirmed also is that we
cannot deny the Palestinian people that right, nor do we
want to separate the general problem of the Middle East
from the specific case of Lebanon.

16. Mr. ANWAR SAN (Indonesia): My delegation has
decided, after long hesitation, to vote for draft resolution
S/ 109 16/Rev. 1 submitted by France and the United Kingdom. We would have been happier if we could have voted
for the draft resolution in its original form, before ils
revision, though even in that form my delegation thou&l it
did not correctly reflect the serious situation in the Middle
East which developed after the recent Israeli incursion irito
Lebanon in which three leaders of the Palestinian liberation
movement were murdered and some other innocent civilians lost their lives.
17. As the Council is aware, my delegation had the
intention of proposing, along with some other delegations.
an amendment to the draft resolution in its original form.
The representative of Guinea has already explained why the
four nations withdrew their proposal. In particular, the
deletion of operative paragraph 4 of the original draft,
which is, in the opinion of my delegation, only a weaker
version of paragraph 3 of resolution 280 (1970), was an
element of great disappointment to us.

12. In the draft presented by the representative of France
/S/l0916/Rev.l],
we have seen that the liberation movements and Israel, which defies the international community, are condemned on an equal footing.
13. I am sure that the members of the Council wilI not
misunderstand the sense of our vote, but we think that we
should be consistent. Hence my delegation will abstain
from voting on the draft resolution submitted by France
and the United Kingdom

18. Though my delegation is not happy with the text and
would prefer to abstain, which would be more in line with
our view on the issue, we have, however-as I have said,
after long hesitation-decided to vote for draft resolution
S/10916/Rev.l for two reasons. First, because Lebanon, as
the party most directly interested and the one that brorlght
the complaint before the Council, considers that in its
revised form the text meets a large portion of its requirements and is prepared, in the words of my colleague and
friend the representative of India, to live with it; and,
secondly, because we consider the adoption of draft
resolution S/l 09 16/Rev. 1 more as an interim measure Since
the Council has adopted resolution 331 (1973), proposed
by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Egypt, in paragraph 2

14. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (trmslation from Clzinese).
The Chinese delegation has studied the draft resolution
[S/l 0916/Rev. I/ tabled by France and the United Kingdom. We find much of the contents of the draft resolution
acceptable to us. For instance, operative paragraph 2, which
condemns the repeated military attacks conducted by Israel
against Lebanon and Israel’s violation of Lebanon’s territorial integrity and sovereignty in contravention of the
Charter; paragraph 3, which calls upon Israel to desist
forthwith from all military attacks on Lebanon, and so on.
All this is correct. However, it must be pointed out that the
2

of which it was decided that the Council would examine
the situation in the Middle East following the submission of
the Secretary-General’s report on the situation since 1967.

against repetition of its military acts against Lebanon under
penalty of consideration of more effective measures in case
of repetition of such acts of aggression. It is most
regrettable that this omission has led to the withdrawal of
the four-Power
amendment which is important to the
consideration mentioned above. It was, however, made
abundantly clear by the majority of the Council that
military and financial assistance to Israel constituted an
important factor in helping Israel to perpetuate its policy of
aggression against Lebanon and of occupation, terror and
intimidation against other Arab countries. It would, therefore, have been important that this be reflected in the draft
resolution. Its absence, however, does not undermine the
significance attached to it by the majority of the Council.

19. As I said in my statement before the Council on
Tuesday last [170&h meeting/, it is the considered view of
my delegation that, as a result of the unresolved Middle
East question of which the recent Israeli incursion into
Lebanon was a manifestation, the problem of terrorism
cannot be considered apart from its root causes. My
delegation is happy that in adopting resolution 331 (1973),
which had our strong support, the Council has agreed to
examine the whole question of the Middle East. It is on
that basis that my delegation, though most reluctantly, will
vote in favour of draft resolution S/l 09 16/Rev. 1.

24. While on the question of evident trends in the Council
which are not reflected in the draft resolution, my
delegation observes with satisfaction that many delegations
have expressed their conviction and support for the legitimate aspirations and inherent rights of the Palestinian
people to self-determination and to their legitimate struggle
to obtain their goal. Many delegations also share our
conviction that no military action or terrorism by Israel can
stop a liberation movement like the Palestinian movement
from reaching its goal, let alone that any futile attempts to
liquidate it might succeed., Indeed, it is a lesson for Israel to
consider.

20. Mr. ABDLJLLA (Sudan): My delegation made it
sufficiently clear in its statement in the Council on 13 April
f i70&/1 nzeeting;l that the case referred to in the complaint
by Lebanon regarding Israel’s aggression of 10 April was a
clear-cut case of aggression by one Member State against
another Member State and that it should be treated as such,
with all the appropriate decisions by the Council.
21. On that basis, my delegation would have welcomed
without reservation a positive condemnation of the repeated aggressions by Israel against Lebanon, including that
of JO April, with a clear warning against repetition of such
acts and with a request to all States to refrain from giving
Israel any assistance that would encourage its perpetuation
of its aggression, terrorism and occupation. Instead of such
action commensurate with the Israeli crimes and befitting
at least decisions on these lines by the Council, we regret to
find that draft resolution S/10916 and its revised version
contain forcefully injected reference to and condemnation
of individual casts of violence which have taken place
outside Lebanon and for which Lebanon is not responsible.
We believe not onIy that that reference is irrelevant to the
present case but that it is most probable that Israel will
exploit such reference as a pretext for future agression
against Lebanon. In our view, the draft resolution should
have contained a clear and exclusive reference to the acts of
violence and terrorism that have been committed directly
by Israel, which would be relevant to its aggression of 10
April, instead of forcefully referring to acts of violence for
which Israel is ultimately responsible also on account of its
policy of military aggression, occupation and terrorism.

25. In concluding my statement in explanation of my
vote, let me assure our brother and colleague, Ambassador
Ghorra of Lebanon, following reassurances already presented by my President and Foreign Minister to the
President and Foreign Minister of’ Lebanon on 11 April,
that we treasure the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Lebanon as being as valuable and dear to us as it is to our
brother people of Lebanon
26. For these reasons, and in compliance with the wishes
of Lebanon, the vote of the Sudan delegation will be in
favour of the draft resolution, despite the very sad fact that
WC consider the draft resolution regrettably below the
expectation of the delegation of the Sudan.
27. Mr. ODEROJOWI (Kenya): In the statement I made
before the Council on 18 April, I made the following point:
“We cannot but regret the human suffering that has
ensued as a result of this situation. We thus strongly
condemn all acts of aggravation of the situation and all
acts of terrorism and counter-terrorism; we passionately
condemn these in the name of human dignity and in the
name of peace. Terrorism is not a commodity for export.

22. Many statements have pointed to the official and
actual threat by Israel of the use of military force without
any pretext or justification, which made it necessary to
warn Israel against the repetition of such acts in the draft
resolution. At any rate, my delegation is opposed to any
interpretation
of paragraph 1 as applicable to the Palestinian national liberation movement, for all liberation
movements have their inherent right to fight.

“. ..
“My delegation repeats that it is opposed to acts of
violation of the sovereignty of other States, whether that
be through incursions such as the recent Israeli incursion
into Lebanon, or through acts of subversion and incursions into other States by groups or individuals trained
and encouraged by other States. Such acts of aggression
and incursion, and interference with the sovereignty of
other States, cannot be justified by any excuse whatsoever.” [I 709th meeting, paras. 8 and 12.1

23. With reference to other components of the draft
resolution, while my delegation fully associates itself with
the condemnation of Israel, it is equally reassuring to my
delegation that the Council clearly upholds the sanctity of
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon. HOWever, the draft does not reflect the overwhelming view of
the Council that Israel should be warned categorically
3

28. This is the basic position of my delegation and,
because the draft resolution in document S/10916/Rev.l
maintains that equilibrium of justice, we shall vote in
favour of it.
29. I also indicated that my delegation was in favour of
the Council’s tackling the Middle East situation in its
totality. We still maintain this basic position because the
Middle East situation is a complex one and demands a
whole combination of solutions in order to bring peace to
that part of the world In a message just received from my
Foreign Ministry this basic position of the Kenya Government is emphasized as follows:
“Kenya Government policy is one of effective, prompt
and demonstrable
implementation
of resolution
242 (1967). Kenya opposes military and terroristic measures emanating frbm any quarter to escalate the conflict
in the Middle East. Kenya also opposes injection of
cold-war politics and encouragement of arms race in the
Middle East because these are impeding early, effective
and peaceful settlement of the Middle East dispute.”

Abstaining: China, Guinea, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United States of America.
73e draft resolution was adopted bJ> II votes to II(I,ICwith 4 abstentions, 1
34. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): L
shall now call on representatives who wish to explain tlleir
vote after the vote,
35. Mr. MOJSOV (Yugoslavia): My delegation would ]lavc
voted in favour of the original France-British text submitted in document S/l 09 16, with the amendment by four
non-aligned States contained in document S/l 09 17, wl~i;ll
the sponsors agreed to incorporate in their original draft*
That draft, so amended, was, in our view, well balanced a116
contained and reflected, in a much more satisfactory wti)
than the draft just adopted, some of the basic principIp14
and positions important to us, which were cx’pressed ill olir
statement before the Council on Friday, ‘13 April /17(1&h
meeting].
36. While our views and positions against individual
senseless terrorism that causes the loss of innocent 1111m3n
lives and jeopardizes the safety of communications, travcf
and normal international traffic are well known a&
established, we find t.hat the resolution just adopted IJ
unbalanced, in that it might give the impression to somt’
that we are here equating the State government-organid.
official terrorism of a State Member of the United Nations
with other acts of violence, especially since it is Lebarloll’i
complaint against the State of Israel’s military attnsi
against Lebanese territorial integrity and sovereignty that
has been on the agenda and that was the subject matter \r!
our current meetings.

30. This is our basic position, and because we are of the
opinion that this draft resolution introduces the basic
equity into the situation we shall vote for it.
31. Mr. BOYD (Panama) (interpretation Jlfom Spanish):
My delegation will vote in favour of the draft resolution in
document S/10916/Kev.l,
submitted by France and the
United Kingdom, representing a compromise between
several delegations, because Lebanon has considered that
this text is acceptable and because, as we see it, the text
reaffirms the right of Lebanon to have its territorial
integrity and sovereignty respected, and at the same time
condemns the repeated military attacks which have occurred recently and which have led to the loss of innocent
lives.

37. In condemning all acts of violence that cause the t(rij
of innocent civilian lives, we could not equate the rutrli
with the consequences. It is in that connexion that we a12
expressing our fears that any dilution of Israel’s respossrbility for its recent and repeated attack on Lebanon might
encourage those who organize and conduct such attacks
and even proclaim the conducting of those attacks 3s 3
State policy, possibly leading to the resumption of such
attacks, which would in turn lead to new and very grri”rt
consequences and complications.

32. The PRESIDENT (interpretation porn Spanish): One
of the members of the Council has requested a suspension
of the meeting before the vote, under rule 33 of the
provisional rules of procedure. If there is no objection we
shall act in accordance with this request.
The meeting was suspended at 11.10 a. m. and resumed at
11.20 a.m.

38. A particularly disturbing change in the draft that 111~
sponsors have accepted was, in our view, the omission +!I
operative paragraph 4 of the original draft-the warning IP~~
Israel against a repetition of such attacks. We can only Im~t*
that, because the paragraph did exist in the original drdir
and was then subsequently deleted, and because su&
warnings against a repetition of Israel’s military ilttiKb5
have been almost invariably contained in practically all BUT
resolutions dealing with similar actions of Israel-such .:s
256 (1968),
262 (I9hh).
resolutions
248 (1968),
26.5 (1969), 270 (1969), 280 (1970) and 316 (1972)-this
present omission will not be seen or taken by anyone as the
Council’s possible sudden weakening, even by mere omission, in its stern position against any future attacks.

33. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): As
no other delegation wishes to speak at this time, I take it
that the Council is now ready to proceed to the vote, and
accordingly I shall put to the vote the draft resolution, as
revised, sponsored by France and the United Kingdom and
contained in document S/ IO9 16/Rev. 1.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
82 ./bfizvo~1~:
Australia, Austria, France, India, Indonesia,
Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern 1reland,’ Y ugodavia.
Against. None.

1 Seeresolution 332 (1973).
4

c

34. However, despite these reservations and doubts, we
voted in favour of the revised France-British draft because
we were expressly and officially assured by the representative of Lebanon, a friendly Member State, victim of
repeated and ruthless military attacks, that the revised
draft, however inadequate but containing, nevertheless, a
condemnation of Israel for those attacks and calling upon it
to desist forthwith
from any further acts, would meet,
although not fully, some of Lebanon’s basic requirements.

aggressor and eliminate the consequences of aggression, and
also in this specific instance on the well-known resolution
242 (1967).
46. During the discussion, almost all members of the
COUnd stressedthe fact that, in order to achievea peaceful
settlement of the conflict in the Middle East,stepsmost be
taken for the immediate implementation of resolution
242(1967). Many of thosewho spokeduring the discussion,
both Council membersand representativesof other countties participating in the considerationof the item, noted
the responsibility of the Security Council, and particularly
of its permanent members, for the settlement of the
situation in the Middle East, which endangersthe causeof
peace.The almost unanimousopinion of membersof the
Council concerning the needfor a settlementof the Middle
East conflict on the basisof resolution 242 (1967) reflects
the sentiments of all peoples of the world, This is
confirmed by the decisionsof such authoritative international public and governmentalorganizationsasthe World
Peace Council, the Conference of Foreign Ministers of
Non-Aligned Countries, the Organization of African Unity
andothers.

40. We hope that Israel will, as it must, conclude from the
whole spirit of our debates here and from the whole process
of our coming to today’s decision, that the Council and the
international community are now less than ever prepared to
tolerate its policy of military attacks and aggressive assaults
against its neighbours, in disregard of the basic principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and Security Council
decisions.
41. In conclusion, let me add that my delegation is
looking forward to the forthcoming consideration by the
Council of the Middle East crisis as a whole, its roots and
causes and the reasons for the collective failure to deal with
it adequately since 1967. IF we invest all our efforts,
energies and good will in the right direction, we might be
able to find at least some ways towards a peaceful solution
of the problem on the basis of respect for the legitimate
rights of all States and peoples of the area, and always
starting out from the solemn principle of the inadmissibility
of the acyuistion of territory by force.

47. The Assembly of Headsof State and Government of
the Organization of African Unity at its ninth session,held
at Rabat in June 1972, adopted a specialresolution on the
question of Israel’s continued aggressionagainstthe Arab
States [see S/10741 of 20 Ju& 1972, resolution AHGf
Res.67(fX}/. In that resolution, the Assembly invited
Israel publicly to declareits adherenceto the principle of
non-annexation of territories through the use of force, and
to withdraw immediately from all the occupied territories
to pre-5 June 1967 lines, in accordance with Security
Council resolution 242 (1967). The OAU Assembly also
urged all States Membersof the United Nationsto intensify
their action in both international forums and the United
Nations Security Council andGeneralAssemblyand to take
all initiatives for the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of Israel from the Arab territories and the condemnation of Israel’s attitude which impedesthe implementation of Security Council resolution 242 (1967). The
Assembly also requestedal StatesMembersof the IJnited
Nations to refrain from supplying Israelwith any weapons,
military equipment or moral support likely to enableit to
strengthen its military potential and to perpetuate its
occupation of Arab and African territories.

42. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(tru!!s/ntioiz from Russian): Mr. President, first of all I
should like to express satisfaction at the Security Council’s
adoption at its 1710th meeting, on the initiative of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Arab Republic of Egypt,
Mr. El-Zayyat, of an important resolution (331 (1973/l
concerning an early review of the question of the situation
in the Middle East as a whole in all its aspects.
43. The importance of this resolution of the Council, in
the view of the Soviet delegation, is that it may represent a
breakthrough in the search for a peaceful settlement in the
Middle East, on the basis of Security Council resolution
242 (1967), which would ensure a just and lasting peace in
the area based on the withdrawal of all Israeli forces from
all occupied Arab territories and on respect for the lawful
rights of the Arab people of Palestine.

48. The Conference of Foreign Ministers of Non-Aligned
Countries, meeting at Georgetown, Guyana, in August
1972, in its resolution on the Middle East,? also acknowledged that it was impermissibleto acquire territory
through force and to usethe occupation of territories as a
meansof pressurefor imposinginequitable solutions, and
reiterated that the full respectfor the inalienablerights of
the Arab people of Palestinewasa prerequisiteto peacein
the Middle East, The Conference also called for the
immediate and unconditional withdrawal of Israel from all
Arab territories to pre-5June 1967 lines. The Conference
called upon all States to provide the Arab peopleswith any
assistancewhich might help them achieve the immediate
and unconditional withdrawal of Israeliforcesfrom all Arab

44. We attach particular importance to the fact that, at
yesterday’s meeting of the Security Council, as at previous
meetings, during the discussion of the subject, members of
the council linked this decision to the need to activate the
existing United Nations machinery for the settlement of the
Middle East conflict, by which I mean primarily the
continuation of Ambassador Jarring’s mission and the
renewal of consultations among the permanent members of
the Security Council on the Middle East.
45 Consideration of this question must, of course, be
based on strict observance of the Charter of the United
Nations, which provides for comprehensive assistance to
and protection of the interests of victims of aggression and
for the adoption of appropriate measures to curb the

2 NAC/I:M/CONF.1/RI:S.3,

5

territories and the restoration of the lawful rights of the
people of Palestine.

revised draft, which has now becomea Security Council
resolution. In paragraph2, the Council condemnsIsrael’s
continuing military attacks against Lebanonand its violation of Lebanon’s territorial integrity and sovereignty.
Paragraph3 contains a demand that Israel should desist
forthwith from all military attacks on Lebanon.

49. This is the universal view of prominent mass organizations and the most important public and governmental
organizatons throughout the world. All this indicates the
need for the Council to discuss the Middle East problem in
all its aspects. The Soviet delegation is convinced that such
a discussion might make a real contribution to the
constructive search for a peaceful settlement in the Middle
East.

54. Nevertheless,asI have already commented,asa result
of revision under pressurefrom the forces I have named,
this draft beameso weakenedthat it did not meet the need
for the Security Council, as the principal organ for the
safeguardingof international peace and security, not only
to condemn lsrael for its latest perfidious attack on
peace-lovingLebanon, but also to take effective steps ta
prevent similaractsof banditry by Israelin future.

50. Even today it is also possible to sum up some of the
results of the discussion in the Security Council of Israel’s
latest monstrous act of aggression against Lebanon. The
statements by members of the Security Council and
representatives of other States Members of the LJnited
55. Neither the draft resolution nor the resolution now
Nations have confirmed the view expressed by the Soviet
adopted provide for the application of sanctionsagainst
delegation at the very outset of the discussion of this
Israel, asa State in which aggression
hasbecomethe main
question [170&h meeting/, that lsrael would be morally
purposeof foreign policy and which stubbornly, systematiand politically condemned for its new aggressivecrime cally and deliberately violates United Nationsdecisionsand
againstLebanon. Indeed, the statementsof practically all
the basic purposesand principles of the Charter of this
representativeshave exposed Israel and firmly condemned Organization, which are designedto maintainand strengtheninternational peaceand security,
it as an aggressorwho is grosslyviolating the principlesof
the Charter of the United Nations and the basicrulesof
56. Nor can I fail to draw attention to the fact that even
international law, above all suchfundamental principlesof
international relations as respect for the sovereigntyand our respectedcolleagueswho voted in favour of this draft I
territorial integrity of States, the inadmissibility of the
for the reasonsindicated by them, expressedclear dissatisfaction at the content and nature of the resolution.
acquisition of territory by meansof force or the threat of
force and renunciation of the use or threat of force in
international relations. No speakerhassupportedor indeed 57. In the circumstances, and in the light of these
could support or justify
Israel’s aggression,which has considerations,the delegation of the USSR could not
become the major part of its State policy. The attemptsof
supportthe draft resolution.
Israel’sleadersto extol State terror and the policy of State
terrorism and to justify aggressiveactsagainstneighbouring 58. Mr. SCALI (United Statesof America): In my remarks
Arab Statesby referencesto Israel’sso-called“self-defence” before the Council on 17 April, I assertedthe deeply fell
or to the right of what it terms retribution for individual view that “The overriding task of the Council is to seizethe
acts of terrorism committed by certain private persons
and presentopportunity and moveto put an end to violence [in
groups who are in despairas a result of Israel’scontinuing the Middle East] so that the political processwill have a
aggressionhave been exposed and rejected. The vast chanceto operate” / 1708th meeting, para. 721.
majority of the membersof the Council have spokenin
favour of decisive condemnation of Israel’s aggression
againstLebanon and the adoption of appropriatemeasures 59. I also state anew what I believemy delegation has
to put an end to any acts of aggressionby Israelagainst made emphatically clear on many occasions: that the
United States, as a matter of firm principle, opposes
Lebanonand other neighbouringStates.
international violence and terrorism from whatever souccc
5 1. In the light of what I have said, the Soviet delegation and of whatever kind. States must not export violence and
terrorism; private groups must not export violence and
would
like to make the following observationson the draft
resolution submitted by France and the United Kingdom terrorism. Assessingblame is secondary to the purpose of
which hasjust been adopted by a majority of votes as a endingthe misery and sufferingon both sides.
resolution of the Security Council.
GO. My delegation has called for a move away from
52. First of all, we should like to expressour regretthat
recrimination to even-handedcondemnationof all forms of
even the initial draft of this resolution-which, in our view, violence.We do not accept the counselof despairof those
in the form in which it was originally drafted, wasnot
who witness it, deplore it and then conclude that the
strong or decisive enough-was subsequently still further
violence cannot be controlled. Even lessdo we accept the
weakened.The delegation of the USSR took a decisionto
view that violence should be encouragedand supported
vote in favour of that initial draft version of the resolution. regardlessof its motivation. We must reject terrorism
However, the draft resolution was then revised, under equally as we reject violence, now, before humanity is
pressurefrom pro-Israeli forces, in such a way that we forced to endure so much of it that it becomesaccepted as
normal, as the ugly new rulesof engagementthat nations
could not support it.
and groups can follow to settle their differences. My
53. Of course,the Soviet delegationsupportsthe ideasand delegationbelievesthat the presentresolutionfalls short of
proposalsset out in operative paragraphs2 and 3 of this fully meetingtheseprinciples,thesecriteria.
6

61. However, through the Security Council, the international community, for the first time in the history of the
world Organization, has rejected the cycle of violence and
counter-violence, a deadly cycle in which innocent people
inevitably become victims. In our view, the resolution
condemns both violence and terrorism. These are positive
elements. My delegation is pleased that, by its reference in
the sixth paragraph of the preamble to “recent acts”, the
resolution takes note of the tragedy of Khartoum, in
violation of Sudanese sovereignty, incidents at Nicosia,
violating Cypriot jurisdiction, and other vicious acts in
many places, particularly in Europe.
62. In many other places, horrors have been averted only
through the timely precautions of local authorities. To
bring the matter home to this table, I would also make the
point that, except for the vigilance of the New York Police,
the recent placing of massive explosives in three crowded
locations in this great city could have caused indiscriminate
casualties in enormous numbers. Do we here believe that we
and our families are immune to this kind of blind terrorism,
SO long as the international
community does not awaken to
the need for urgent action?
63. My delegation withheld its positive vote for two
principal reasons. In our view, the resolution focuses too
much on the meaningless exercise of trying to parcel out
blame. It falls short of meeting the full dimensions of the
challenge facing the Security Council, Until this very hour,
I and my delegation have been applying every ounce of our
energies to achieving by quiet diplomacy an agreed draft
that could command the unanimous support of this
Council. We came close to succeeding in this, and we are
disappointed that we did not achieve that outcome. Even
SO, all of us can derive some satisfaction from the fact that
the Security Council has grappled, and grappled vigorously,
with one of the great issues of the time. We should not lose
sight of this fact, even if the result does not reach our
highest aspirations.
64. No resolution and no legislative act are perfect. Each
of those who voted for the resolution have, as we have
heard, expressed views on how it could have been improved
by adding or subtracting some additional element or
through some different emphasis. But, more important, no
resolution of this Council can be an end to itself. A
resolution’s worth is judged by its effects, and its effects
depend upon the actions of the international community
that flow or do not flow from the resolution.
65. Before 1 close I think it important for the sake of the
record to make some comments on the matter of arms
supplies to the Middle East area. In the course of this debate
we have heard several distorted and one-sided references to
United States assistance in meeting Israel’s legitimate
defence needs. I have sensed an effort to depict this as a
flow
of arms through one pipeline, from a single source to a
single destination. There has been no reference to the fact
that, even as we have been sitting in this chamber, major
deliveries of war material have been made by certain Powers
to several other countries in the area.
66. The United States has no intention of taking steps that
would alter the arms balance in the Middle East or

otherwise contribute to instability. However, I would
emphasize that the United States does not propose to sit
idly by while others pour arms into the hiliddlc East for one
side, thus inevitably tempting some Governments to believe
that, with those new arms, they could risk another round in
the Middle East war.
67. My Government has, in the past six years, insistently
sought an agreement among the major arms suppliers to
limit weapons shipments to that part of the world. The
United States stands ready at this instant to participate in
such an arrangement if others are willing to put aside their
special political objectives and work with us towards the
goal of a reduced military confrontation.
68. In concluding, I want to affirm that, despite the
imperfections of the present resolution, my Government is
determined to do all in its power to encourage mutual respect
of sovereignty among nations in the Middle East and to
seekto further the international campaignto protect the
innocent against violence and terror from all sources.
Despite the imperfections of the present resolution, my
Government will regard its positive elementsas points of
departure for efforts to seek a new era in the Middle
East-an era in which all the peoplesof the Middle Eastwill
live in peaceand security and an era in which the handsof
friendship will reach acrosssecureand recognizedborders.
Let us all dedicate ourselvesto the achievementof that era.
69. Sir Laurence MCINTYRE (Australia): My Government
hasgiven a great deal of thought to the kind of resolution
that might appropriately meet this situation as well as to
the text of the resolutionjust adopted.
70. There is much in the original France-British draft
resolution that we could agreewith. Among other things,as
I saidin my statement in the Council on 17 April /I 708th
meeting], the raid on Beirut and neighbouring areasof
Lebanon that was planned and executed by the Government of Israel in the early morning of 10 April must be
censuredas a deplorableintrusjon upon the sovereignty of
another Member of the United Nations.But, in the view of
my Government, a condemnatory judgement that wouid
have treated that particular act, reprehensibleas it was,in
isolation from the rest of the pattern of provocative
violence, terror and reprisal of which it is undoubtedly a
part, and which is encroaching on the safety of life
everywhere, would have amounted to a distortion by the
Council of the realities of the situation in the Middle East
and would scarcely have been likely to help towards a
settlementof its stubborn problems.
71. For those reasons,andbecausein our view the draft in
document S/ 10916 was too heavily pitched againstIsrael,
my delegation would not have been able to vote in favour
of it. However, the changesthat were madeas a result of
yesterday’s consultations and introduced in document
S/l 0916/Rev. 1 go somedistanceat leasttowards injecting a
measureof balance into the resolution to the point where,
even though we still do not regardit asentirely satisfactory,
we felt able to support it.
72. Mr. JANKOWrTSCH (Austria): As I had the opportunity to state a few days ago /170&h mm’ing/, the

Austrian Federal Government has consistently rejected
and condemned all acts of international violence wherever
they occurred and by whomever they might be committed.
That position of principle must also apply to the Israeli
actions in Lebanon that have been the subject of the
present debate in the Security Council.

78. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): As
representativeof PERU, I should like to state that 1 voted
in favour of the resolution which we have just adopted
because1 consider that, even with the changesintroduced
in the text yesterday[S/l0916/Rev.l], it doescontain the
basicprincipleswhich had to be reflected in the decisionof
the Council.

73. The resolution on which we have just voted in many
respects meets that position of principle in condemning all
acts of violence and addressing itself in no uncertain terms
to a particular case. The Austrian delegation therefore
voted for the draft resolution presented by France and the
United Kingdom [S/10916/Rev. I]. We consider that resolution to be an urgent appeal to all parties involved in the
conflict in the Middle East to halt the use of violence in any
form and to exert all their influence in order to eliminate
all acts of violence. We also consider the resolution to be an
important reaffirmation of the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Lebanon, and we express our expectation that
its territorial integrity will be strictly respected by all sides.

79. The position of Peruis fully recordedin the recordsof
the Council. Nevertheless,I should like to say that I was
prepared to vote in favour of the draft resolution as
originally submitted (S/10916] as well as of the amendmentsin document S/10917 submitted by Guinea, India,
Indonesiaand Yugoslavia. It is clear that the new version
representsa considerableeffort at compromisebut I should
like to point out that deletion of former operative
paragraph4 shouldnot, in the opinion of my delegation,be
understoodto meanthat the Council abdicatesits responsi.
bility under the Charterin the event that a situalion should
ariseonce againwhich leadsto a complaint such asthe one
that we haveconsidered.

74. The Austrian delegation wishes to express the hope
that this debate in the Security Council will be a first step
leading to renewed and concerted efforts by all parties
concerned towards a lasting, peaceful and just solution of
the conflict on the basis of resolution 242 (1967). We are
encouraged in this regard by the unanimous adoption
yesterday of the draft resolution introduced by the Foreign
Minister of Egypt, requesting the Secretary-General to
submit to the Security Council a comprehensive report on
the efforts undertaken by the United Nations pertaining to
the situation in the Middle East since June 1967 [see
resolution 331 (1973)]. My delegation hopes that that
report will provide a basis for a constructive debate on the
problem of the Middle East.

80. Now, as PRESIDENT, 1 call on the representative of
the Soviet Union who hasaskedto bc allowed to speakin
order to give an additional explanation.
81. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translationjkonz Russian):Mr. President,during the statements in explanation of vote, one speakeradvanced the
thesisthat the questionof assistance,including the supply
of arms,to the victim of aggressionshould be put on the
samefooting asassistance,
financing andthe supply of arms
to the aggressor.We cannot agreewith this approach. It
would be analogousto the approachheardin the statement
of one speakerduring the discussionin the Security Council
to the effect that the individual terror committed by
despairingindividuals and the State terror and policy of
State terrorism engagedin by Israel should be put on the
samefooting. Neither thesisis acceptable. This has been
confirmed by the discussionin the Council on the question
of Israel’saggression
againstLebanon.

75. Sir Colin CROWE (United Kingdom): As one of the
sponsors of the draft resolution in document S/10916/
Rev. 1, 1 should like to express my delegation’s gratitude
and that of our co-sponsor France to those who voted in
favour of the resolution We fully understand the difficulties of many of them and indeed it will be recalled that
we were prepared to accept a resolution with additional
paragraphs.
76. As we all know, it is not always, indeedit is not often,
possible to secure everything that one wants from the
Council and compromiseis generally necessary.There is a
French expression: ‘Ye mieux
est -I’ennenzidu bien” (the
best is the enemy of the good), which sumsup the matter
very aptly, as the French languagedoes so often. In this
case, the good is that the resolution asadopted preserves
the essentialfeaturesof the original draft we submittedand
we feel that it meets the needs of the situation in
respondingto the complaint of Lebanon of the invasionof
that country and the infringement of its sovereignty by
Israel, while at the sametime making clear the Council’s
abhorrenceof all actsof violence.

77. It hasbeena disappointmentto usthat not all members
of the Council havefelt able to support this view. Wehope,
however, that with this resolution we may witness a
de-escalationof violence in the area, a retreat from reprisal
and counter-reprisal,and a beginning of a move towardsan
atmospherewhich may be more conducive to a settlement.
8

82. The vast majority of speakerscondemnedIsrael for its
State terror and its policy of State terrorism. This, of
course, does not constitute a justification for terror by
individuals, which results in the loss of life of innocent
victims.
83. However, we must be perfectly clear about this, and 1
assumethat the vast majority of thosesitting around this
table, as well as of our respectedcolleagueswho attend
Security Council meetings-I refer to the permanent representativesto the United Nations-would not agree that the
questionsof assistingand co-operating with the victim of
aggression
and with the aggressorshouldbe approached on
the samelevel or measuredwith the sameyardstick. The
provisionof assistance
to the victim of aggression,including
the supply of arms, is lawful and just and fully in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
Support for and assistance
to the aggressor,including the
supply of arms, is, on the other hand, a grossviolation of
the Charter. For this reason1felt it necessaryto clarify the
principlesunderlying this qtlestion and to stressthat this is
the positionof the Soviet delegation.

L

84. The PRESIDENT (interpretation firm Spanish): I call
on the representative of the United States who wishes to
exercise his right of reply.

people of Israel in the defence of its rights but also by the
support of enlightened public opinion all over the world, by
the stand adopted by international organizations capable of
taking a more balanced view of the situation than the
Council and by the attitude of international personalities
who, unlike government representatives guided by political
considerations, can assess problems on the basis of principles of law, justice and morality.

85. Mr. SCALI (United States of America): 1 must thank
my Soviet colleague and good friend for his assistance in
identifying one of the sources of the arms and war material
that continue to pour into various countries of the Middle
East. I said that there were several sources and did not wish
to name names. I will not bore this company which has
already done a day’s work with more details at this time. I
shall be happy to give those details on a more suitable
occasion.
86. The PRESIDENT
011 the representative

91. It is now to be hoped that the Government of
Lebanon will evaluate correctly its responsibilities. Words,
especially such as those that have emerged in the resolution,
cannot free Lebanon from its international obligations. The
Lebanese Government remains in duty bound to take
action to end the savage attacks planned, organized and
launched from its territory against innocent civilianiin the
Middle East and in other parts of the world. Israel expects
the Government of Lebanon to act forthwith to eliminate
the terrorist bases and centres within its borders.

(interpretution from Spanish): I call
of the Soviet Union in exercise of his

right of reply.
87. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(franslution from Russian): I was speaking about a principle, and did not name any names; I did not mention by
name those who defended the thesis that the same
approach should be adopted to questions of assistance,
including the supply of arms, to the aggressor and to the
victims of aggression. It is now clear to us all who in fact
supports this thesis.

93. The PRESIDENT (interpretation fkom Spanish):
now call on the representative of Lebanon.

I

94. Mr. GHORRA (Lebanon): Horace once said that for
every folly of their princes the people felt the scourge.
Today the Security Council has adopted a resolution which
deals with another act of folly and terror organised by the
Government of Israel against Lebanon. It is another act on
the long trail of Zionist terrorism--on that long trail on
which Zionist terrorists have left their footprints. These
footprints cannot be effaced by any eloquent speeches here
in the Security Council, The acts of Zionist aggression and
terrorism have been elevated by the Israeli Government to
the status of State terrorism orgdnized by leaders of the
country, They definitely cannot take satisfaction in the fact
that they have Phantoms and Skyhawks and more power.
They must remember that, in the words of William Yeats,
“the Phantoms work in the midst of tears” and there are
plenty of tears that have been shed in Lebanon over
hundreds of our innocent victims that have been murdered
by Israel.

88. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
representative of Israel has asked to speak and 1 call on him.
89, Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): The adoption of the text just
voted upon confirms a number of known facts. It demonstrates once more that the Security Council, like other
United Nations organs cannot, because of its structure and
composition, its voting procedures and their pre-ordained
results, deal equitably with questions pertaining to the
Middle East situation. If it cannot examine and at least
pronounce itself fairly and adequately on the murder of
innocent men, women and children by Arab terrorist gangs,
if it cannot recognize Israel’s inherent right to defend itself
against sanguinary attacks, it is obviously not the body
capable to act on any of the complex issues of the
Arab-Israeli conflict.

95. I am not going to resort to any juridical sophistry here
in interpreting the resolution just adopted by an overwhelming majority. I owe it to most of my colleagues
around this table to explain and to tell them that, like
them, we are not satisfied with this resolution. We are very
unhappy with it. Even the previous text submitted by
France and the United Kingdom was not satisfactory to us.
We wanted more. We have requested the Security Council
to take further steps. It has adopted resolutions on previous
occasions condemning the acts of Israel against Lebanon. It
has warned Israel against such attacks. lt has pledged itself
to take new steps and new measures against Israel if its
attacks should be repeated. However, unfortunately, even
the previous draft of the resolution did not satisfy all our
requirements. The new draft in a sense meets certain of our
requirements, but we are unhappier with it than we were
with the previous text.

90. The adoption of the resolution confirms that there is
international law on the one hand and that there are words
produced in the Security Council on the other, and the
twain rarely meet. ln this Passover season, one is tempted
to say that the forceful exodus of the Israelites from
ancient Egypt would have been condemned by the Security
Council had the Egyptians asked for it. The resolution also
confirms that, in the absence of meaningful United Nations
action against international terrorism, it is incumbent upon
responsible Governments to combat this scourge by their
own means. The Government of Israel, in accordance with
its inalienable rights and its international obligations, will
continue to protect the people of Israel from Arab murder
attacks.
91. The debate has given Israel the opportunity publicly
to restate its case. We appreciate this, although we knew in
advance that the Security Council was not able to consider
it on its merits. Ours is a just case and we are fortified in
our conviction that this is so not only by the unity of the

96. Allow me to remind the members of the Council of
one particularly important fact: that the resolution just
adopted by the Council was adopted on the basis of a
complaint lodged by the Permanent Representative of
9

Lebanon and that the Council acted following a specific act
of aggression against Lebanon admitted by the guilty party.
It was an act of aggression and it was a very strong act of
violence against my country and my people and the people
living in Lebanon

organsof the United Nations, do not represent the real
international public opinion and that only a few little
gatherings somewhere in the world which pass some
favourable expressionsto Israel represent the civiiized,
enlightenedpublic opinion of the world. That contempt by
Israelmustcometo an end.

97. Paragraph 1 is not to be interpreted in any way except
in connexion with the other paragraphs af the resolution. I
beg to differ with any other interpretation given to this
particular paragraph The paragraphs deal with acts of
violence continually perpetrated by Israel, against Lebanon
and the neighbouring Arab States. The mere fact that one
preambular paragraph refers to recent acts of violence does
not mean that it should refer to some acts of violence
without referring to others. We all remember the recent acts
of violence, in particular the murderous one which resulted
in the destruction of the Libyan aircraft. In this respect I
should like to place on record in the Council the text of a
telegram that was approved by the Human Rights Commission on 27 February 1973 and sent by the Chairman of the
Commission, Mr. Ramphul, to the Government of Israel. It
referred to a recent act of violence. It said:

100. I should like to quote here from a letter 1 addressed
to the Presidentof the Security Council on 21 September
1972:
“On many occasions,the Security Council has condemnedIsrael becauseof her acts of aggressionagainst
Lebanonand solemnlywarnedher that if suchacts wereto
be repeated,measures
would be taken againsther. In the
absenceof effective and appropriate measuresby the
Council, Israel, unrestrainedand uncurbed,has persisted
in her campaignof organized terror againsta Member
State of the United Nations. Lebanon, which has put all
her trust in the Security Council and in the Charter of the
United Nations, and which hasreliedon the international
order for her protection, finds herself defencelesswhen
exposed to persistent criminal attacks by Israel.”

“The United Nations Commission on Human Rights is
extremely distressed that, on 21 February last, the Israeli
Air Force shot down a Libyan airline commercial aircraft.
Thjs
cruel and unjustifiable act caused the death of over
one hundred innocent civilians, including many women
and children, nationals OF a number of States. The
Commission condemns this massacre of innocent people
and calls upon the Government of Israel to respect and
implement canons of civilized and humanitarian behaviour among peoples and States. Also, the Commission
once again calls upon the Government of Israel to abide
scrupulously by its obligations under the relevant international humanitarian instruments.“3

[S/10799.J

101. You have today adopted this resolution. For various
reasonsalready known to membersof the Council, we have
not gone as far as requestingyou to go further; to apply
sanctions against Israel and to warn it against further
measures
to be adopted by the Council. We regret thal WC
had to face a situation in which we accepta resolution like
this, but I should like to bring to your attention that we
have placed our trust in this august body. We believe in
international law, and the time has come for Israel Lo
understandand respectinternational law. President l3scnhower saidon 1 May 1958:
‘L. . . The world no longer has a choice between force
and law. If civilization is to survive, it must choose the
rule of law.“5

98. You have just heard the representative of Israel, and
you have heard the words he addressed to the Council. I do
not have to repeat them; they are on your record already;
they are in my hand. They are nothing but another
expression of contempt for the Council. This is the
international law that the representative of Israel wants to
uphold.

And Mr. Richard Nixon, then Vice-Presidentof the United
States,saidon 13 April 1959:
‘6, . . The time hasnow come to take the initiative in
the direction of establishmentof the rule of law . . . to
replacethe rule of force.“6

99. The United Nations has adopted numerous resolutions
regarding Israel, resolutions that Israel has either rejected or
scuttled Twenty-five resolutions have been adopted by the
General Assembly on the rights of the Palestinian people;
six by the General Assembly and the Security Council
calling on Israel to facilitate the return of displaced persons
to their homes in the occupied territories; four by the
General Assembly and the Security Council regarding the
measures taken by Israel in the Holy City of Jerusalem; 14
by organs of the United Nations calling upon Israel to
respect the human rights of the population in the occupied
territories and to abide by the Fourth Geneva Convention
of 1949.4 Mr. Tckoah would like to tell you that you and
the General Assembly of the United Nations, the highest
3 See
Fifttylfourth

official

Records
of the
Session,
Supplement

sion 1.
4 GenevaConvention relative
in time ot’ war, of 12 August

Economic
No. 6.

and

social

chap. XX,

to the protection
1949.

102. We strongly believe in those principles, and that is
why WCcome to the Security Council--becausewe know
that the Charter of the United Nations and the Cau~~cil
embody the highest principles of international law that
shouldbe compliedwith and respected.
103. I must say a word of gratitude to the representatives
of France and the United Kingdom, who have applied
themselveswith all their energy, wisdomand talent in order
to produce a resolution that could be acceptable to the
majority of the Council. We appreciate their labour; WC
appreciatethe position of their Governments;we appreciate
their support and the overwhelming support we have

council,

sect. B, dcci-

of civili;\n

5 Department

persons

6 Ibid.,

10

of State

Bulletin.

vol.

vol. XL, No. 1036, p. 624.

XXXVIII,

NO. 986,

I-L 831.

received for our case from the large majority of the
tnembers of the Council. If I have a note of regret to voice
at this particular time, it is the fact that the representative
of the United States has put so much emphasis on one side
of the resolution rather than on others, We are disappointed-as he was disappointed with another aspect-that
in the statements of the United States we did not note any
nlention of Lebanon by name. We certainly noticed a
passing reference to the need for mutual respect of
sovereignty. WC do appreciate many things in our friendly
relations with the United States. It is no secret to anyone
that we have friendly relations with the United States, as
WC have with all members of the Security Council. We want
those relations ta develop and to be strengthened on the
basis of justice to us and to the Arab people.

we understand today, after the statement we have heard,
that the United States is going to guarantee the conquests
of Israel? Are those the “legitimate defence needs” that
the representative of the United States is referring to?
108. I should like to hear an answer to that, and a direct
answer. Does he consider that supplying the most sophisti.
cated arms in the American arsenal to Israel is the best way
to perpetuate Israeli occupation of the Arab territories and
thus compel the Arabs to yield to the diktat of Israel? Or
does the United States representative consider that such a
supply would really convince Israel to desist from its
premeditated military attacks on Arab States? Again, does
the representative of the United States consider that such a
supply of arms is an even-handed policy in the area:
assisting the aggressor and occupier to maintain his policy
of intransigence, arrogance and disregard of all the efforts
SO far exerted in the search for a peaceful settlement,
honourable and acceptable to every party in the area and,
above all, to the Palestinians, who are struggling and striving
for the restitution of their right to self-determination?

104. A final word. This week has been a week of suffering
for the Christians of the world. Yesterday commemorated
the day of the Via Doloro,sa. The Palestine people have
been treading a long road of suffering for over 25 years and,
as I said before, nothing is in sight to show that their plight
and their suffering are coming to an end. Tomorrow, for
the Christians, is a day of resurrection. We hope that it is
not only a day for the resurrection of hopes. We have seen
so many hopes shattered in the past. We have seen them
shattered many times. Today, what we want to be
resurrected are the genuine and effective efforts to bring
peace to that troubled area of the world that is ours. We
need peace; we want peace; WC have been working and we
want to work for peace.

109. My country has always expressed its determination
to have peace, once and for all, established in the area on
terms of justice for everyone, and not on terms of injustice
to the Arabs, Even-handedness, as we understand it, is not
to supply Israel with these weapons and other kinds of aid,
and just sit idly by watching it intimidating its Arab
neighbours and continuing its policy of expansion and
absorption of the occupied territories. Even-handedness is
to encourage, and not to obstruct, the international
community in carrying out and implementing what it had
unanimously
agreed to as the only solution to that
problem Of course, I did not go, in my optimism, as far as
to expect the even-handedness policy to go beyond
non-obstructionism:
namely, to encourage positive and
constructive endeavours seeking a lasting and just peace in
the Middle East.

105. Finally, Mr. President, allow me to address to you
my appreciation for your forbearance during these very
trying days and for all the efforts you have deployed to
bring the work of the Council to a satisfactory conclusion.
If this conclusion is not entirely satisfactory to many of my
friends and colleagues around this table, 1 do understand
their grievances and share in them. But believe me,
Mr. President, Lebanon has trust in the Council and will
depend on the Council for its defence, and if the Council’s
resolution has not warned Israel against the repetition of its
acts, then the statements I have heard around the Council
table were a clear enough warning to Israel to desist
forthwith from the repetition of its acts against Lebanon.
We hope that Israel will heed those warnings. We trust that
it will comply with the will of international law.

110. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Sparzish): 1
have a request from the representative of Israel to be
allowed to speak, But before calling on him, I think it is
necessary to remind everyone that we have already adopted
a resolution on the item on the agenda and that members of
the Council have already explained their votes: therefore,
the debate has been concluded. May I therefore appeal to
other representatives to be extremely brief’?

106. The PRESIDENT (interpretatiorz from Spanish): I
now call on the representative of Egypt.

Ill.

107. Mr. ABDEL MEGUID (Egypt): Mr. President, allow
me to thank you for giving me the floor. We have heard
the representative of the United States trying to justify, in
front of the Council, the massive flow of the most
sophisticated weapons and arms to Israel by claiming that it
is to assist Israel in its “legitimate defence needs”. May 1
ask the United States Ambassador, through you, Mr. President, what legitimate defence needs are meant? Is it the
legitimate defence needs of the occupied Arab territories
that he means? Is it the legitimate defence of the Israeli
conquest, or is it the legitimate defence needs of guarding
the fruits of aggression? It was once said that an eminent
and responsible American declared that America was ready
to guarantee the existence of Israel, not its conquests. Do

I call on the representative of Israel.

112. Mr, TEKOAI-I (Israel): I think all of us deserve a
respite from the kind of statements that we have just heard,
and I shall be very brief. 1 think all of us deserve to be able
to go home and to examine in fact the difference between
law and Security Council resolutions, to examine the
difference between what I called-I think justly-enlightened public opinion and the views of the Security Council,
seven of whose 15 members States have no diplomatic
relations with Israel.
113. But I should like to say to the representative of
Lebanon that we shall continue to insist on the application
of one principle, and that is that, if there is international
law, it shall apply equally to all States and Israel will not be
11

an exception in the implementation of its fundamental,
legitimate rights under the tenets of international law and
the Charter of the United Nations. Israel, like all nations,
Israel, like all States of the United Nations, has a right to
independence and sovereignty. Israel has a right to protect
its independence and sovereignty, to defend its citizens
from armed attack and from murderous outrages. Israel,
like all other nations, has the right to arm itself in order to
be able to withstand the kind of aggression that we have
been subjected to since 1948.
114. Now, it is understandable that the representative of
Egypt and his Government are not very happy about the
fact that, during 23 years of Egyptian aggression against
Israel, Egypt has not been particularly successful in
attaining its sanguinary objectives. But this feeling on the
part of the representative of Egypt and his Government
deserves no sympathy at all. It is simply too bad that Egypt
has not succeeded in achieving the goal of President Nasser
to deal a death-blow to Israel’s existence and to drive the
Israelis into the se?. It is simply too bad for Egypt that it
has not succeeded in the last few years in achieving the goal
enunciated by President Sadat: that Israel has to be
eliminated from the Arab world.
115. No speeches, no resolutions, no votes can deprive the
Jewish people of its right to freedom, to independence and
to equality with other nations, and this right the Government of Israel has and will continue to defend, to protect
and to vindicate with all the means at its disposal.
116. Mr. ABDULLA (Sudan): I am sorry to intervene at
this last minute. I have constrained myself not to make any
statement on the repeated references to the Khartoum
incident during the debate and afterwards. 1 have tried to
impress on the Council that the present case is a specific
case of an attack on the sovereignty of a State by another
Member State and that we should limit ourselves to that,
Unfortunately, references have been made to the Khartoum
incident to an extent where that incident appears to be
exploited by Mr. Tekoah as a malicious incitement of
various organs or people.
117. The Khartoum incident, regrettable and sad as it was,
is not an incident for trading or for political manoeuvres.
Everybody is aware that the Sudan Government hastaken
every necessarystep to deal with that matter in the most
effective and wisestmannerof handlingsuchan affair.

are essentiallywithin the domestic jurisdiction of any
state or shalt requirethe Membersto submit suchmatters
to settlementunder the presentCharter. . ,“.
119. For this reason,I thought it objectionable that the
Khartoum incident shouldbe referred to in that particular
andslantedway.
120. The PRESIDENT (kzterpretation from Spanish): 1
call on the representativeof Lebanon.
121. Mr. tiHORRA (Lebanon): 1 shall be very brief. We
have againheard another expressionof contempt for the
Council and someof its members.Becausesome of the
members of the Council do not maintain diplomatic
relationswith Israel, a distinction must therefore be made
betweenthem and the “enlightened” public opinion of the
world. I shall not defend my coltcaguesaround this table,
but when the majority of the world condemnsIsraelfor an
act of aggression,
that is not an act of “enlightenment”. It
is prejudice:it representsa mechanicalmajority. For Israel
the United Nations seemsto be irrelevant.
122. Mr. Ben Gurion once remarked,“It is not important
what the go~~im”-that is, the gentiles--“think, but rather
what the Jewsdo.”
123. The PRESlDENT (interpretation j?om Spnrzish):I
call on the representativeof Israel.
124. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I believethere is no need to
explain to membersof the Security Council seatedaround
this table the high regard and the deep respect which 1
personallyand my Governmenthavefor them, and I do not
think that the representativeof Lebanondoesjustice to the
situation by trying to utilize my comments about the
Council’sstructure, composition,voting proceduresand the
preordainedresultsof thosevoting proceduresin order to
makepolitical attacks which by now are rather hackneyed
and uninteresting. But if he is concernedabout the image
which this organ, and perhapsother organsof the United
Nations, have created for themselvesin the eyes of the
public and in the eyes of the world. let him study very
carefully the records of these meetingsand examine the
statementmade by his colleagueand defender, the repre’
sentativeof the Sudan.If a statement of the kind that we
heard a while ago is allowed to be voiced without anv
reaction to it at the Council table, if the murder o’f
American and Belgiandiplomatsin cold blood carried out
in any placein the world. . . .

118. I should like to say here that the Khartoum incident
wascommitted by individuals within the Sudaneseterritoq
and therefore subject only to the juridical authority of the
Sudan. The fact that reference has been made to it in a
maliciousway perhaps indicates an attempt to prejudice
any legal decision that might be taken in that case.No
decisionhasyet been taken. For that reason,we object to
such references,but we also object to referencesto the
Khartoum incident because,under Article 2, paragraph7 of
the Charter, such referencesare not permissiblesincethe
matter is within the national jurisdiction of a MemberState
of the United Nations. I should like to read out Article 2,
paragraph7 of the Charter. It says:

127. The PRESIDENT (interpretatior7 porn Spanish): I
call on the representativeof Israel and appeal to him to
confine himselfto the item on the agenda.

“Nothing contained in the present Charter shall authorize the United Nations to intervene in matterswhich

128. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I wasabout to saythat if the
murder of foreign diplomats organized at Beirut and
12

12.5. The PRESIDENT (interpretation ,fi~~n Spanish): 1
callon the representativeof Sudanon a point of order.
126. Mr. ABDULLA (Sudan): 1 havejust pointed out the
inadmissibilityof discussingthe Khartoum incident, which
is under legal consideration by the juridical powers of a
national State. I wish to remind the Council again of
Article 2, paragraph7 of the Charter.

carried out at Khartoum in cold blood in the most savage
manner can be said, at the Security Council table, not to be
of international
concern but to fall within domestic
jurisdiction . . . .
129. The PRESIDENT (interpretation J’)onz Spanish): I
call upon the representative of the Sudan, who wishes to
speak on a point of order.
130, Mr. ABDULLA (Sudan): My objection to continuation of discussionof the Khartoum incident still stands.
131. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I
call upon the representative of Israel and again appealto
him to confine himself to the item on the agenda.

132. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel):1 amwithin the limits of the
agendain responding
to a statement
on the questionon the
item made by the representativeof the Sudan. If a
statementsuchasthat is allowedto bemadein the Security
Council, and the representative
of a State which is not a
memberof the Councilis the only one to raisehisvoicein
order to say that we have reachedthe lowest point of
misinterpretatjonof what our Charteris, then I think it is
quite clearwhy the Security Councilandother bodiesof
the United Nationsareregardedasthey areby thosewho
apparentlyknow a little moreaboutinternationallaw and
its precepts, about the Charter and its purposesand
principles.
Themeetingrose
at 12.55p,ni.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

Unite 1 Nations
publications
may be obtained
throughout
the world.
Consult
your bookstore
Section, New York or Geneva,
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

from bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
IJnies sont cn vente dans les librairies
et les aaences
depositaires
du mondc entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous
1 : Nations
Unies. Section des ventes, New York ou GenPve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

Las publicnciones
de las Naciones Unidas
e&n
buidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo. Consulte
Unidas,
Section de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

Price:

$U.S.

1.00 (or equivalent

NACIONES

UNIDAS

en venta en librerfas
y casas distria su librero
o ditfjase
a: Naciones

in other

currencies)

7%82001-April

1979-2,200
