s

UNITED
NATIONS

Security Counc:I

Distr.
GENERAL
S/25334
25 February 1993
ORIGil1AL:

ENGLISH

!IOTE BY :"HE ?RES I :JEUT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

Following consultations among members of the Security Council, the
?resident of the Council made the following statement, on behalf of the
Council, at its 3177th meeting, on 25 February 1993, in connection with the
Council's consideration of the item entitled "The situation in Bosnia and
i1erzegovina":
"The Security Council, having received a report from the
Secretary-General, recalls all its relevant resolutions and its
statements of 25 January 1993 (S/25162) and 17 February 1993 (S/25302)
concerning the provision of humanitarian relief in the Republic of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
It is deeply concerned that, in spite of its repeated
demands, relief efforts continue to be impeded by Serb paramilitary
units, especially in the eastern part of the country, namely in the
enclaves of Srebrenica, Cerska, Gorazde and Zepa.
"The Security Council deplores the deterioration of tr.e humanitarian
situation in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina at a time when
discussions are to resume with a view to reaching a just and durable
agreement to end the conflict.
It regards the blockade of relief efforts
as a serious impediment to a negotiated settlement in the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and to the efforts of the Co-Chairmen of the
Steering Cc~~ittee of the International Conference on the Former
Yugoslavia.
It notes with concern that the measures taken by Serb
pararnilitary units to interdict humanitarian convoys, in flagrant
violation of relevant Security Council resolutions, expose the personnel
of UUPROfOR .1nd :.J!IHCR as well as other humanitarian organizations to
physical harm.
"The deliberate impeding of the delivery of food and humanitarian
relief essential for the survival of the civilian population in the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina constitutes a violation of the Geneva
Conventions of 1949, and the Security Council is committed to ensuring
that individuals responsible for such acts are brought to justice.

2S0293

I • ••

S/25334
English
Page 2

"The Security Council strongly condemns once again the blocking of
humanitarian convoys that has impeded the delivery of humanitarian
supplies.
It reiterates its demand that the Bosnian parties grant
immediate and unimpeded access for humanitarian convoys and fully comply
with the Security Council's decisions in this regard. The Security
Council expresses its strong support for the use, in full coordination
with the United Nations and in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions, of humanitarian air drops in isolated areas of the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina that are in critical need of
humanitarian supplies and cannot be reached by ground convoys.
It
reaffirms its firm commitment to the full implementation of the
humanitarian relief programme in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
"The Security Council remains actively seized of the matter and
continues its consideration of further steps, in accordance with its
relevant resolutions."
