United Nations

A/RES/58/263

General Assembly

Distr.: General
20 February 2004

Fifty-eighth session
Agenda item 120

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 23 December 2003
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/58/572)]

58/263. Report of the Joint Inspection Unit on the revenueproducing activities of the United Nations system
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Joint Inspection Unit on United Nations
system revenue-producing activities 1 and the comments of the Secretary-General
and the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination thereon, 2
1.
Agrees with the concepts expressed in paragraph (a) of recommendation 1
of the Joint Inspection Unit1 concerning consolidation of the management of
revenue-producing activities on the basis of sound business practices, bearing in
mind the related legislative mandates, and awaits with interest the specific proposals
of the Secretary-General;
Takes note of paragraph (b) of recommendation 1 of the Unit1 and the
2.
related comments of the Secretary-General;2
3.

Endorses recommendation 2 of the Unit;

4.
Notes paragraph (a) of recommendation 3 of the Unit, and requests the
Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at the second part of its
resumed fifty-eighth session on the possibility of operating guided tours, bookstores
and gift shops at the United Nations Office at Nairobi and the cost implications
thereof;
Requests the Secretary-General to explore the possibility of selling
5.
products of the gift centre and the book shop via the Internet, in addition to existing
arrangements;
Endorses paragraphs (b) and (c) of recommendation 3 of the Unit, and
6.
agrees with the comments of the Secretary-General in connection with paragraph (a)
of that recommendation;

_______________
1
2

03 51030

See A/57/707.
See A/57/707/Add.1.

A/RES/58/263

7.
Recognizes that in its recommendation 4 the Unit outlines some general
factors that should be considered in connection with the outsourcing of revenuegenerating activities in the framework of approved outsourcing policies;
Agrees with the comments of the Secretary-General in connection with
8.
recommendation 5, and looks forward to further proposals of the Secretary-General
concerning the United Nations Postal Administration consequent to its resolution
57/292 of 20 December 2002;
Agrees also that the competent legislative organs, when considering
9.
strengthening the policy frameworks for revenue-generating activities in their
organizations, should consider drawing on the objectives set out by the Unit in its
recommendation 6, bearing in mind the specificities of each organization and the
comments of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination
with respect to the generation of income from intellectual property;
10. Agrees further with the comments of the Chief Executives Board for
Coordination on recommendation 7 of the Unit;
11. Endorses recommendation 8, which should not affect existing practices
concerning the free distribution of public information materials;
12. Also endorses recommendation 9, and agrees with the Chief Executives
Board for Coordination that the application of this approach needs to be tailored to
the specific objectives and circumstances of the organizations concerned;
13. Takes note of recommendations 11 to 13 of the Unit and the related
comments of the Chief Executives Board for Coordination.
79th plenary meeting
23 December 2003

2
