United Nations

S/PV.5703

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-second year

5703rd meeting
Friday, 22 June 2007, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Verbeke . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Belgium)

Members:

China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Congo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Peru . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Qatar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Slovakia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Li Junhua
Mr. Gayama
Mr. De La Sablière
Mr. Tachie-Menson
Mr. Kleib
Mr. Spatafora
Mr. Arias
Mr. Chávez
Mr. Al-Bader
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Burian
Ms. Qwabe
Ms. Pierce
Ms. Wolcott Sanders

Agenda
Protection of civilians in armed conflict

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

07-39152 (E)

*0739152*

S/PV.5703

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Argentina, Canada, Colombia,
Germany, Guatemala, Israel, Japan, Liechtenstein,
Mexico, Myanmar, Nigeria, the Republic of Korea,
Rwanda and Tunisia, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation, under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. John Holmes,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Holmes to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
At this meeting, the Council will hear a briefing
by Mr. John Holmes, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs
and
Emergency
Relief
Coordinator. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Holmes: Thank you for this opportunity to
brief the Security Council on the protection of civilians

2

in armed conflict. That is one of my top priorities, as
indeed it should be for all Member States. In the four
months that I have been Emergency Relief
Coordinator, my visits have included the Darfur region
of the Sudan, Chad, the Central African Republic,
northern Uganda and Somalia. In each of them, and in
too many other places as well, I have seen how
hundreds of thousands of civilians have been uprooted
from their ordinary lives by the effects of conflict and
left stranded, their fate of no apparent consequence to
those who fight around them. Countless thousands
have been killed, injured, maimed, assaulted,
humiliated, ignored and treated as less than human.
It is hard not to conclude that for all our advocacy
on behalf of civilians in need of protection, and for all
the resources that are now devoted to all aspects of
protection by the humanitarian and peacekeeping
communities, we are still failing to make a real and
timely difference for the victims on the ground. That is
an oversimplification, as I shall try to explain. But we
cannot afford to do anything but look the facts in the
face. Lip service is easy; effective action is much
harder.
Protection can mean different things. To most
people it means what it says: physical protection of
innocent people from those trying to harm them. We
must not lose sight of that primary meaning. However,
protection of civilians in armed conflict also has a
particular significance in the work of humanitarian
organizations and in the context of the Council’s
responsibilities. For the Council, it represents a series
of primary objectives outlined in its own aide memoire
(S/PRST/2002/6, annex), prepared at the request of and
adopted by the Council, which aim to transform the
security, political, legal and moral environment in
which all concerned operate. Those objectives include:
security for displaced persons and host communities;
ensuring access to those in need and a secure
environment for humanitarian workers; strengthening
the rule of law, in particular police and justice systems;
protection of women and girls in particular from
gender-based violence; involvement of women in
decision-making and incorporating gender perspectives
at every level and in all areas; ensuring the rights of
children by preventing their recruitment, ending
abduction, supporting family reunification and
fulfilment of basic needs; action on disarmament,
demobilization, rehabilitation and reintegration of

07-39152

S/PV.5703

soldiers; and finally, arms control, mine action,
reconciliation and reconstruction programmes.
The list is long and important. And the
increasingly widespread acceptance of these ideas and
principles, together with the existence of institutions
and staff specifically charged with monitoring and,
where possible, ensuring their observance, is a huge
step forward. So too is the agreement of 191 Member
States in the 2005 World Summit Outcome (General
Assembly resolution 60/1) on a fundamental
“responsibility to protect”, a norm that not only
emphasizes the primary responsibility of each State to
protect its citizens and those within its jurisdiction
from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity but also recognizes the role of
the international community and the United Nations in
helping States to exercise that responsibility.
I believe we are gradually making a difference as
to what is regarded as acceptable and normal and that
that will have a profound effect over time. The
activities of the International Criminal Court (ICC), the
four seminal resolutions of the Council and the specific
inclusion in peacekeeping mandates of provisions on
the protection of civilians are all key steps in changing
the international environment. And we are seeing
improvements on the ground in some areas. More
robust peacekeeping and the strategic deployment of
peacekeepers in the interests of protecting civilians has
helped to facilitate returns or, at the least, an
environment conducive to the provision of assistance
in places such as the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. In northern Uganda, southern Sudan and Nepal,
relative peace and stability are allowing some refugees
and internally displaced persons (IDPs) to return to
their homes and to begin the arduous task of reestablishing their lives. Implementation of the cluster
approach should lead to a more coordinated protection
response at the field level among United Nations
agencies and their partners through the action of a
specific protection cluster.

humanitarian law. Yet, day in and day out, they are too
often what we see, particularly in the internal conflicts
and civil wars that have increasingly replaced wars
between States in today’s world.
Civilians bear the brunt of indiscriminate firing
and violence in populated areas, including cities, where
warring parties fail to distinguish, or even to try to
distinguish, between combatants and the civilian
population; or where they employ methods of combat
or types of weapons — such as cluster bombs — that
are out of all proportion to any military advantage to be
gained; or where, just as culpably, they deliberately
place themselves among civilian populations to try to
deter attacks or at least ensure that the opposing side
will damage its own image by killing civilians if they
do attack.
In Somalia, fierce fighting in Mogadishu
involving heavy weapons, between March and early
May, resulted in the killing of over 400 civilians and
the wounding of 700 more — for the most part, older
people, women and children — as well as the
destruction of countless homes and livelihoods.
Civilian casualties resulting from the indiscriminate
use of force — whether from Israeli military
operations, from violence between Palestinian factions,
or from indiscriminate rocket attacks on Israel itself —
have characterized fighting in the occupied Palestinian
territory.

In many places, however, the picture remains
sombre and profoundly worrying. Allow me to
highlight three areas of particular concern.

In Afghanistan and also in Iraq, in addition to the
dreadful toll of civilian deaths caused by insurgents
and militias on all sides, the civilian casualties
resulting from security operations of multinational
forces and Government security forces are of
increasing concern, even if there is no suggestion of
deliberate targeting. Last weekend in Afghanistan was
particularly tragic — 18 children died as a result of
separate attacks by insurgent and multinational
forces — and the overnight news of possible further
civilian deaths reinforces that concern. In Iraq, the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)
estimates, an average of 94 civilians died violently
every day throughout 2006 owing to the actions of all
sides in the conflict.

The first is the targeting of civilians, whether
deliberately or through lack of concern about the
consequences of the use of force. As noted by the
Council in its resolutions on the protection of civilians,
such acts are flagrant violations of international

Civilians are too often deliberately targeted in
order to create a climate of fear and to destabilize
populations. We see this in calculated attacks by
Janjaweed and other militias on innocent villagers in
Darfur and Chad; in brutal sectarian, ethnic and

07-39152

3

S/PV.5703

political violence in Iraq; in the large-scale killing and
abduction of civilians, particularly women and girls, by
ruthless armed groups in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, as well as arbitrary executions and acts of
banditry attributed to Government forces; and in
assassinations, disappearances and other violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law
by those bearing arms in places as far apart as Sri
Lanka and Colombia.

social fabric of entire communities. Survivors are left
with horrific physical and psychological scars. In the
South Kivu province of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, over 27,000 cases of sexual violence were
reported in 2005 and 2006. From March 2006 to April
2007, 6,000 cases of sexual violence were reported in
Ituri, also in the east of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Only a handful of those cases have ever been
the subject of a judicial process.

One particularly horrifying trend is the increasing
use of suicide attacks including car or truck bombs, or
improvised explosive devices (IEDs), to use the
chilling technical term. Such attacks are most often
perpetrated quite intentionally in public places: places
of worship, markets, squares and other civilian areas
where people gather in the normal course of their lives
and where there is no military advantage to be gained.
The inevitable result is carnage among wholly innocent
civilians, thousands of lives ruined forever and a
pervading sense of insecurity, disrupting even the most
basic forms of public life. In Iraq, UNAMI reports,
over 700 civilians were killed and more than 1,200
injured in such attacks during the first three months of
this year alone. Only three days ago, the bombing of a
mosque in Baghdad resulted in the death and injury of
over 200 civilians. Similar trends in countries such as
Afghanistan, Lebanon and Somalia are profoundly
worrying.

In its resolution 61/134, the General Assembly
urged all Member States to take effective measures to
address gender-based violence in humanitarian
emergencies and to make all possible efforts to ensure
that their laws and institutions are adequate to prevent,
investigate and prosecute acts of gender-based
violence. The Council, in its resolution 1674 (2006),
condemned in the strongest terms all sexual and other
forms of violence against civilians in armed conflict, in
particular women and children. The Council undertook
to ensure that peace support operations work to prevent
such violence and address its impact where it takes
place. That is vital, as is the International Criminal
Court’s recent decision to investigate cases of rape in
the Central African Republic.

Those who send so many young men and women
to their bloody ends, along with their innocent victims,
in order to foment ethnic or sectarian tension and
violence bear a heavy responsibility. Those who keep
quiet about such attacks or even privately applaud
them share that responsibility and appear heedless of
the likelihood that they, or their societies in their turn,
may become victims of this inhuman method of
spreading pointless death and destruction.
Another repugnant manifestation of the deliberate
targeting of civilians, also too common in too many of
today’s conflicts, is gender-based violence, particularly
sexual violence. It has been used as a calculated
method of warfare in places such as Bosnia, Rwanda
and Liberia and is currently used in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and occasionally in other
conflicts too, including that in Darfur. Its aim is to
brutalize and instil fear in the civilian population —
especially women and girls, but also sometimes boys
and men — to weaken their resistance and resilience
through humiliation and shame and to destroy the

4

Nevertheless, the nature of sexual violence and
its consequences demand that we, the United Nations
and its Member States — particularly those within
whose borders such crimes are committed — do much
more to prevent and respond to them and to hold to
account their perpetrators, as well as the commanders
under whom such crimes are committed. That requires
more robust coordination and more coherent action by
United Nations agencies and their partners. The United
Nations recently launched United Nations Action
against Sexual Violence in Conflict, a coalition of 12
United Nations entities that aims to do just that, as well
as to support national efforts to prevent sexual violence
and respond effectively to the needs of survivors.
Combating gender-based violence also requires
still greater stigmatization of such violence by national
courts and the ICC as a particularly grave form of war
crime and crime against humanity. Last but not least,
the United Nations itself and Member States must do
still more to prevent sexual exploitation and abuse by
peacekeeping forces operating in the name of the
United Nations and to ensure that there is no impunity
for those responsible.

07-39152

S/PV.5703

A second area of particular concern is the
continuing displacement of civilians as a result of, or
sometimes as the very purpose of, conflict. The Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) reports that there were an
estimated 9.9 million refugees at the end of 2006, an
increase in the global refugee population for the first
time since 2002 — primarily because of refugee flows
from Iraq — as well as 24.5 million internally
displaced persons, all people deliberately forced from
their homes and normal lives, or having had to flee to
avoid violence and conflict and to meet their basic
needs and those of their families.
In Iraq, UNHCR currently estimates that there are
2.2 million people internally displaced, while a further
2.2 million have sought refuge abroad. In Darfur, the
ranks of the internally displaced continue to swell, with
over 150,000 people displaced during the first five
months of this year alone, bringing the total number
again to well over 2 million. More than 237,000 people
have also fled Darfur for neighbouring Central African
Republic and Chad, countries which are also
confronted by large internally displaced populations of
212,000 and 150,000, respectively.
In the Central African Republic, the figures have
increased by more than 60,000 in the last six months.
In Somalia, the intense violence in Mogadishu between
March and early May displaced some 390,000 people,
to add to the many hundreds of thousands long-term
displaced. There may still be as many as 700,000 IDPs
in Côte d’Ivoire, despite recent political progress. And
in Sri Lanka, 300,000 people have been internally
displaced during the last 15 months due to hostilities.
Overall, it is estimated that so far this year an
additional 1.5 million people have been internally
displaced by war in those and other countries.
While displacement is as old as war itself, that
does not mean that we should accept it as inevitable.
On the contrary, we must look for better ways of
preventing the conditions that lead to displacement, as
well as trying to deal with the results. That includes
emphasizing, in our actions and resolutions, the right to
voluntary, safe return and the rejection by the
international community of the results of ethnic or
sectarian cleansing. To do otherwise would be to
condemn millions to lasting misery and degradation.
As I heard and saw for myself in the camps that I
visited in Africa, becoming displaced often marks only
the beginning of further frightening challenges to

07-39152

survival. These include continuing insecurity;
occasionally, as we have seen in Darfur, repeated
displacement through attacks on camps; and exposure
to further serious risks, especially in militarized camp
settings, such as gender-based assaults and forced
recruitment.
Despite the efforts of relief agencies,
displacement too often leads to hunger and illness, both
physical and mental. It erodes human dignity, as
individuals and families become dependent on others
for their survival. Where children are deprived of
access to education and adequate health care, the
effects of displacement can last a lifetime and ruin
future generations, too, with camps becoming the
frame of reference for what is normal. For too many of
the world’s displaced, the experience will translate into
a permanent loss of livelihood, culture and
opportunities, and turn into chronic destitution. Life in
a camp, even when basic needs are met, is a life of
misery: inactivity and boredom are profoundly
debilitating and commonly lead to increasing
politicization and militarization on the part of those
concerned, thus perpetuating cycles of violence and
further reducing the chances of returning to peace,
stability and normality.
Even if peace can be restored, there is still the
enormous challenge of returning home and reestablishing lives, sometimes after a few months but
often after many years or even generations. As we see
in northern Uganda and southern Sudan, that also
involves addressing specific protection challenges if
return is to be truly voluntary, safe, dignified and,
ultimately, sustainable. Aside from the provision of
basic services, these challenges include restitution of
land and property, community reconciliation, and the
painstaking clearance of landmines and unexploded
ordnance in areas of return.
The third area I would like to emphasize today is
access and security for humanitarian workers
themselves. The Council has often underlined the
importance of safe and unhindered access for
humanitarian staff to civilians in armed conflict. In all
my encounters in the field, aid workers have
emphasized access as the main prerequisite for
humanitarian action, which, for millions of vulnerable
people caught up in conflict, is often their only hope
for survival. Yet frequently, and, I fear, increasingly,
we see that such access is anything but safe and far
from unhindered.

5

S/PV.5703

In Darfur, the targeting and harassment of aid
workers continues to place enormous strain on the
delivery of life-saving assistance to millions of people.
Between January and May of this year, more than 60
humanitarian vehicles were hijacked, usually by rebel
groups of one kind or another, and 56 staff temporarily
abducted. Thirty-one aid convoys were ambushed and
looted, and 13 relief organizations forced to relocate
due to attacks. Of particularly grave concern are
incidents of assaults against, and detention of,
humanitarian staff and the killing of one nongovernmental organization (NGO) and one United
Nations staff member and 10 African Union personnel.
Certain agencies and NGOs contributing to
providing some measure of protection to the displaced
and drawing attention to abuses have been harassed by
the authorities. The Joint United Nations-Government
of the Sudan communiqué agreed in April has begun to
produce some results in terms of reductions of other
so-called bureaucratic obstacles, which is most
welcome, but there remains a long way to go.
In Sri Lanka, more than 600,000 inhabitants of
the Jaffna peninsula have faced shortages of basic
necessities since August of last year, when the
Government and the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam
(LTTE) restricted access to the peninsula by road and
by sea, respectively.
In Iraq, access for United Nations agencies and
international NGOs is extremely limited throughout the
country due to the high level of insecurity. If we are to
do more to tackle the growing humanitarian crisis
within that country, it will be important to establish an
understanding with the parties to the conflict, regional
actors and key Member States on the fundamental
importance and inviolability of access and security for
humanitarian workers.
Elsewhere, too, we continue to see deliberate and
unacceptable attacks on aid workers. This month alone,
we have seen the killing of two staff members of the
Lebanese Red Cross at the Palestinian refugee camp of
Nahr el-Bared, the scene of fighting between Lebanese
forces and Fatah al-Islam militants; the killing of a
Médecins Sans Frontières staff member in the Central
African Republic after her vehicle was shot at,
apparently by members of the Popular Army for the
Restoration of Democracy; the killing in West Darfur
of a staff member of Action by Churches TogetherCaritas; and the murder of two workers from the Sri

6

Lankan Red Cross. Let us remember that in 2006, 24
aid workers were killed in Sri Lanka, including 17 staff
of Action Contre La Faim in a single horrifying act.
The perpetrators of all these crimes are yet to be
brought to account.
Killing humanitarian staff and arbitrarily denying
access violates international humanitarian law. It also
threatens the lifeline to hundreds of thousands of
vulnerable people. I therefore propose that we should
follow and assess more systematically the reasons for
and consequences of such denials or restrictions and
report instances of grave concern back to the Council,
in accordance with resolution 1674 (2006).
In conclusion, if I have portrayed a somewhat
bleak picture in this briefing, the reason is that there is
still a lot to be bleak about, and no room for the
Council or anyone else to be remotely complacent
about what has been achieved so far. Nevertheless, as I
have also tried to suggest, the picture is not devoid of
progress or even of a certain degree of hope. The
humanitarian community continues to work hard to
improve its performance in protection on the ground,
through its focus on the issue, its monitoring and
advocacy, awareness-raising and capacity-building, and
devotion of specific staff to this cause. International
presence on the ground, even an unarmed presence, can
make a huge difference in inhibiting violence against
civilians, which is why access and a keen interest in
protection from those who have access are so vital.
This Council has taken important steps towards
better protection for civilians through its actions and its
resolutions, the dividends of which are, for example,
being seen in terms of more robust peacekeeping and
more strategic and protection-related deployment of
peacekeepers in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. I suggest that it may also be useful to take a
systematic look at the practical effect that the inclusion
of protection of civilians in a number of peacekeeping
mandates has had on the ground in order to draw the
right lessons for future deployments.
And if there is one thing we need to do above all,
it is to end the culture of impunity which underlies so
many abuses. Rule of law and judicial redress are
crucial and should be emphasized in everything we do.
In the particular case of sexual violence, more
involvement of women in all aspects of protection,
including peacekeeping itself, would make a real
difference to attitudes.

07-39152

S/PV.5703

More broadly, while humanitarians can ensure
survival and dignity to a certain degree; while
peacekeepers can enhance the safety and security of
affected populations; and while, together, we can help
create a climate conducive to reconciliation, it is worth
repeating again that only political solutions can end the
vast majority of conflicts. The United Nations,
including this Council and the Member States, must
decide once and for all to invest more in conflict
prevention, in facilitating political solutions through
increased mediation capacity and support to help
resolve conflict, and in immediate post-conflict
measures to prevent rapid relapse into conflict.
For my part, I will continue to work with
colleagues in the Department of Political Affairs and
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to ensure
that protection concerns are fully integrated into our
mediation and peacekeeping efforts. I will also
continue to engage this Council and Member States in
seeking improved implementation of the resolutions on
protection of civilians and more systematic inclusion of
protection of civilians concerns in the work of the
Council. I will also continue to bring situations of
grave humanitarian concern to the Council’s attention
through briefings, through the reports of the SecretaryGeneral, or where necessary, and pursuant to resolution
1674 (2006), directly through the Secretary-General.
Only where the international community is united and
resolute can we hope to protect the defenceless, as we
have the obligation to do.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Holmes for his important briefing.
In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I wish to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than four minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate the texts in writing and to
deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.
Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, allow me to thank Mr. Holmes, UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, for his
clear and precise briefing, which reflected the alarming
effects of human violence.
We also wish to acknowledge the outstanding
work of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, which is responsible for

07-39152

providing assistance to millions of civilians suffering
the consequences of armed conflict, particularly
children and women.
We cannot speak of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict without first referring to the prevention
of such conflicts. This Council is obligated under its
Charter mandate to take measures to prevent conflicts,
which requires us to understand in depth the specific
causes that have led to them. Many such causes
transcend mere political and military confrontations.
Terrorism, the HIV/AIDS epidemic and the impact of
climate change are important factors to take into
account when we consider conflict prevention.
Moreover, the protection of human rights must
always be the guiding principle of the Security
Council’s work, be it in the context of preventing or of
resolving conflicts. In addition to being one of the
pillars of this Organization, respect for human rights is
the basis for a peaceful society because, where those
rights are guaranteed, the principal structural,
psychological and cultural causes of conflict cease to
exist.
While we assert that preventing conflicts is an
important part of our work, solving them is equally so.
In undertaking that task, we must above all protect
civilians in armed conflict — those who take no part in
it, especially women and children. In armed conflicts,
civilians fall victim to violent attacks whose physical
and psychosocial effects often last longer than the
conflict itself. They may also lose their homes, their
livelihoods, their right to education and health care,
and other fundamental rights. In the worst cases, they
may lose their lives and their families.
Thus, international humanitarian law —
specifically the Hague and Geneva Conventions and
their protocols, other human rights instruments and
Security Council resolutions — provide a broad and
compelling framework for United Nations action to
protect civilians in armed conflict.
Nevertheless, this Organization has often failed to
resort to those mechanisms to act, shirking our
responsibility to protect civilians in the most atrocious
conflicts. The conflicts in Rwanda and the former
Yugoslavia in the 1990s, the current conflict in Darfur
and the recent events in Lebanon are clear examples of
that situation. The failure to act has cost this
Organization credibility, but the blow to our reputation
is insignificant when weighed against the loss of

7

S/PV.5703

innocent lives. We must never forget those victims if
we wish to avoid falling once again into inertia.

also provide protection for the staff of humanitarian
agencies providing necessary assistance.

I cannot conclude without stressing the ultimate
role of this Organization with respect to international
humanitarian law, as reflected in paragraphs 138 and
139 of the Outcome Document of the 2005 World
Summit, which refer to the responsibility of States and
the international community to protect populations
from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity.

We share the Under-Secretary-General’s concern
about the high and ever-increasing number of refugees
and internally displaced persons, who need effective
humanitarian responses to meet their needs. The needs
that arise from the cases described by the UnderSecretary-General in his briefing, which no one would
like to see repeated in the future, will require that the
Security Council and the United Nations system
intensify their efforts to make a real difference in the
protection of civilians and to ensure the protection of
their human rights. In that connection, Peru would like
to highlight some considerations that may useful in that
regard.

It is our understanding that the responsibility to
protect implies that, over and above the principles of
sovereignty, territorial integrity and non-interference in
the internal affairs of States, when a State or, to phrase
it more aptly, its governmental institutions are
unwilling or unable to meet their responsibility to
protect the human rights of their citizens, it is up to the
international community, and the United Nations in
particular, to adopt timely and decisive collective
measures to do so.
Mr. Chávez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I wish at
the outset to thank Mr. Holmes, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs, for his excellent
briefing, which brought home the need to recognize
that much remains to be done if the United Nations,
including the Security Council, is to be effective in
protecting civilians who find themselves immersed in
various armed conflict throughout the world.
We therefore express our concern at the
dangerous situations that continue confront civilians in
conflicts, where they fall prey to insecurity, violence
and the violation of their human rights. The cases we
have seen in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Somalia, Gaza, Iraq, Darfur, Chad, Afghanistan and
Kosovo — to name just a few — show that, despite the
good intentions of the international community, the
Security Council and the respective Governments
involved, the civilian population, and the displaced
above all, remain without improved protection and are
often the direct targets of attacks and gender-based
violence.
Given the situations described in the briefing, it is
necessary to reaffirm the responsibility of all parties
involved in armed conflict to respect their obligations
under international law regarding the protection of
civilians. Likewise, parties must ensure humanitarian
access to populations affected by conflict. They must

8

First, the Security Council must seek to ensure
the full implementation of resolution 1674 (2006),
which contains crucial provisions for the improvement
of the international system to protect civilians in armed
conflict. That includes the responsibility to protect
populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity.
Secondly, the Council must continue to support
bodies and international organizations providing
humanitarian assistance, especially those present on the
ground, in order to improve the efficiency of the
protection of civilians, including internally displaced
persons.
Thirdly, the Council must continue to seek new
ways to address growing humanitarian challenges. That
must be done in cooperation with other bodies of the
United Nations system. An innovative example in this
area is the Central Emergency Response Fund, which is
intended to provide support to populations in need of
humanitarian assistance.
Fourthly, the Council must cooperate with the
International Criminal Court to combat impunity.
Effectively punishing those responsible for serious
violations of human rights is both an obligation of the
international community and a way of sending a strong
message about the rule of law.
Finally, the Council must continue to work with
the Peacebuilding Commission.
In conclusion, I would like to point out that Peru
believes that overcoming crises and restoring longdesired peace to countries in conflict pose a challenge
to the Security Council: to bridge the gap between

07-39152

S/PV.5703

good intentions and implementing concrete measures
to protect civilians. We must therefore above all
recognize that strengthening post-conflict protection
for civilians requires decisive steps to build sustainable
institutions in affected countries, including the
establishment of stable economic conditions and
development strategies, with a view to preventing
social exclusion, which in many instances is the main
cause of domestic conflict in the first place.
Ms. Wolcott Sanders (United States of
America): We are encouraged that this meeting
provides a forum for us to jointly reaffirm our
commitment to the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. We reiterate that the primary responsibility for
protecting civilians lies with the parties to an armed
conflict, and that international efforts should
complement that function. However, in situations
where parties to an armed conflict are unable or
unwilling to protect civilians, the international
community has a distinct role to play. I would like to
touch on a few key elements of this topic that we feel
require particularly close attention and warrant full
Security Council support.
The recurrent use of sexual and gender-based
violence is arguably one of the most significant
protection challenges, due to its scale, profound impact
and tendency to be ignored. Sexual and gender-based
violence must be more effectively addressed. United
Nations peace support missions have a clear role to
play in preventing that violence and addressing its
impact.
In Burma, for example, there are widespread
reports of serious human rights abuses, including rape
by Burmese military personnel in conflict areas and
other ethnic minority areas. The Burmese army’s
strategy of forced relocation to deny support to armed
insurgents reportedly has been accompanied by serious
human right abuses, including rape. Burmese refugees
newly arrived in Thailand and internally displaced
Burmese near the Thailand-Burma border report that
Government soldiers in the Chin, Karen and Karenni
states continue to rape women and girls there. Killings,
beatings, torture and rape by Government soldiers have
also been reported against Shan, Rohingya, Mon and
other ethnic minorities. The youngest rape victim was
only eight years old. Other abuses of civilians
reportedly perpetrated by Burmese military personnel
include forced labour, the recruitment and use of child
soldiers, seeding villages with landmines, using

07-39152

civilians to clear mines and the destruction of homes,
granaries, animals and other civilian property.
In Darfur, as in other cases where rape has been
used as a tool of armed conflict and/or of political
oppression, rape by Government soldiers and/or their
allied militias is widespread and systematic, and is
typically committed in ways that appear designed to
humiliate and demoralize not only the victims but also
the communities of which they are members. The
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights recorded in April 2007 that there was
“widespread sexual violence during attacks by
Sudanese Government forces and allied militia last
December”.
Where necessary, the protection and creation of
secure environments for displaced populations should
be a primary objective for peacekeeping. We reiterate
that the Emergency Relief Coordinator and his Office
should be engaged in the planning of United Nations
peacekeeping efforts from the earliest stages.
The protection of internally displaced persons
remains one of the biggest challenges facing the United
Nations and the international community. It is
important to state that internally displaced civilians
living in camps are not always protected from serious
human rights abuses. We applaud the work done by the
Inter-Agency Standing Committee under the leadership
of Under-Secretary-General Holmes in continuing to
develop leadership and accountability in the protection
sector. We strongly feel that this approach has the
potential to strengthen the United Nations response
capacity in humanitarian assistance and protection,
providing a critical point of coordination, ensuring the
efficient use of resources and maximizing impact.
Let me now turn to a few current situations of
particular concern.
In the Sudan, attacks on civilians and deliberate
displacement have been used as tactics of war, in
flagrant violation of international law. While largescale attacks on civilians have decreased in some areas
of Darfur, grave protection concerns persist throughout
the region. The briefing by Under-Secretary-General
Holmes to the Council following his mission to the
Sudan (see S/PV.5655) painted a stark picture of a
humanitarian situation on the brink of an even largerscale catastrophe. The situation in Darfur illustrates
clearly the urgent role that the international community
must play to ensure the safety of civilians, including

9

S/PV.5703

those who are internally displaced, when traditional
means of protection have broken down.
Due to the continuation of violence and the
tenuous security environment in Darfur, both those
civilians affected by the conflict and those trying to
provide humanitarian assistance are under direct threat.
We continue to receive reports of attacks deliberately
targeting United Nations and other humanitarian
personnel. We stress the responsibility of the
Government of the Sudan to hold those responsible
accountable.
We further call on all parties to cease hostilities
and to cooperate with the international community to
advance a peaceful resolution of the crisis, including
by facilitating the deployment of an effective hybrid
peacekeeping force, easing the delivery of
humanitarian assistance and supporting a viable United
Nations/African Union-led peace process.
We reiterate the recent appeal by the International
Contact Group for Somalia for an immediate cessation
of hostilities, and we continue to call on all parties to
facilitate humanitarian access for the delivery of lifesaving aid. We expect the Transitional Federal
Government to facilitate the critical work of the United
Nations
and
humanitarian
non-governmental
organizations. We remain committed to supporting
humanitarian assistance in Somalia.
The suffering of the Iraqi people, and the many
innocent lives lost due to the violence in Iraq, is
deplorable. Multinational forces in Iraq and
Afghanistan are conducting military operations. At all
times during such operations, the multinational forces
strive to minimize any collateral damage and to avoid
harm to the civilian population.
We all recognize the profound tragedy of civilian
casualties during times of armed conflict. Insurgent
activity that is aimed at civilians and that selects
civilians as targets is an entirely different matter. It is
an abomination and should be summarily condemned.
It is inappropriate to equate any such deliberate
targeting of civilians by terrorists to the operations of
multinational forces in Iraq and Afghanistan aimed at
restoring security and stability for the people of those
countries.
We also remain deeply concerned about the
numbers of internally displaced persons and refugees
who have fled their homes due to violence and unrest

10

in Iraq. We have strengthened and expanded our own
programmes that address this humanitarian issue, and
we urge broad international involvement. In particular,
we urge the United Nations agencies currently in
Amman to consider increasing their presence in Iraq.
United Nations involvement will be critical to helping
this vulnerable population, including through support
to the Governments of Jordan and Syria to help them in
providing education of displaced Iraqi children
currently in their countries.
As we once again reaffirm our commitment to
strengthening and reinforcing the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, let us ensure that our words
and intentions become real action.
Mr. Spatafora (Italy): I would like to express the
strongest appreciation to Under-Secretary-General
Holmes for his passionate briefing, which provided a
comprehensive picture of the progress made and of our
continuing concerns about the protection of civilians in
armed conflicts, which is one of our top priorities, as
Under-Secretary-General Holmes rightly emphasized.
Italy fully associates itself with the statement to
be delivered later by the representative of Germany on
behalf of the European Union. Allow me to make only
a few additional remarks.
Resolution 1674 (2006) marked a milestone in
the work of the Security Council, affirming the
responsibility of States to protect civilians in armed
conflict, in line with the principles of international
humanitarian law. We welcome the progress and
positive achievements made in this field, which is at
the core of United Nations activity in conflict
prevention, peacekeeping and rapid response in times
of crisis. We now have to focus on how to ensure the
steady implementation of resolution 1674 (2006) — to
move from words to deeds, as our colleague from the
United States has just said. In this respect, Italy would
like to stress three simple operational ideas. The first is
to systematically address the issue of protection of
civilians on the ground upon revision of the mandates
of United Nations missions and operations. The second
is to use a framework based on that of the Working
Group on children in armed conflict and its reporting
mechanism also for protection of civilians in armed
conflict so as to provide, as so rightly highlighted by
Under-Secretary-General Holmes, a better system of
proactive — I stress the word “proactive” —
monitoring and prevention, advocacy, awareness-

07-39152

S/PV.5703

raising and capacity-building. The third idea is to
encourage further cooperation among the relevant
actors to follow up on the decisions of the Security
Council in this regard, taking into due account the
crucial role of the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
Under-Secretary-General Holmes’s briefing was
troubling in many ways. It addressed key protection
issues, such as a rise in the deliberate targeting of
civilians in conflict, the indiscriminate use of force,
forced displacement and the issue of safety and access
of humanitarian personnel. Let me briefly touch on a
few aspects, before concluding my statement.
The protection of civilians is not an abstract
political or legal concept. It is, of course,
understood — as recalled by Under-Secretary-General
Holmes and by many other previous speakers — that
what is at stake here is the seriousness and credibility
of our commitment to the responsibility to protect.
Civilian suffering and casualties are very concrete, and
particularly and increasingly troubling, realities in the
very many crisis areas and the numerous aspects that
were recalled by Under-Secretary-General Holmes. In
this respect, we are particularly concerned about the
protection of the most fragile groups, those who are the
most exposed to the consequences of conflict. I am,
obviously, referring to women and children.
Secondly, the consistent reports regarding the
increase in the number of journalists being killed in
conflict situations are alarming. Security Council
resolution 1738 (2006) addresses the safety and
security of journalists. Accordingly, Italy promoted the
inclusion of a reference to it in resolution 1746 (2007),
extending the mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan.
Thirdly, and finally, in situations where any
civilian population is the target of attacks, the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court provides the
legal basis for holding accountable those responsible
for the attacks if a State is unwilling or unable to do so.
In this regard, we must reiterate our commitment to
end impunity.
I would like to close with the words of UnderSecretary-General Holmes, who rightly emphasized
that “if there is one thing we need to do above all, it is
to end the culture of impunity which underlies so many
abuses” (supra).

07-39152

Mr. Al-Bader (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to extend our sincere thanks to Mr. John Holmes,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, for his important
briefing to the Council.
Since February 1999, the Security Council has
adopted several resolutions that reflect the
international community’s increasing commitment to
develop and improve ways to address the tragic
suffering of civilians living in areas of armed conflict.
Those resolutions, particularly resolution 1674 (2006),
have condemned the deliberate targeting of civilians,
acts of violence and attacks against civilians, the
forced displacement of civilians and the deliberate
denial of access for humanitarian assistance.
In spite of these efforts, the world continues to
witness an increase in the deliberate targeting of
civilians, including humanitarian workers, by terrorist
attacks. Civilians living in conflict areas are still
suffering under the scourge of forced displacement.
There are other matters for grave concern, such as the
indiscriminate use of force and the accidental killing of
civilians in conflict areas or in areas where military
operations are conducted. This situation requires all
parties in such areas to take the necessary steps to
prevent risks to civilians, in accordance with the
Fourth Geneva Convention, of 1949.
On the same note, we would like to recall
Security Council resolution 1674 (2006), which
reaffirms the provisions of the 2005 World Summit
Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/1) regarding
the responsibility to protect populations from genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity. We would like to emphasize that, on the
theoretical level, the responsibility to protect civilians
is an important humanitarian principle, for it embodies
a noble humanitarian value: defending innocent people
whose only fault is that they live in or near areas of
conflict and who, in most cases, are intentionally
targeted for pure political and ideological reasons. But,
from a practical and operational perspective, we should
be cautious in dealing with this principle in order that
it not be exploited or abused. If we apply this principle,
while respecting the ideals behind it, we should ensure
that our objectives are not politicized, that they rise
above individual interests and that they reflect purely
humanitarian motives.

11

S/PV.5703

What we need today is the effective
implementation of actions and measures contained in
the relevant Security Council resolutions aimed at
improving conditions for civilians in areas of armed
conflict. In this regard, we would like to stress that the
parties to armed conflict, whether Governments or nongovernmental actors, are duty-bound to comply fully
with their commitments under international law and
relevant Security Council resolutions, since the
responsibility to protect civilians rests, first and
foremost, with the States concerned. The role of the
international community is to provide the necessary
protection to civilians and to find the means to mediate
the settlement of conflicts peacefully. Peacekeeping,
humanitarian relief operations and other forms of
intervention under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations in conflict areas are merely
contingency solutions. Furthermore, urgent action is
required to end conflicts in a definitive manner.
Security Council resolution 1674 (2006) lists
various groups of civilians who suffer as a result of
armed conflict and are in need of assistance and
protection. That list, however, does not include the
category of persons with disabilities in conflict areas,
despite the serious impact that armed conflict has on
such people. In that regard, we recall General
Assembly resolution 60/131 on the implementation of
the World Programme of Action concerning Disabled
Persons, which expresses grave concern about the
devastating consequences that armed conflict continues
to have on the human rights of persons with
disabilities, as well as the United Nations Convention
on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, the
preamble of which stresses the importance of providing
full protection to persons with disabilities, particularly
in situations of armed conflict and foreign occupation.
In this regard, we would like to underline that it
is important that the Secretary-General, in his next
report on the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
to be submitted in October 2007, take into account
conditions for persons with disabilities in conflict areas
with a view to strengthening and improving ways of
meeting their needs.
Finally, we would like to reaffirm our full
commitment to promoting and strengthening the
protection of civilians in conflict areas, in accordance
with the relevant Security Council resolutions.

12

Mr. De La Sablière (France) (spoke in French): I
would like first of all to associate myself with the
statement to be made later by the representative of
Germany on behalf of the presidency of the European
Union.
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, and your
country, Belgium, for having provided us with this
opportunity to discuss once again the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. We welcome the
Secretariat’s continued involvement in this matter. I
would also like to thank John Holmes for his
introduction to our debate.
I would like to focus on four points. The first
concerns respect for international humanitarian law.
How could we fail to note that civilians are the first
victims of conflict? Even more serious, they are
increasingly being targeted. Parties to conflicts are
showing
increasing
disdain
for
international
humanitarian law. Indiscriminate attacks against
civilians and humanitarian actors carrying out their
missions have become increasingly common. Thus,
humanitarian space is now no longer a sanctuary. That
phenomenon is disturbing, and we believe that it is the
duty of the Council to remind all parties that they may
not, under any circumstances, fail to comply with
international humanitarian law, including, of course,
the four Geneva Conventions, as well as the two
Protocols additional to those Conventions, whose
thirtieth anniversary we have just celebrated. We
should not forget that 167 States are parties to those
Protocols, and we invite all those States that have not
yet done so to ratify them as soon as possible.
Compliance with international humanitarian law
requires rigorous action against impunity for violators.
The Council emphasized, in resolution 1674 (2006), of
April 2006, “the responsibility of States to comply with
their relevant obligations to end impunity” (para. 8)
and recognized the relevance of “the full range of
justice and reconciliation mechanisms ... including
national, international and ‘mixed’ criminal courts”
(para. 7).
In that regard, the International Criminal Court
has a pre-eminent role to play in trying those
principally responsible for the most serious crimes
when national courts are not in a position to do so. The
cooperation of States and the United Nations with the
International Criminal Court is essential. The
obligation to cooperate following on from the Rome

07-39152

S/PV.5703

Statute and
respected.

from

Council

resolutions

must

be

Finally, I wish to recall that international
humanitarian law also applies, of course, to forces
engaged in peacekeeping operations. France welcomes
the Secretary-General’s zero-tolerance policy regarding
sexual abuse. We further recall the important principle
of the non-refoulement of persons seeking refuge with
the United Nations.
My second point concerns the protection of the
most vulnerable populations. We note that sexual
violence is now used regularly as a weapon of war.
Such abominable crimes affect millions of individuals,
and they must be prevented and punished. Resolution
1325 (2000) must be closely followed up in this regard.
Children are among the most vulnerable groups
in that regard. The recruitment of children to serve in
armed forces is equally unacceptable. On this front,
however, some initial progress has been made thanks to
the Security Council’s action in the context of
resolution 1612 (2005). We are pleased that the Sudan
Liberation Movement has just signed a plan of action
committing it to the demobilization of children. Also as
a result of resolution 1612 (2005), other similar plans
of action have already led to the release of several
hundred child soldiers, in particular in Côte d’Ivoire.
But that scourge still affects about 250,000 children
throughout the world. We call on all the States
mentioned in the annexes to the Secretary-General’s
report on this issue to fully commit to tangible
cooperation with the Security Council, the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Representative and inter-agency task
forces.
From Darfur to Iraq and Sri Lanka, millions of
displaced people need protection. They are now more
numerous than refugees, and the phenomenon is
growing. We must afford them the greater protection
they need owing to their vulnerability, with due respect
for the Charter and the right of voluntary return.
Still with respect to the situation of the most
vulnerable populations, I would add that we are
concerned at the number of humanitarian personnel
who have been killed. It is particularly inadmissible
that those who come to help a population in distress
should be targeted. Here, we must ensure compliance
with resolution 1502 (2003).

07-39152

Likewise, we are shocked to observe month after
month that those who seek to shed light on situations
of armed conflict, journalists, are being attacked while
doing their job. At the initiative of France and Greece,
the Security Council recalled, in resolution 1738
(2006), that journalists are civilians like others. The
attacks against journalists must not go unpunished.
I turn now to the question of access to
humanitarian assistance by vulnerable populations. As
the Under-Secretary-General has just underlined, the
question of access is central with respect to the
protection of civilians. Without access, nothing is
possible. Full, unimpeded access of humanitarian
personnel to civilians who need aid is a central demand
which the Council made in resolution 1674 (2006). We
believe that the Council needs to be fully informed of
obstacles to humanitarian assistance. In this
perspective, my country would see only advantages in
the Secretary-General’s next report on the protection of
civilians
containing
information
on
specific
developments on this question, including in the form of
an annex if necessary.
My fourth and last point deals with the
contribution of peacekeeping operations to the
protection of civilians. In resolution 1674 (2006),
adopted by consensus in March 2006, the Council
reaffirmed its practice of ensuring that the mandates of
United
Nations
peacekeeping,
political
and
peacebuilding missions include, where appropriate and
on a case-by-case basis, provisions regarding, first, the
protection of civilians, particularly those under
imminent threat of physical danger within their zones
of operation; secondly, the facilitation of the provision
of humanitarian assistance; and, thirdly, the creation of
conditions conducive to the voluntary return of
refugees and internally displaced persons. I would
recall that the Council stipulated in the same resolution
that the protection of civilians should be given priority
in decisions about the use of available capacity and
resources and that protection mandates should be
implemented.
Clearly, the Council has made demands with
regard to United Nations operations, and those
demands are ambitious when such operations are
assigned a protection mandate. How do we assure that
these demands are met? In our view, there are several
possible approaches. First, it seems useful to enhance
the doctrine of peacekeeping with a debate on the
protection of civilians in the context of peacekeeping

13

S/PV.5703

operations; this could perhaps also lead to a debate on
rules of engagement. Secondly, we think it is important
to take into consideration, in the context of the regular
reports to the Security Council on the implementation
of the mandates of peacekeeping operations, the
civilian protection aspect when it appears in such
mandates. And finally, we wonder whether it might not
be useful for the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations to contribute to the Secretary-General’s
general reports on the protection of civilians and to be
associated with the briefings the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs makes to the Security
Council, at least with a view to responding to questions
regarding the theatres of activity of certain operations.

various existing modalities. Challenges appear when it
comes to non-State armed groups. My delegation
recognizes the limits of State-centric international
instruments in addressing the issue of protection vis-àvis those groups. Accordingly, my delegation stresses
the need for alternative measures to hold non-State
combatants accountable when they violate human
rights and humanitarian norms. In this regard, we
welcome the role of the International Committee of the
Red Cross and other humanitarian and human rights
agencies in promoting awareness of the instruments
among non-State combatants and in ensuring that they
obey those instruments. We believe that the United
Nations could also contribute to that endeavour.

These proposals are intended to give practical
effect to the demands made in resolution 1674 (2006).
They lead us to express our wish for further
enhancement of the cooperation that already exists
between the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations. We would appreciate it if,
during his next briefing to the Security Council,
Mr. Holmes would report to us on progress in that
cooperation.

When conflict is taking place, civilians have also
become displaced. Under such circumstances, they are
generally deprived of their basic rights, including the
right to food. Many die of disease or hunger. In that
regard, we underline the critical importance of
humanitarian assistance and continue to appreciate the
value of humanitarianism in the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. We continue to support the work of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian
agencies. We commend donor countries for their
contributions and the countries receiving refugees for
their generosity.

Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): First of all, let me join
other speakers in thanking Under-Secretary-General
Holmes for his briefing.
Civilians have always been victims of warfare,
throughout the history of humankind. Today, the
picture remains gloomy. Conflicts in Africa, the Middle
East, the Balkans and other zones of war have caused a
considerable number of civilian casualties. We
therefore believe that the protection of civilians in
armed conflict is an urgent matter. We also believe that
existing measures to protect civilians must be
strengthened and that new measures must be sought.
We continue to have high regard for legal
measures in promoting the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. In particular, we attach great
significance to the 1949 Geneva Conventions and the
1977 Additional Protocols.
As far as complying with international
humanitarian law is concerned, my delegation
underlines that armed State actors and armed non-State
actors have equal responsibility in the protection of
civilians and in adherence to the law. Compliance with
humanitarian and human rights law by armed State
actors can in general be easily monitored through

14

Indonesia is concerned over frequent incidents
where humanitarian aid convoys are ambushed or
where access to humanitarian assistance is restricted so
that displaced civilians are out of reach. In our view,
this tactic will only prolong the anguish of displaced
civilians; thus, we cannot let it happen.
As regards conflict-induced displacement, my
delegation has devoted particular attention to the needs
of vulnerable groups, especially children and women.
We stress that all parties to a conflict should make
arrangements to meet the protection and assistance
requirements of children and women and to ensure the
unhindered delivery of basic necessary services.
We are also very concerned about the fact that
humanitarian workers who provide the civilians with
humanitarian assistance have increasingly become
targets during armed conflict. This act is extremely
deplorable, knowing that the workers went because
they wanted to help and because they have ambition
and wanted to mitigate human suffering.

07-39152

S/PV.5703

Before I conclude, let me say a few words about
the threat to civilians posed by landmines and other
munitions. Civilians, including farmers and school
children, in over sixty countries remain under the
threat of anti-personnel landmines. The affected
countries bear a costly burden and their citizens have
to deal with potential death or injury every time they
take a step.
We therefore welcome United Nations mine
action activities carried out in collaboration with
governments and other international organizations. We
underline the importance of demining, victim
assistance, mine-risk education and destruction of
stockpiled landmines as part of mine action. We also
urge countries that hold information about the sites of
mines and other munitions they deployed during a war
to share that information, especially with the United
Nations, as a basis for further action.
My delegation holds the view that protection of
civilians in armed conflict is multifaceted and thus
requires comprehensive measures, including both legal
and humanitarian measures. The political will of all
parties concerned is essential in the implementation of
those measures.
As a final point, we would like to reiterate that
while protection of civilians in armed conflict should
be strengthened, the best protection is the prevention of
armed conflict itself. It is the role that the Security
Council could play in promoting the prevention of
conflict and in the maintenance of international peace
and security.
Mr. Gayama (Congo) (spoke in French): Armed
conflicts that in the past involved only military
personnel are now involving civilians on a routine
basis. In today’s debate — which you were kind
enough to convene, Mr. President, and we wish to
thank you for that — conflicts we are discussing
involve men and women of all ages, and the only thing
they did wrong was to be in the wrong place at the
wrong time, as innocent victims of the cruel game of
those who control weapons.
So let us not talk about the category of civilians
engaged in militias — whose objectives are
debatable — who, having decided to engage in policy
through means more violent than peaceful, seal their
own fate. The only reason for that is ideology. These
are the people who practice terrorism and the bulk of

07-39152

those they recruit, primarily from among extremists.
Some of them are young or even only children.
It is for the young people and children that
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
programmes are increasingly being established, which
are now part of the whole range of measures geared
towards getting more young people back to civil
society — which they never should have left behind —
and which allow them to trade a rifle or combat
fatigues for a more useful tool.
The third term of the DDR trilogy — the “R” of
reintegration — is the measure whereby we assess the
degree of reliability of a programme. It is the final
point of a process whose objective is to build peace
and to secure a commitment guaranteeing a non-return
to the life of a fighter. That is where the Peacebuilding
Commission should act, which now more than ever
should be supported.
Serious attention should be paid to DDR
programmes now underway in Burundi, Liberia, Sierra
Leone and Côte d’Ivoire so that not only young people
but the “reconverted” will be freed from
unemployment in the long term and will cease being a
source of constant misfortune for the citizens of their
countries as agents looting, stealing, rape, maiming and
other forms of insecurity.
Two days ago the entire world commemorated the
International Day of Refugees, of which there now
about 14 million, along with 20 million internally
displaced persons spread through 23 countries. Among
the victims of crimes of genocide and atrocities of all
kinds — which are the source of famine, malnutrition,
illness or simply of exclusion and anything else that
can breed death or desolation — we count all of those
who are denied all human dignity and the right to the
first among human rights, which is the right to life. It is
women, children and other categories of vulnerable
people of whom we are thinking and for whom today
the strict application of those rights should be
demanded.
Now more than ever, the action that the Security
Council is called upon to take should be taken in the
most coherent manner possible with governmental and
nongovernmental organizations committed to the noble
task of protection of and assistance for civilians, direct
or indirect causalities of armed conflicts. From that
point of view, the recently concluded agreement among
the United Nations, the African Union and the Sudan

15

S/PV.5703

for a hybrid operation in Darfur is of particular
importance for hundreds of thousands of individuals
who are victims of attacks and secret killings. We hope
this will become a well-merited act of deliverance,
which is long overdue.
The principle of responsibility and the duty to
protect were highlighted during the 2005 Summit,
when the international community took on the
obligation to protect people from the crimes of
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity.
The international tribunals for Rwanda, the
former Yugoslavia and Sierra Leone, concerning which
the Council was briefed a few days ago, are today the
expression of the professed will of the international
community not only to recognize the sacred character
of human life but also to convert that affirmation into a
tangible reality and to punish those responsible for
those attacks. Unfortunately, too many States still hide
behind crassly political strategic interests, so as not to
lend all the assistance needed by the Tribunals, even
if — for example, in the case of the Lord’s Resistance
Army in Uganda or in Darfur or Somalia — some
warlords, who have neither faith nor law, could have
been severely punished.
The protection of journalists and humanitarian
personnel is being given more attention, since now we
see a situation of great concern, with tragedies sparing
no continent. We see them in Southern Europe,
Afghanistan, Sri Lanka, Iraq, the Middle East, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Haiti.
Massive displacements of populations taken
hostage, persecutions for cultural reasons, torture for
political reasons or simply horrid crimes, the
Janjaweed in Darfur of sinister reputation, Palestine,
Somalia — all these have given us many lessons,
enough for us to stress what Mr. Holmes said in his
message at the start of the briefing.
More than ever, it is up to the international
community to stand up to the increasing numbers of
barbaric acts with the power of the law, of which the
thirtieth anniversary of the Additional Protocols to the
Geneva Conventions, relating to the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, commemorated on 8 June,
served as a timely reminder. In order for the 1977
Protocols to the 1949 Conventions to be effective
alongside the relevant Security Council decisions —
such as resolution 1674 (2006) of 28 April 2006 and

16

resolution 1738 (2006) of 23 December 2006, adopted
following the two most recent open debates on this
item — it is now more necessary than ever to combine
political will with an active consensus against the spirit
and practice of terrorism, which continues to motivate
too many parties to the human tragedies of our times.
In the international community’s imperative fight
in that area, conflict prevention and the promotion of
political and socio-economic solutions form the
essential basis for firmly establishing the rule of law,
with all its implications in terms of human rights. This
cannot fail to strengthen true peace and security.
In conclusion, my delegation wishes to thank the
Belgian delegation for having taken the excellent
initiative to convene this debate. We are prepared to
support any future decision the Council might take in
response to public opinion on the question of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Congo for the kind words he
addressed to the presidency of the Council.
Mr. Li Junhua (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I wish to thank Under-Secretary-General
John Holmes for his briefing. The Chinese delegation
appreciates all his efforts and the work he has done on
the ground since taking office. I also wish to pay
tribute to the relevant United Nations agencies for their
efforts in protecting civilians in armed conflict and in
providing other humanitarian relief.
The item on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict has been on the agenda of the Security Council
for many years, during which numerous resolutions,
including resolution 1674 (2006), and presidential
statements were adopted. However, in almost every
conflict situation, the circumstances of civilians have
not been greatly improved. Some conflicts have eluded
solution for too long or have escalated, leading to
continuous deterioration of the humanitarian situation
and consequently affecting additional civilians.
Refugees and displaced persons have no access to
essential relief. Therefore, while it is necessary for the
Security Council to respond to a crisis in an integrated
manner, addressing legal and political issues, it should
also take a tailored approach when addressing a
particular situation involving specific issues.
First, the Security Council should faithfully carry
out its sacred duty, as provided for by the Charter of

07-39152

S/PV.5703

the United Nations, by stepping up efforts to prevent
and resolve conflicts. Civilians are the most vulnerable
group in armed conflict and no remedial measure can
save them from harm when they are caught in an armed
conflict. Efforts to prevent or deal with crises will
effectively contribute to alleviating the suffering of
civilians. Efforts to prevent and reduce conflicts are the
best protection for civilians. Meanwhile, together with
other relevant bodies, the Security Council should
identify and remove the root causes of conflicts so that
both the symptoms and the causes of the problem can
be addressed.
Secondly, the role of Governments should be
given its place in the protection of civilians and should
be respected. The Charter of the United Nations,
international humanitarian law and resolutions of the
Security Council and the General Assembly all require
that Governments bear the primary responsibility for
the protection of civilians. The international
community and external players have a role to play in
resolving crises by providing help and support. But
external assistance should be provided with the
prerequisite that the will of the Government concerned
must be respected and its sovereignty and territorial
integrity preserved, and that no arbitrary intervention
should be imposed on the Government concerned over
its objection.
Thirdly, the concept of the responsibility to
protect should be understood and applied correctly. The
2005 World Summit Outcome (General Assembly
resolution 60/1) devoted a large section to
comprehensively setting out the responsibility to
protect populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity, and requested
the General Assembly to continue its consideration and
enrichment of the concept. At present, there are still
differing understandings and interpretations of this
concept among Member States. The Security Council
should therefore refrain from invoking the concept of
the responsibility to protect. Still less should that
concept be misused. The Security Council should
respect and support the General Assembly in
continuing to discuss the concept in order to reach
broad consensus.
Fourthly, the effectiveness and credibility of
humanitarian relief efforts should be improved. The
parties concerned should collaborate in compliance
with international humanitarian law. Humanitarian
relief efforts are indispensable for minimizing losses

07-39152

and helping civilians overcome difficulty in the
aftermath of a crisis. Over the years, humanitarian
relief agencies have done a great deal of work in
dangerous circumstances to provide relief to civilians
in distress. They deserve our appreciation and
acknowledgement. But even though the causes of
conflicts are complex and sensitive, humanitarian relief
efforts should strictly abide by the principle of fairness,
neutrality, objectivity and independence, thereby
safeguarding the humanitarian nature and credibility of
the activities.
Mr. Burian (Slovakia): First of all, I wish to
express the gratitude of my delegation to Mr. Holmes
for his valuable briefing and to the Belgian presidency
for organizing this important open debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. My delegation
fully aligns itself with the statement that will be
delivered later this morning by the representative of
Germany on behalf of the European Union. Therefore,
I will limit myself to a few additional remarks.
Today’s briefing of Mr. Holmes, as well as the
observations of the most recent Security Council
mission to the Sudan, Côte d’Ivoire and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and daily news
reports from the Middle East and other places confirm
the continued occurrence of gross violations of
humanitarian law and human rights, including
deliberate attacks against civilians, sexual violence
used often as a weapon of war, abductions, recruitment
of child combatants and other forms of grave
violations, perpetrated by State and non-State actors.
We believe that the international community must
do much more to protect the most vulnerable in armed
conflicts. There can be no excuse for inaction when
thousands of civilians are dying every week as a result
of armed conflict. It is clear that despite the existing
legal framework for the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, which was further strengthened last
year by the adoption of resolution 1674 (2006), serious
gaps remain in the practical implementation of agreed
norms and principles, including the responsibility to
protect. We welcome and support the intention of the
Secretary-General to initiate a discussion among
United Nations Members on how to translate that core
principle of humanity and human solidarity, which our
leaders endorsed at the 2005 World Summit, into
concrete action on a global, regional and national level.

17

S/PV.5703

In that respect, we were encouraged during last
week’s discussions between the Security Council and
the Peace and Security Council of the African Union in
Addis Ababa and Accra by the level of commitment on
the part of the African Union to deal with the issue of
protecting civilians in armed conflict through greater
involvement in peacekeeping and mediation efforts in
various crisis situations on the continent.
We believe that the partnership, consultations and
dialogue between the United Nations and regional
organizations on these issues should be further
strengthened and expanded, in line with the joint
communiqué of the United Nations Security Council
and the African Union Peace and Security Council.
Through joint action, we must find more efficient ways
to deal with humanitarian crises such as that in Darfur,
where civilians continue to suffer and die every day.
With respect to Darfur, which is the site of one of
the world’s most grave crises and humanitarian
situations, Slovakia welcomes the recent agreement
that will, we hope, lead both to rapid and successful
deployment of the African Union-United Nations
hybrid operation in Darfur and to improved protection
of civilians in the region from violations of human
rights and humanitarian law. In that regard, we call
upon the Government of the Sudan to facilitate
deployment of the hybrid peacekeeping force and to
allow the monitoring and investigation of crimes,
including active cooperation with the International
Criminal Court. In addition, we hope that the recent
discussion between the United Nations Security
Council and the African Union Peace and Security
Council will contribute to closer cooperation and
interaction between the United Nations and the African
Union in addressing the increased humanitarian
suffering of civilians in the Central African Republic,
eastern Chad and Somalia, as well as the consequences
of criminal activities by the Lord’s Resistance Army in
the Great Lakes region.
However, we must not forget about people in
other parts of the world, such as the Middle East and
Afghanistan, where the numbers of attacks on innocent
civilians — employing the most vicious killing tactics
and terrorist acts, including the use of chlorine — are
increasing day by day. We agree with Mr. Holmes that
that trend is profoundly worrying. It must be addressed
through effective action by all regional and global
stakeholders in order to contain it.

18

We are concerned about the level of impunity
with respect to grave violations of humanitarian law
and atrocities committed against civilians in armed
conflicts. I would like to underline that we are
especially concerned about the direct involvement of
Government military and security forces and
institutions in such criminal activities.
In that regard, Slovakia stresses the need for strict
application of a zero-tolerance policy with respect to
war crimes and crimes against humanity. Impunity for
such crimes is unacceptable, and we must make sure
that the perpetrators of criminal acts are brought to
justice. In situations where national judicial authorities
— who have the primary responsibility for bringing the
perpetrators of crimes to justice — are not fully
capable or, in some cases, unwilling to address
violations of international humanitarian law, Slovakia
will continue to support active engagement by the
international
community,
including
through
international and “mixed” tribunals, the International
Criminal Court and, when necessary, applicable
targeted measures by the Council in ensuring respect
for humanitarian and human rights law.
We are also concerned about the increasing
number of deliberate attacks against United Nations
agencies, non-governmental organizations and other
humanitarian workers providing assistance to civilian
populations, as well as attacks against media personnel.
In that respect, we strongly condemn acts such as the
recent killing of a staff member of Médecins Sans
Frontières in the Central African Republic and of two
Lebanese Red Cross workers at a Palestinian refugee
camp in northern Lebanon, the brutal killing of a Radio
Okapi national reporter in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and attacks against humanitarian personnel
and piracy threatening relief deliveries to Somalia.
We support all necessary steps and actions by the
international community to protect humanitarian
personnel, to establish safe corridors allowing for full
and unhindered humanitarian access and to provide
basic security for the work of the media, including
through full implementation of last year’s Security
Council resolutions 1674 (2006) and 1738 (2006).
Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to
thank and pay tribute to all humanitarian organizations
for their relentless efforts and to express our sympathy
to the families of those who made the ultimate sacrifice
for the cause of peace and humanitarian relief.

07-39152

S/PV.5703

Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I wish to align
myself with the statement to be made later this
morning by the presidency of the European Union.
I would like to thank the Under-SecretaryGeneral for his thought-provoking presentation. It is
not acceptable that even now, in the twenty-first
century, violent conflict impacts most severely on the
civilian population. Helping to ensure the protection of
civilians during armed conflict is central to the work of
the Council.
In that connection, let me say that we regret the
deaths of civilians that have resulted from operations
by international forces in Iraq and Afghanistan and
elsewhere. Any civilian casualty is one too many. We
recognize that it is incumbent on those forces to
continue to do everything they can to avoid any
civilian casualties, and we remain committed to that.
At the same time, it is important that we all
distinguish between these unintended deaths and those
resulting from the deliberate and callous targeting of
civilians by insurgents and others. The issue is quite
simple: we seek to avoid civilian deaths, whereas the
insurgents seek to cause them. That goes to the heart of
why we are dealing with conflicts in the first place.
Many challenges face us on the ground in such
situations. Civilians continue to be deliberately
targeted by insurgents, terrorists and others. In many
areas of conflict, sexual and gender-based violence is
still widespread. The abhorrent practice of using rape
as a weapon of war continues. Millions of civilians are
or remain displaced from their homes every year, left
to lead a fragile and vulnerable existence. We have also
heard too many stories over the past few weeks in
which humanitarian workers, journalists and others
have been attacked, kidnapped or murdered.
All of those things are unacceptable. It cannot be
right that civilians continue to bear the brunt of violent
conflict. They account for the greatest number of
casualties. The most vulnerable — women, older
people and children — are hit particularly hard. Let me
cite some examples. In Burma, ongoing military
campaigns against the insurgents have meant that
civilians in conflict areas have suffered the
repercussions. In Sri Lanka, the escalation in conflict
has brought a high human cost. We remain concerned
about the fragile state of security in Somalia and the
impact that terrorist violence is having on civilians
there.

07-39152

The United Kingdom has also said many times in
this Chamber that the terrible suffering of the people in
Darfur has gone on for far too long. We welcome the
agreement of the Government of Sudan to a hybrid
force. At the same time, we draw attention to the
deteriorating security situation in Darfur. We are
concerned that humanitarian agencies may be forced to
pull out unless there are safety guarantees and unless
those responsible for attacks are held to account. We
call on the Government of the Sudan to continue to
remove bureaucratic impediments to the operations of
humanitarian agencies.
The United Kingdom is also deeply concerned
about the humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip. The
recent violence, as has been stated in this Chamber, has
had tragic consequences. The United Kingdom fully
supports the statement by the Quartet and efforts to
meet the humanitarian needs of the Palestinians. In that
regard, we welcome Israel’s decision to facilitate
humanitarian access and to ensure the provision of
basic services.
In conflict situations, all parties must do their
utmost to ensure full, safe and unimpeded access to
humanitarian and relief agencies. Let me place on
record my country’s appreciation of and respect for
those national and international staff who are prepared
to work in the most difficult conditions in order to
provide humanitarian relief. I welcome the Saving
Lives Together initiative, which aims to improve
security arrangements in the field.
It is easy to identify the challenges but much
harder to identify what more we can do to try to
address them. We should continue to hear the UnderSecretary-General’s briefings on protection and
country issues. This gives us an opportunity to draw
attention to the actions of the worst offenders and to
support those who are making progress.
We should strengthen respect for, and
enforcement of, international law. We should work
towards ending impunity by ensuring that there are no
hiding places for the perpetrators of the most egregious
crimes. The United Kingdom highlights the important
role of the International Criminal Court in that regard
and underlines that States with an obligation to
cooperate with the Court should do so.
The Council can also continue to ensure that,
where appropriate, United Nations peacekeeping forces
are given the mandate and support that they need to

19

S/PV.5703

protect civilians from violence. We have made gradual
progress on this front — for example, we welcome the
robust action taken by the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) against armed militia that threatened the
local population — but more should be done. We can
all think back to the time in Bosnia when United
Nations forces were not able to protect the population,
and we can regret that; but we can help make sure that
such an event never happens again by ensuring that all
United Nations-mandated forces have the most robust
mandate possible. What the Under-Secretary-General
said about the need for evaluation of the impact of
protection language in peacekeeping mandates is
something that we find very interesting and would like
to explore further.
Protection concerns, therefore, should be
reflected more systematically in peacekeeping
mandates. We should encourage and facilitate a closer
working relationship between the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) on
this agenda. We should also continue to work towards
better reporting to highlight abuses. In that regard, we
very much welcome the Under-Secretary-General’s
proposal to monitor and report on access issues.
While national Governments have the primary
responsibility to protect their citizens, the international
community also has responsibilities. We should live up
to them.
Mr. Tachie-Menson (Ghana): First of all, let me
join members in thanking the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. John Holmes, for his
comprehensive briefing.
The question of the treatment of civilians in
conflict situations is as old as civilization itself.
However, in recent times, the proliferation of brutal
conflicts in various parts of the world has focussed the
attention of the international community on this
problem.
It is clear that the primary responsibility for the
protection of civilians lies with States and
Governments. That fact was recognized in General
Assembly resolution 46/182 of 1991. The 2005 World
Summit Outcome Document also affirmed that
principle in its paragraphs 138 and 139, which
emphasize the responsibility of the United Nations to
use appropriate diplomatic and other peaceful means to

20

protect populations at risk, and, failing that, to take
collective action under Chapters VI and VII of the
Charter to protect civilian populations from genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity. That was also stressed by resolution 1674
(2006).
It is therefore undeniable that the international
community has the legal and institutional tools to deal
with this issue. The challenge for us now is how to
translate the mechanisms at our disposal into effective
practical systems for the protection of civilians. The
problem of the protection of civilians in armed conflict
will have to be considered within the context of the
following factors: first, prevention of conflicts;
secondly, observance and implementation of the rules
of
international
humanitarian
law;
thirdly,
peacekeeping and humanitarian assistance; and,
fourthly,
post-conflict
peacebuilding
and
reconciliation.
With respect to the first point, it is only logical
that, in order to stop the abuse of civilians, we should
go to the root of the problem, removing, through
conflict prevention, the conditions that breed conflicts
in the first place.
In that regard, we are guided by the SecretaryGeneral’s report of April 1998 on “The causes of
conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa”, which identified
the promotion of human security and human
development as the basis of conflict prevention.
That raises issues related to governance,
economic management and the rule of law. As stressed
by resolution 1674 (2006), there is a need for a
coordinated, comprehensive approach on the promotion
of economic growth, poverty eradication and
sustainable development in vulnerable areas and
regions by the United Nations and its agencies. This
also calls for cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations and non-governmental organizations
(NGOs).
An important aspect of conflict prevention which
is often overlooked is an early-warning system. This
can operate at two levels: first, to warn of tensions in
the community that can trigger conflict; and, secondly,
to alert the international community to situations that
might lead to an escalation of violence against civilians
and result in a humanitarian crisis.

07-39152

S/PV.5703

The Peace and Security Council established under
the African Union Constitutive Act, which is a
collective security and early-warning arrangement, is
an example of this. The Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) early-warning system is
also a step in the right direction.
On the question of the observance and
implementation of the rules of international
humanitarian law, the responsibility lies with the
relevant States and combatants. The international
community as a whole and regional and subregional
organizations, in concert with NGOs, have a role to
play in sensitizing the various factions to the need for
observance of these rules and in exerting sustained
pressure to ensure compliance.
When States and combatants prove unwilling or
unable to act, the international community has a moral
and legal duty to intervene to avert a humanitarian
catastrophe.
Peacekeeping and humanitarian assistance are
two important tools currently used by the international
community to keep conflicts in check and reduce the
scale of human suffering. These two tools, while
distinct, are mutually supportive and complementary.
To enable peacekeeping and humanitarian assistance to
work effectively, it is necessary for peacekeeping
missions to be reconfigured through the adoption of
robust mandates to ensure not only the physical
protection of civilians but also the facilitation of
humanitarian assistance. Since the practical and moral
underpinnings of peacekeeping operations are
imperilled if the local population cannot be protected,
the protection of civilians should be part of the core
mandate of peacekeeping operations. That requires
additional resources. However, this is the most costeffective way to prevent a humanitarian disaster, which
would absorb even more resources.
On the fourth point, concerning post-conflict
peacebuilding and reconciliation, it is important that
the international community make available the
necessary resources, which would facilitate not only
economic reconstruction but also the building of
political and judicial institutions that will ensure the
rule of law and enable the individual to live in peace
and security. In that regard, the importance of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration is very
clear. Reconciliation and the bringing to justice of

07-39152

those guilty of the most serious crimes should also
form part of the nation-building and healing process.
In that context, we are happy to note that the
International Criminal Court (ICC), which has become
fully operational, can play an effective deterrent role in
the promotion of the international legal framework for
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. The
referral of the Darfur situation by the Security Council
to the ICC is an important test case in this regard.
Finally, we call on the international community to
muster the necessary political will to put in practice the
measures necessary for the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, as I have outlined.
Ms. Qwabe (South Africa): South Africa joins
others in thanking you, Mr. President, for having
convened this open debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, and we would like to
commend
the
Under-Secretary
General
for
Humanitarian Affairs
and
Emergency
Relief
Coordinator, Mr. John Holmes, for his briefing.
Despite positive political developments in
achieving peace in many conflict areas, our world
continues to be ravaged by violent armed conflicts that
claim the lives of thousands of civilians and leave even
more permanently displaced. The deliberate targeting
of civilians in armed conflicts, together with the
indiscriminate use of force, gender-based violence,
forced displacement and the lack of safety and access
of humanitarian personnel all have a detrimental effect
on civilians.
We are therefore of the view that finding a
common solution for the protection of civilians would
need the cooperation of each Member State and all
parties involved in a conflict. We recognize the need
for a coherent, comprehensive and coordinated
approach by the principal organs of the United Nations,
cooperating with one another and within their
respective mandates when dealing with the issue of the
protection of civilians. General Assembly resolution
46/182, amongst others, highlights the important value
that humanitarian assistance should be assigned in
accordance with the principles of humanity, neutrality
and impartiality and, consequently, that assistance
should not be given on the basis of geopolitical
considerations.
We should therefore avoid the politicization of
humanitarian assistance and, in that context, we urge

21

S/PV.5703

the international community not to ignore the occupied
Palestinian territory in Gaza. Just yesterday, Mr. David
Shearer, the head of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) in the occupied
Palestinian territory, told reporters at the United
Nations that the humanitarian situation in the Gaza
Strip could worsen unless Israel eases the restrictions
and closures at its border crossings with the area. South
Africa supports the call by OCHA for the reopening of
Karni crossing, the main commercial crossing point
into Gaza.
It will be recalled that, during its presidency of
the Council in March 2007, South Africa convened an
open debate on greater cooperation and coordination
between regional organizations and the Security
Council, in particular the African Union. We believe
that the protection of civilians and humanitarian
assistance would be better addressed in partnership
with regional mechanisms and that strengthening
dialogue and cooperation between the Security Council
and regional organizations would contribute to tackling
common security challenges. Furthermore, the role of
regional organizations should be strengthened to allow
them to act more effectively when future conflicts may
arise, as they are closer to the area of concern and can
thus, in principle, act more speedily.
As stipulated in Security Council resolution 1265
(1999) on the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
the Council has expressed its willingness to consider
how peacekeeping mandates might better address the
negative impact of conflict on civilians. We are
therefore pleased to note that United Nations
peacekeeping mandates now include the specific
protection needs of women and children, including
those of humanitarian personnel, due to the Council’s
adoption of landmark resolutions 1325 (2000) on
women, peace and security; 1612 (2005) on children
and armed conflict; and 1502 (2003) on the protection
of United Nations personnel, associated personnel and
humanitarian personnel in conflict zones.
In conclusion, the four resolutions the Security
Council has adopted on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict have established a good framework for
the international community to actively and
collectively address the challenges of protecting
civilians in armed conflict. Those resolutions
reaffirmed the importance of preventing armed conflict
and its recurrence, while stressing the need for a
comprehensive approach through the promotion of

22

economic growth, poverty eradication, sustainable
development, national reconciliation, good governance,
democracy, the rule of law, and respect for and
protection of human rights.
In addressing violations of international
humanitarian law, South Africa supports the work of
the International Criminal Court and the various
international tribunals, and believes that all
perpetrators, regardless of nationality and geopolitical
status, should be properly and fairly tried. It is
therefore hoped that the challenges of protecting
civilians in armed conflict will be addressed in a way
that will increase respect for the principles of
international humanitarian, human rights and refugee
law, human dignity and the legitimacy of the United
Nations.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Holmes for the
updated information he has provided on the status of
protection of civilians in armed conflict. Not a day
goes by that we are not made aware of new instances
of killing, torture, cruelty and other forms of violence
against civilians in armed conflict.
In recent years, we have focused particular
attention on the humanitarian situation in Darfur.
However, at present, and due to a large extent to the
ongoing and painstaking efforts of the United Nations
and the African Union, we have noted genuine
prospects for an intensification of the political process,
a consolidation of the Darfur peace agreement, and a
strengthening of the peacekeeping presence in Darfur.
That gives hope that the threat of violence will cease to
loom over that region of the Sudan.
Unfortunately, such positive momentum is not yet
in evidence in Iraq. Reports of mass casualties have
become commonplace. The international community
would not yet seem to have grasped the scope of the
humanitarian tragedy unfolding in Iraq in the course of
the conflict, which has already become among the
bloodiest of the past 50 years.
Today, we cannot ignore the many years of
suffering endured by civilians in the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. The wounds inflicted on Lebanon in the
summer of 2006 have yet to heal, and civilian
casualties number in the many hundreds.
The number of civilian casualties in Afghanistan
is growing. We understand the alarm of the Afghan

07-39152

S/PV.5703

Government in reaction to each death among its
peaceful citizens.
While responsibility for the protection of
civilians falls first and foremost on the Governments of
States where conflict is occurring, we believe that such
responsibility should also be kept in mind by other
parties that might be drawn into various conflict
situations.
We are especially aggrieved by the deaths of and
injury to children. Just the other day, seven children
were killed in the Zargun Shah district of Afghanistan.
The Secretary-General, his Special Representative
Ms. Coomaraswamy, and the United Nations
Children’s Fund reacted in a timely fashion. Such
events should fall within the purview of the Council’s
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
Attention must be paid to gender-based violence.
The United Nations must react expeditiously to
instances of violence against peaceful civilians and the
destruction of civilian sites in armed conflict. This is a
most topical issue given that, in many current conflicts,
civilian deaths and the destruction of civilian
infrastructure are often the result of premeditated
actions or of insufficient attention to preventing
civilian casualties. We therefore need to strive for strict
compliance by all parties with the norms of
international humanitarian law and the relevant
decisions of the Council.
Conflicts often lead to massive displacements of
people within or outside a country. According to data
from the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, for the first time in the
past five years the number of refugees in the world has
increased, rising to almost 10 million. The main cause
of that rise is the violence in Iraq, from which
approximately 1.5 million people have had to flee,
while some sources put that figure at 2.2 million. The
need for emergency measures in that context was
expressed at the conclusion of the International
Conference on Addressing the Humanitarian Needs of
Refugees and Internally Displaced Persons inside Iraq
and in Neighbouring Countries, held in April in
Geneva. Afghanistan remains the point of origin of the
largest number of refugees, now numbering some
2.1 million.
In recent years, along with the status of refugees,
growing attention has been paid to the internally
displaced person (IDP), whose status is not regulated

07-39152

by international law. Unlike refugees, IDPs legally
continue to be protected by their States. Upon the
request of the State, they may be provided assistance
by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and other
international organizations.
The issue of IDPs is often linked to the concept
of the responsibility to protect, which, we believe,
must be interpreted in strict compliance with the 2005
Summit Outcome. We would recall that heads of State
throughout the world agreed to help to protect people
from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity, with the understanding that
this concept and its implications would be considered
by the General Assembly on the basis of the principles
of the Charter and international law.
Humanitarian work is a component of a crisissettlement strategy and post-conflict reconstruction and
requires systemic measures at the international,
regional and national levels. The Security Council is
fully justified in paying greater attention to the
protection of civilians as part of its responsibility to
maintain international peace and security.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a brief statement in my capacity as the
representative of Belgium.
As other colleagues have done, I would first like
to thank Mr. Holmes for his statement, which
illustrated great commitment and spoke to us all.
Belgium would also like to associate itself with
the statement to be delivered shortly by our German
colleague on behalf of the members of the European
Union.
In his briefing, the Under-Secretary-General
clearly illustrated that there is still a huge gap between
the diplomatic conception of the protection of civilians,
on the one hand, and reality on the ground, on the
other. In order to bridge that gap, Belgium favours a
more concrete, predictable and systematic approach
based on the provisions of resolution 1674 (2006) that
could provide a better mechanism to enable the
Council to carry out an effective policy in the area of
both prevention and recovery. It is clear that the
Secretariat has a clear role to play. We support all of its
efforts and urge it to continue to utilize all means
available to it to that end.

23

S/PV.5703

Belgium would also like to emphasize that it is
above all States themselves that must assume the
responsibility to protect civilians in situations of armed
conflict. If they do not have the capacity or the will to
guarantee adequate protection, then the international
community has the responsibility — and even the
duty — to respond.
Like Mr. Holmes, Belgium condemns in the
strongest terms the refusal to grant access to
humanitarian workers in conflict situations. He pointed
out that there have been several conflicts on the
Council’s agenda in which such access has been
denied. We have also seen numerous instances of the
use of humanitarian assistance for political purposes,
which is unacceptable. The Council must use all of its
influence in order to guarantee total access in full
security for humanitarian staff.
Among the aspects of resolution 1674 (2006),
Belgium attaches particular importance to the fight
against violence, especially sexual violence against
women and minor children. We have noted how such
acts of violence become true instruments of war in a
number of conflict situations. It is imperative not only
to eradicate such practices but also to prevent them.
As the Under-Secretary-General has emphasized,
combating impunity is one component of protecting
civilians in armed conflict. In that connection, there are
a number of legal and reconciliation mechanisms in
place at the regional, national and international
levels — chief among them the International Criminal
Court — that can contribute to ensuring that justice is
done. Their effective functioning is clearly a deterrent
to those who intend to violate the rights of civilians in
armed conflicts.
I would like to assure Mr. Holmes of Belgium’s
full support in the immense task he has before him.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give
Guatemala.

the

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Briz Gutiérrez (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): I would first like to thank you, Mr. President,
for following the usual practice of holding two
thematic debates annually on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. Allow me also to thank Mr. John
Holmes, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian

24

Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, for his
timely remarks at the beginning of this debate.
Despite the time that has passed since the 1899
and 1907 Hague Conventions — 100 years to date —
and the August 1949 Geneva Convention, we continue
to have to reiterate our concern at the scarce progress
made on the ground with regard to providing effective
protection for civilians in armed conflict and the urgent
need to provide better physical protection to displaced
populations and other vulnerable groups at greater
risk — such as women and children, humanitarian
workers, United Nations staff, journalists and those
whose work places them at risk.
In that connection, we regret the recent deaths in
Iraq, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Sri Lanka,
Darfur and Lebanon. We reiterate our condemnation of
terrorist attacks against communities, in which no
distinction is made between the civilian population and
the warring factions. We also condemn all other attacks
that have forced the internal displacement of entire
communities or caused them to seek refuge in
neighbouring countries.
We believe that the holding of open debates on
this subject, the statements that are sometimes issued
following the debates and the adoption of resolutions,
such as resolutions 1674 (2006) and 1738 (2006),
among others, represent positive progress in our effort
to identify a common understanding as to the best way
to jointly confront the challenges repeatedly brought to
our attention in the reports of the Secretary-General,
reports, incidentally, which are useful tools for gaining
a better understanding of the complexities of this issue.
Over the decades, we have together, through the
United Nations, been able to address numerous
difficult and complex conflicts whose solution has
required the adoption of fundamentally important
decisions. However, there remains much for us to do
before we can achieve comprehensive approaches that
will help us to prevent conflicts or their recurrence —
approaches in which genuine coherence, coordination
and complementarity between the main bodies of the
Organization are evident. In that connection, we fully
agree with the Emergency Relief Coordinator as to the
need to make greater investments in the area of
prevention.
For as long as we fail to improve that
interaction — whenever a new armed conflict breaks
out or when we fail to protect civilians or to ensure the

07-39152

S/PV.5703

deployment of humanitarian staff to lend assistance to
people trapped in a conflict — every life lost and every
case of genocide or ethnic cleansing will remind us that
we have yet to achieve the noble ideals upon which the
Organization was founded.
Our own experience in Guatemala teaches us that
this is no easy task. Despite the progress we have made
and the set of peace agreements aimed at establishing a
solid foundation for economic growth with fairness,
respect and protection for human rights and greater
participation for women and indigenous peoples, we
nevertheless continue to endeavour to establish,
broaden and strengthen institutions, opportunities and
guarantees that will bolster national reconciliation, the
rule of law and the end of a culture of impunity which
has especially affected women and girls.
This difficult experience has enabled us to
understand the importance of the just application of the
provisions of resolution 1674 (2006), particularly those
relevant to the incorporation of the protection of
identified vulnerable groups in the planning for
peacekeeping missions and other relevant United
Nations missions in order to minimize the inherent
traumatic impact of any conflict. To this end, we also
support the Coordinator’s suggestion with regard to
assessing the various peacekeeping mandates that
already include the protection of civilians and to draw
the appropriate lessons from them.
Likewise, we feel that the aide-memoire on the
protection of civilians adopted by the Security Council
as an annex to presidential statement S/PRST/2002/6,
updated by OCHA in 2003 (see S/PRST/2003/27), has
been a useful diagnostic tool for assessing the priorities
that should be taken into account when establishing,
ending or changing mandates for peacekeeping
operations. We feel that it could benefit from periodic
review and updating in order to better reflect the
concerns, trends and measures that must be taken into
account for the protection of civilians and the
implementation of programmes related to this topic.
We await the Secretary-General’s next report, to
be submitted in October. We are confident that it will
provide up-to-date information and describe recent
experiences in peacekeeping operations and in the
innovative work in the area of peacebuilding. We are
confident that its content will lead to an interesting
debate on new approaches to the implementation of

07-39152

programmes on the ground, which will allow us to
meet fully our responsibility to protect.
Finally, we would like to end our statement by
congratulating the Special Court for Sierra Leone on
the conviction of three leaders of the Revolutionary
Armed Forces, who were found guilty of 11 crimes
considered crimes against humanity, including the
recruitment and use of child soldiers. This is the first
time that an international tribunal has handed down a
verdict on the recruitment of children; it also
constitutes a strong message in the struggle against
impunity and for the defence of the civilian population.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Oshima (Japan): Japan is pleased that the
Security Council continues to give close attention, as it
should, to the plight of civilians in armed conflict. We
therefore welcome today’s open debate and thank
Under-Secretary-General John Holmes for his briefing
on the progress that has been made. We commend the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) for playing the leading role in this area.
Indeed, real and concrete progress has in fact
been made towards the goal of protecting innocent
civilians. The Security Council has adopted a number
of normative instruments, including resolution 1674
(2006). With regard to the issue of the protection of
journalists in conflict, which was raised in the open
debate last December (see S/PV.5577), we welcome the
unanimous adoption of resolution 1738 (2006).
For Japan, the protection of civilians is a high
priority, as we believe it is essential to human security.
The United Nations Trust Fund for Human Security,
which is administered by OCHA and to which my
Government has made substantial contributions, has
accordingly taken great interest in projects that address
issues such as conflict prevention, post-conflict
peacebuilding, landmines, internally displaced persons
(IDPs) and refugees, giving support to more than 50
projects over the years. For example, the Trust Fund
has assisted in promoting recovery and sustainable
livelihoods for that part of the Sri Lankan population
which has been affected by internal conflict. Most
recently, on 29 May, the Government of Japan and the
United Nations decided to extend assistance through
the Trust Fund for Human Security to a project that
aims at the protection, reintegration and resettlement of
IDPs in Somalia. The Central Emergency Response

25

S/PV.5703

Fund has also helped to ensure a predictable flow of
financing for efforts to protect civilians in neglected
crises; we all welcome these efforts.
Today I would like to touch upon four aspects of
the subject of protection of civilians. Allow me to start
with the Security Council, which we commend for the
significant progress it has made in this area.
Specifically, the Working Group on children and armed
conflict has effected improvements in the situation of
children in armed conflict through the monitoring and
reporting mechanism which the Council established in
resolution 1612 (2005).
At the same time, we are deeply troubled by the
large number of civilians affected by conflict — in
Iraq, Afghanistan, Darfur, Somalia and other embattled
parts of the world — who continue to be in desperate
need of protection and assistance. We deplore the fact
that civilians have with increasing frequency become
the primary targets of violence, even as we have
witnessed a steady decline in the number of conflicts
over the past few years. We also condemn the
harassment, intimidation and murder of humanitarian
workers operating in crises and emergencies around the
world.
But condemnation is not enough. World leaders
formally acknowledged the responsibility to protect
populations at the 2005 World Summit, and it was
reaffirmed by the Security Council in its resolution
1674 (2006). Yet, these words have not adequately
been translated into action. We need to discuss in this
body what other concrete measures the United Nations
and the Security Council can take.
One such measure is the aide-memoire adopted
by the Council in 2002 (S/PRST/2002/6, annex) as a
tool to bridge the normative instruments this Council
develops and concrete action on the ground. In
particular, it has proven useful in the process of
formulating a peacekeeping mandate. This useful tool
should not be shelved; rather, it should continue to be
put to good use. And to be useful, it should be
reviewed and updated from time to time.
Proper monitoring in order to provide early
warning is another mechanism in place that contributes
to the protection of civilians. Also, timely briefings
from the officials responsible, including the Emergency
Relief Coordinator and the United Nations High
Commissioners for Refugees and for Human Rights,
should, therefore, be provided.

26

Secondly, we need to strengthen our efforts to
protect IDPs. We support the recommendation of the
High-level Panel on System-wide Coherence that the
humanitarian agencies should clarify their mandates
and enhance cooperation in this area. We also welcome
the start of informal consultations on humanitarian
issues this week. Japan for its part intends to
participate constructively in the discussion on this
subject in whichever forums it takes place, including
OCHA and the Executive Committee of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
Third is the question of ending impunity. The
question of how to strike the proper balance between
national reconciliation and punishment of those who
have done wrong, and also between peace and justice,
needs to be considered further. There can be no doubt,
however, that establishing the rule of law contributes
greatly to durable peace and to stability. Accordingly,
Japan has been taking initiatives in this field. It has
actively supported the Khmer Rouge Tribunal in
Cambodia, for example, and it welcomes the recent
important
progress
made
that
brings
the
commencement of the trial closer. Japan hopes that the
trial will proceed smoothly and with all due speed. To
that end, it is vital that the United Nations and Member
States continue to support Cambodia.
With regard to the International Criminal Court
(ICC), Japan has completed the necessary legislative
procedures so that it may participate in the ICC, and
my country plans to join the Court formally by the fall
of this year. In doing so, our hope will be that we can
contribute further to the prevention and even
eradication of many serious crimes and to
strengthening the rule of law and the maintenance of
peace and security.
Fourthly and lastly, I would like to underline the
importance of regional initiatives to ensure the
implementation of normative frameworks and
principles relating to the protection of civilians. It is
clear that the involvement of relevant regional
organizations is desirable and beneficial.
Accordingly, we welcome the regional conference
organized by OCHA in April in Dakar. We hope to be
able to work with OCHA to hold a similar conference
in Asia at an appropriate time.
In conclusion, all of the efforts of the
international community for the protection of civilian
must ultimately be judged by the number of people

07-39152

S/PV.5703

actually protected and saved. Any concrete action that
contributes to that ultimate objective should be
pursued, including removing anti-personnel mines,
ensuring the timely and sufficient delivery of food and
medical support to people in distress, exercising
maximum care to avoid civilian casualties in counterinsurgency operations and making political efforts to
end or contain conflicts. We are also concerned about
the humanitarian toll that can result from unexploded
cluster munitions. According priority to the framework
of the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons,
Japan will continue to constructively participate in the
discussion on this problem in various international
forums.
The protection of civilians must be the concern of
all Member States, and the Security Council should
therefore continue to act to provide the necessary
leadership and to monitor developments closely. I
assure you, Mr. President, that Japan will do its part.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to the representative of Argentina.
Mr. Argüello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, the Argentine delegation would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for having convened this open
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
We would also like to express our appreciation Mr.
John
Holmes,
Under-Secretary-General
for
Humanitarian Affairs
and
Emergency
Relief
Coordinator, for his briefing, to which we listened very
carefully.
Argentina attaches great importance to the
question of the protection of civilians in armed
conflicts. We had the honour of being a member of the
Security Council when resolutions 1265 (1999), 1296
(2000) and 1674 (2006) were negotiated and adopted.
Today, those resolutions constitute the legal regime in
that area. We understand that the effectiveness of the
Security Council in strengthening the protection of
civilians is one of the key areas in which international
public opinion evaluates the contribution of the
Council to the maintenance of international peace and
security.
As Mr. Holmes’s predecessor pointed out, the
responsibility to protect civilians in conflict is a central
principle of humanity, which must be depoliticized and
transformed into joint action on the part of Security
Council members and international organizations.

07-39152

The fact that, as regular Council assessments
have made clear, atrocities against civilians are
continuing leads us to consider the possibility of
adopting, in the case of certain conflicts, the measures
currently envisaged to deal with situations in which
States involved in conflict lack the political will or the
capacity to take effective action to protect civilians
affected by the crisis.
No national security considerations can prevail
over the obligation of States and other parties to a
conflict to comply with humanitarian law. Argentina
appreciates the work of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and United Nations
agencies regarding the protection of civilians,
including in the area of refugees and internally
displaced persons, as well as with respect to women,
children and other vulnerable groups, in the context of
armed conflict.
My country emphatically condemns attacks
against humanitarian personnel and would like to
express sincere condolences to the families and friends
of those who have so generously sacrificed their lives
while assisting people caught up in humanitarian
emergencies.
The responsibility of States to protect
humanitarian personnel and provide them with full,
unimpeded access to the civilian populations affected
is clearly established in current law and cannot be
denied under any circumstances.
Several years ago, the Security Council included
on its agenda the question of the protection of
civilians, and it has been establishing a legal regime in
that area. In that regard it has had at its disposal such
tools as the road map (see S/2001/614), the
aide-memoire (S/PRST/2002/6, annex) and the tenpoint platform (see S/PV.4877). Furthermore, it has
benefited from valuable suggestions for improving the
information mechanism for the protection of civilians.
It is now up to us to fully apply that framework.
Resolution 1674 (2006) must be implemented and
developed. The submission in October of the report of
the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians
provides OCHA with an opportunity to undertake a
detailed assessment of the international situation in that
area and to propose new ideas and approaches, as well
as specific actions to be taken, including on issues
regarding access by humanitarian personnel to
populations affected by conflict and the security of

27

S/PV.5703

journalists, other media professionals and associated
personnel.
In conclusion, we would like to express to
Mr. Holmes our gratitude and our best wishes as he
carries out his tasks, as well as our commitment to
continue supporting OCHA in this and other United
Nations bodies.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to the representative of Mexico.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): The
delegation of Mexico would like to express its
appreciation for the timely organization of this open
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
given the increasing number of civilian casualties in
various regions of the world as a result of either
collateral damage or deliberate military targeting by
groups or other actors in conflict.
As we hold this debate, hundreds of civilians are
dying in conflicts as diverse as those in Afghanistan,
the Democratic Republic of Congo, the Gaza Strip,
Iraq, Somalia and the Sudan — to mention just a few
of the most obvious examples widely covered by the
mass media.
In the context of such countless human losses, it
is the most vulnerable groups, including women and
children, who suffer the effects of armed conflicts.
Gender-based violence continues to be an issue of
particular concern, as is the fact that women are
victims of sexual abuse and that a large percentage of
the children recruited by militias are girls, who are also
victims of violence and forced labour.
Impunity prevails for those responsible for the
many atrocities committed against the civilian
population in the vast majority of armed conflicts,
given that all too frequently the perpetrators are never
brought to justice.
Not only does our Organization have a moral
responsibility to eradicate such practices, but, over the
past few years, it has also given itself the necessary
tools to do so. It is vital that the organized international
community send a clear message that it will not
tolerate disregard of the basic norms of international
humanitarian law or of human rights. My delegation
therefore believes that a comprehensive strategy should
be put in place to address the most important aspects so
as to ensure the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, on the basis of the following principles.

28

First, there must be respect for humanitarian law.
It is imperative that the Security Council and the
relevant regional organizations require the parties to
conflict to abide by the Geneva Conventions and their
Protocols, in particular the provisions of common
article 3, which already constitute customary law.
Secondly, with regard to strengthening the rule of
law and the fight against impunity, the creation of the
International
Criminal
Court
represents
an
unprecedented development because it complements
the efforts of national jurisdictions to bring to justice
those who commit crimes against humanity. The
Court’s success is intrinsically linked to the need to
prevent the recurrence of deliberate attacks against
civilian populations and to prevent that practice in
other conflicts. The strengthening of the Court has
been reflected in the increasing number of cases under
its consideration. We encourage the Security Council to
appeal to the Court whenever the particular conditions
of a conflict so justify.
Thirdly, with regard to the protection of
humanitarian personnel, violence against humanitarian
personnel constitutes a war crime and directly affects
civilians as it deprives them of the necessary assistance
for their survival and consequently increases their
suffering. In that regard, it is imperative that the
Council ensure that deliberate attacks against
humanitarian personnel in the field do not go
unpunished and that all parties to a conflict guarantee
the safe and unhindered access of humanitarian
personnel to affected civilian populations.
Fourthly, concerning the strengthening of
coordination and clear mandates, we must encourage
broader coordination within the United Nations
between the Department for Peacekeeping Operations
and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, and between those parts of the Secretariat and
regional organizations, in order to make the protection
of civilians in armed conflict a central objective of the
respective mandates. That also requires the provision
of the necessary resources and staff appropriately
trained to respond to the needs on the ground. In the
same way, the provisions of resolutions 1325 (2000)
and 1502 (2003), on women, peace and security and on
the protection of humanitarian personnel, respectively,
must be systematically integrated into all relevant
mandates provided for in resolutions on armed conflict
adopted by the Council.

07-39152

S/PV.5703

Fifthly, concerning the full implementation of the
10-point action plan, the plan was introduced by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and offers a comprehensive strategy to support the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. However, its
provisions constitute for the most part a declaration of
good intentions, given the few commitments by States
towards its implementation. Subjects such as the
international protection of internally displaced persons
and the proliferation of small arms and light weapons
in conflicts have not been sufficiently addressed by the
international community. Therefore, Mexico considers
it important that Member States carefully consider the
practical and tangible measures associated with the
implementation of the Action Plan.
One of the practical outcomes of the 2005
Summit was the adoption in the Outcome Document of
the principle of the responsibility of the international
community to protect populations from genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity.
Almost two years later, we have witnessed enormous
difficulties in the application of that principle in
concrete situations and in translating the spirit that led
to its adoption into actions that have a genuine impact
on the lives of hundreds of thousands of people. The
resolutions adopted on the situation in Darfur illustrate
the difficulties encountered in that respect and the
diplomatic inertia to which the Secretary-General
recently alluded in a press article.
We all know that the debate about the
responsibility to protect involves fundamental
principles of international law. Despite the consensus
reached in 2005, we cannot deny that an atmosphere of
mistrust prevails over that subject. While some States
see in the new principle the mere continuance of
interventionist policies aimed at destabilizing political
regimes, others promote its application in a selective
manner, limiting its scope to cases significant for their
foreign policy interests. For that reason, it is essential
that States commit to reaching new agreements that
give true content to such an important principle in an
objective and impartial manner.
One of the lessons learned from the atrocities of
the past decade in the Balkans and Rwanda, among
other conflicts, is that the United Nations must not
remain passive and indifferent when faced with
situations that threaten to become new humanitarian
tragedies — hence, the importance of strengthening the
response mechanisms of the United Nations in order to

07-39152

combat genocide and other crimes against humanity.
Clear rules must be defined, according to which the
Security Council would be able to authorize relevant
resolutions under Chapters VI or VII to act against
such crimes, while guaranteeing respect for
international law. That is a task of primary importance
for the General Assembly, in which the Mexican
delegation is ready to play an active role.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
Mr. Von Ungern-Sternberg (Germany): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union
(EU). Armenia, Iceland, Georgia, the former Republic
of Macedonia, Moldova, Serbia, Turkey and Ukraine
align themselves with this statement. I would like to
thank the President of the Security Council for the
opportunity to discuss this important issue. I would
also like to extend our appreciation to UnderSecretary-General
for
Humanitarian
Affairs,
Mr. John Holmes, for his very informative briefing.
The EU is deeply concerned about the growing
number of refugees and internally displaced persons
worldwide. Right now, we witness yet again the
tragedy in the Middle East. The European Union
welcomes the approval by the United Nations Central
Emergency Response Fund of nearly $6 million to
Palestinian refugees who are fleeing the fighting in and
around the Nahr El Bared refugee camp. The EU is
also pleased that, through contributions made by the
European Commission and some of its Member States
in their national capacity, further funds have been made
available. Overall, the Flash Appeal for $12.7 million
has been met.
Women, children and other vulnerable groups are
especially affected by armed conflict. Sexual
exploitation and abuse continue as widespread
atrocities affecting millions of victims. It is estimated,
for example, that 40 women are raped every day in
South Kivu. Such violence is not an inevitable
consequence of war, it needs to be prevented. Sexual
exploitation and abuse by peacekeeping personnel is
also unacceptable. The EU welcomes the zerotolerance policy that has been introduced by the United
Nations and has adopted the same in its own European
security and defence operations.
The illegal recruitment of child soldiers must end.
Currently, an estimated 300,000 child soldiers
participate in armed conflicts. Recently, we heard

29

S/PV.5703

alarming reports from Sri Lanka. But there are also
some encouraging developments: in the Sudan, the
Sudan Liberation Movement signed an agreement on
12 June to begin handing over children associated with
its armed groups. Previously, similar agreements led to
the release of several hundreds of former child soldiers
in Cote d’Ivoire. In the Republic of the Congo, United
Nations peacekeepers and the Congolese police
launched a six-month law-enforcement campaign to
improve the protection of children.
The growing number of journalists being killed is
also extremely disturbing. Just recently, UNESCO
voiced grave concern over the alarming increase in the
number of journalists who lost their lives in Iraq in the
last month. Security Council resolution 1738 (2006),
on the safety and security of journalists, media
professionals and associated personnel, has become
even more relevant. Equally disturbing is the number
of humanitarian personnel being killed. We strongly
condemn the recent killings of two workers of the
Lebanon Red Cross, of two Red Cross workers in Sri
Lanka, of two United Nations workers in Gaza, of a
member of Médecins Sans Frontières in the Central
African Republic, of a member of Caritas International
in Darfur and all other killings of humanitarian
personnel.
International standards for the protection of
civilians in armed conflicts are largely in place. On
8 June we celebrated the thirtieth anniversary of two
Additional Protocols to the Geneva Conventions of
1949 that are essential for strengthening the protection
of civilians Also, international human rights law
continues to be applicable in times of armed conflict.
At the 2005 World Summit, heads of State
established the responsibility to protect. The EU
welcomes the reaffirmation of that responsibility by the
Security Council in subsequent resolutions, including
resolution 1674 (2006).
Security Council resolution 1612 (2005)
establishes an enhanced framework for the protection
of children in armed conflict. The EU is currently
developing country-specific recommendations for its
actions in countries in which children are affected by
armed conflict. I would like to take this opportunity to
recall the important adoption, in February 2007, of the
Paris Commitments and Paris Principles against the
illegal recruitment of child soldiers.

30

International humanitarian law urges all parties to
allow full, unimpeded access by humanitarian
personnel to civilians in need of assistance.
Furthermore, all those concerned are encouraged to
make available all facilities necessary for the
operations of humanitarian United Nations and
associated personnel and for promoting the safety,
security and freedom of movement of such personnel.
The International Criminal Court, international
criminal tribunals and special courts, as well as
reconciliation commissions, are working to end
impunity. Ending impunity is essential if a society in
conflict or recovering from conflict is to come to terms
with past abuses.
In 2001, the United Nations adopted a
Programme of Action aimed at preventing, combating
and eradicating the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons. The proliferation and misuse of such
weapons constitute the primary cause of civilian
deaths. Under German chairmanship, the Group of
Interested States in Practical Disarmament Measures,
in New York, works closely with the United Nations to
identify support for States in their endeavours to
reduce and control such arms. In 2005, the EU adopted
its own strategy to combat their illicit accumulation
and trafficking.
Finally, we need to continue to strengthen these
standards and to ensure their full implementation. Let
me point out three areas of priority for international
action.
First, there must be worldwide recognition of
standards. The EU calls on Member States that have
not done so to ratify and support the existing
conventions and resolutions forming the legal
framework for the protection of civilians and to
implement them fully within their national legal
systems. The EU also calls upon all Member States to
abide by and support all resolutions relating to the
protection of civilians.
Secondly, there must be clear and sufficiently
robust Security Council mandates for peacekeeping
operations. As pointed out in resolution 1674 (2006),
mandates have to include provisions regarding the
protection of civilians within their zones of operation,
the facilitation of the provision of humanitarian access
and, finally, the creation of conditions conducive to the
voluntary, safe, dignified and sustainable return of
refugees and internally displaced persons. The EU

07-39152

S/PV.5703

strongly supports Under-Secretary-General Holmes’s
request for Council support in situations in which
access to humanitarian work is being denied. We also
agree that it might be useful to evaluate the practical
effects that the inclusion of language concerning the
protection of civilians has actually had on the ground.
Thirdly and finally, there must be prevention.
Civilian suffering should be prevented in the first
place. Early action in the case of simmering conflicts is
therefore critical. Timely briefings by the SecretaryGeneral, his Special Adviser on the Prevention of
Genocide, the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, the Emergency Relief Coordinator and
other relevant actors are extremely helpful in drawing
the attention of the international community to areas
where conflicts are prone to erupt.
The protection of civilians in armed conflict is a
complex task. The EU is fully committed to meeting
that challenge. In cooperation with the United Nations,
the EU continues its work for the promotion of peace
and the prevention of conflict so that, one day in the
future, human suffering can end.
Mrs. Eilon Shahar (Israel): At the outset, allow
me to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your able
stewardship of the Council during this month and to
thank you for convening this debate. I also wish to
thank Under-Secretary-General John Holmes for his
informative briefing and to congratulate him and the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs on
their important ongoing humanitarian work on the
ground.
Israel assigns vital importance to the protection
of civilians in armed conflict and is encouraged by the
continued efforts of the Security Council and the
Secretary-General and his staff in this area. We believe
that all individuals should live without fear of physical,
sexual, psychological or other forms of abuse, which
stem from or are aggravated by conflict. But, as
Mr. Holmes noted, lip service is easy; effective action
is much harder. Israel agrees, and I wish to share with
members our perspective on the matter.
A quick snapshot of conflicts around the world
reminds us of the almost daily violence committed
against civilians and of the failure of a number of
States to protect their civilians from such immediate
threats to life and security, triggered by forces of
extremism and instability. Sadly, it is primarily

07-39152

civilians who are caught in the crossfire, bearing the
tragic toll of casualties and victimhood.
Civilians are often exploited by their own
insurgents who intentionally and cynically choose to
operate from densely populated areas, in blatant
violation of the basic principle of the distinction
between combatants and civilians. The persistent
violence and the culture of impunity in Darfur have
contributed to the continuation of the dire situation in
which rape is used as a weapon of war and sexual and
gender-based violence are widespread, including in
camps for internally displaced persons. Perpetrators
should be brought to justice in accordance with
international law and the basic dictates of humanity,
and immediate humanitarian action should be
enhanced. In that regard, Israel hopes for an immediate
deployment of the African Union-United Nations
hybrid force to the region to ensure the protection of
civilians, who have been denied it for so long.
Similarly, the safety and access of humanitarian
personnel and journalists, who work as professional
independents, must be ensured. Humanitarian workers
provide essential services on the ground, and their vital
work must not be hampered. The rise in violence
directed at journalists and other associated personnel
was addressed by the Council last December in its
adoption of resolution 1738 (2006). The Council
rightfully took a strong stance in condemning the
intentional attacks against journalists, and parties in
conflict should be mindful of the obligations in this
area. Additionally, the masquerading of terrorists and
militants in the vehicles of journalists must be
forcefully condemned.
When sovereign States fail to govern responsibly
according to their duties under international law,
terrorists and other non-State actors seek to take
advantage of the void. We have witnessed that deeply
troubling phenomenon too many times in our region.
This past Sunday, in a moment of déjà vu, we saw
rockets once again launched directly at civilians in
northern Israel by terrorist factions in southern
Lebanon.
Moreover, the blatant disregard of terrorists for
the sanctity of human life is a brutal maliciousness that
we have seen, even among their own populations. The
abuse, manipulation and endangerment of civilians are
at the heart of terrorist thinking and tactics. In
Lebanon, Hizbullah stored its rockets inside homes and

31

S/PV.5703

launched attacks from positions nestled within the
fabric of civilian life and in proximity to places of
worship and hospitals. In the Gaza Strip, Palestinian
terrorists firing Qassam rockets use similar tactics. As
we see, terrorists groups such as Hizbullah and Hamas
share those tactics.
Additionally, in Gaza we have seen the violence
against Israel accompanied by intra-Palestinian
violence, with blatant disregard for the rights of
civilians caught amid the fighting of warring factions.
In this case, civilians are not merely used as shields to
mask acts of violence; in actual fact, they are
deliberately targeted.
The vigilance of the international community in
protecting civilians, particularly in cases where States
are not able to do so, must not wane. The international
community’s choice to deal with these situations could
save the lives of countless civilians.
To this effect, there should be greater focus on
timely and credible prevention measures, in addition to
restorative actions, in order to ensure that humanitarian
agencies can be effective in pursuing protection
concerns in the field. Effective action also requires
consistent follow-up. The Council must be proactive in
monitoring the implementation of these resolutions to
avert further crises stemming from State neglect.
Israel recognizes that it is the duty of all States,
first and foremost, to protect their civilians from all
harm. Equally important is the obligation of all States
to ensure that attacks are not launched from their own
sovereign territory.
Failure to hold accountable terrorist groups, as
well as those States which provide safe haven and
refuge for them, will only encourage extremists to
increase their abuse and manipulation.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to the representative of Nigeria.
Mr. Wali (Nigeria): Mr. President, my delegation
appreciates your initiative to convene this debate on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict, especially
at a time when, in spite of the unwavering efforts of the
international community to douse conflicts in our
society, new cases are rapidly evolving while
expectations of dealing decisively with those already
ongoing are becoming disappointingly wishful. We
also thank Mr. John Holmes, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief

32

Coordinator, for his comprehensive briefing on this
subject.
We believe that the time has come for the
international community to re-examine when it is its
responsibility to protect civilians, without prejudice to
the sovereignty of Member States. The genocide in
Rwanda, the ethnic cleansing in Bosnia and the crimes
committed against unarmed civilians in areas of
conflict, especially in Africa, serve as a constant
reminder that we have to seek a generally acceptable
understanding when the international community
exercises its responsibility to protect.
We expect that Member States will use this
opportunity to reflect and exchange views on the
precarious situation of, and daunting challenges facing,
unarmed civilians in conflict situations. We
acknowledge the fact that non-combatant civilians are
increasingly the first fatalities of, and bear the burdens
imposed by, armed conflicts, whose causes are usually
not of their own making.
In that regard, not only do untimely deaths result
from deliberate armed attacks by contending parties
seeking to carry out reprisals, but the social, cultural
and economic lives of such non-combatant non-parties
to conflicts — which include the aged, women,
children and youths — are, unfortunately, adversely
affected. Civilians often become pawns in this deadly
game, which neither has rules nor respects the dignity
of persons.
It is inhuman, to state the obvious, that the heavy
burdens which conflicts impose on civilians include
denial of access to medical care. The situation is even
more precarious for people with disabilities, those
afflicted with age-related discomforts and others with
serious diseases, who, along with the healthy, must
endure the burdens associated with refugee status
within and outside their countries.
It is therefore the belief of my delegation that this
open debate will help the international community to
focus attention principally on the urgent task of
protecting and safeguarding civilians wherever
conflicts erupt.
In that regard, Nigeria welcomes the increased
capacity of the African Union to forestall and resolve
armed conflicts and protect civilians in war situations
through its Peace and Security Council. We also
welcome the valuable extension of logistical support

07-39152

S/PV.5703

from the United States of America and the European
Union to the African Union Peacekeeping Operations
in the Darfur region of the Sudan.
We appreciate the renewed United NationsAfrican Union partnership aimed at identifying specific
cases in which the United Nations could, as a matter of
improving the African capacity for peace operations,
assist the African Union with capacity-building
requirements, including in the area of monitoring the
conduct of parties to conflicts.
Condemnation by States Members of the United
Nations of rape and sexual assault against women, as
well as expressions of outrage by human rights
advocates as a whole directed at the enlistment of child
soldiers into combat, are a veritable and useful means
of protecting civilians in conflict situations.
My delegation believes that the expansion of the
scope and definition of war crimes and crimes against
humanity to include rape, enforced prostitution,
trafficking, enslavement and torture has resulted in an
increase in the number of persons brought before the
International Tribunals for acts committed against
civilians in the course of armed conflicts.
In order to strengthen those laudable initiatives,
in particular those already embarked upon by the
international community aimed at bringing succour to
hapless civilians caught up in the tragic consequences
of events they have hardly provoked or facilitated, my
delegation further wishes to urge those States that have
not done so to adopt, ratify or codify in their national
laws the various conventions and protocols on the law
of armed conflicts and to ensure the implementation of
their provisions. That calls for a more results-oriented
strengthening of legal frameworks and mechanisms for
monitoring and reporting attacks against civilians by
States and non-State actors.
My delegation wishes to re-emphasize that
another way of protecting civilians from the ravages of
armed conflict is through conflict prevention.
Experience has shown that it costs less to prevent
conflicts than to control them. Within the West African
subregion, for instance, in the context of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS),
Nigeria has been steadily coordinating initiatives with
other member States of the Community in bringing
about the peaceful resolution of conflicts within and
among the member States and other States contiguous
to Nigeria. It makes tremendous positive sense to

07-39152

prevent the civilian casualties that would result were
the parties to resort to war.
Unfortunately, conflicts are the inevitable
consequence of the diversity of human behaviour. We
should therefore always expect them and continue to
mainstream civilian protection into United Nations
regional peacekeeping operations. More importantly,
we should tackle their root causes of conflicts with a
spirit of openness, mutual compromise and give and
take. By doing so, we can provide rest to the weary,
daylight to the discouraged and sunshine to the sad —
nature’s best antidote for trouble.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to the representative of Canada.
Mr. McNee (Canada): I am pleased to speak
today on behalf of Canada, Australia and New Zealand
(CANZ).
Let me first thank Under-Secretary-General
Holmes, the Emergency Relief Coordinator, for his
very helpful presentation earlier today. His leadership
as an advocate for the protection of the displaced and
dispossessed is more critical than ever before. We also
wish to express our thanks to Belgium for having
convened this important debate today.
The protection of civilians is not simply an
abstract or theoretical debate for the Security Council.
Rather, it remains an essential objective in the context
of contemporary conflict. The death and displacement
of men, women and children is a deliberate objective
of warring parties and terrorist groups. Girls and boys
are recruited as combatants; civilians become
unwitting targets of suicide bombers; families are
displaced from their homes; sexual violence is a
deliberate weapon of war; and civilian infrastructure
and economies are often shattered.
The consequences of such actions play out daily
in the Darfur region of the Sudan and in Afghanistan,
Iraq, northern Uganda, Lebanon, Somalia and Sri
Lanka, to name just a few. The Council’s focus,
therefore, on ways in which it can effectively respond
to protection challenges remains critical.
CANZ applauds the role that the Council has
played to advance international understanding of
protection issues and international action on behalf of
people at risk. The Council’s decisions, in both
thematic and country-specific resolutions, have made
clear that the plight of civilians must be addressed

33

S/PV.5703

effectively as part of any comprehensive international
response. But it is vitally important that we continue to
bridge the gap between words and deeds.
In Darfur and in Chad, for example, we all have
seen an escalation of violence in recent months. CANZ
partners condemn the persistent culture of impunity
and the increasing attacks on civilians, African Union
and United Nations personnel, and humanitarian
workers perpetrated by all parties to the conflict. The
situation is further compounded by the obstacles to
humanitarian access which continue to be imposed by
the Government of the Sudan.
We are encouraged by the Government of the
Sudan’s acceptance of the AU-United Nations hybrid
operation and urge all parties to implement an effective
ceasefire and facilitate the rapid implementation of that
force, which should include a robust mandate for the
protection of civilians. We also urge the Sudan to take
measures to prevent further violations of human rights,
to ensure that perpetrators are brought to justice in
accordance with international law, and to facilitate
urgently needed humanitarian assistance to vulnerable
populations.
CANZ joins other delegations in calling upon the
Government of the Sudan to cooperate with the
International Criminal Court. Steps must be taken
immediately to secure the arrest and appearance of two
named suspects before the Court. We call on the
Council to ensure full implementation of existing
resolutions, including resolution 1591 (2005), which
stipulates that the Sudan must cease conducting
offensive military flights over Darfur, and we call upon
all parties to the conflict immediately to cease
hostilities and actively seek a political solution under
AU and United Nations leadership.
In places such as Afghanistan, non-State actors
continue to deliberately target civilians, including aid
workers. Respect for international humanitarian law
and the protection of civilians must remain the priority
of the international community. Our resolve to augment
civilian protection in the face of such violence must
not wane.
Insurgents, warlords and criminals continue to
terrorize and victimize civilian populations. In the face
of that, CANZ partners are encouraged by the efforts of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) to adopt more strategic and coherent
approaches to civilian protection. Ongoing planning by

34

UNAMA and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) to convene a protection
of civilians workshop can help create a better
understanding of the protection challenges Afghans
face and of how actors on the ground can work
together better. Clear and mutually reinforcing
protection strategies remain an important element of
the international efforts to assist Afghanistan in
achieving long-term stability and security.
Identifying and addressing the needs of the most
vulnerable, ensuring that State and non-State actors
fulfil their responsibilities towards affected populations
and are held accountable when they do not, and
developing the tools and strategies needed to help
guide international responses stand out as key
challenges. There are, however, no quick fixes to those
complex problems, but there are practical actions that
all Member States can support and where long-term
Council leadership is required. I would like to
highlight three areas in which strategic and mutually
reinforcing investments must be made as part of an
international protection strategy.
First is enhancing the evidence base. The 2005
report of the Secretary-General noted that future
reports on the protection of civilians would ensure a
greater emphasis on empirical information to reflect
the effect of conflict on the quality of life and
wellbeing
of
civilian
populations.
CANZ
wholeheartedly supports that approach. We look
forward to an indication of progress in the SecretaryGeneral’s next protection of civilians report in
December.
Monitoring and reporting activities can provide
reliable data which assist the Council, in partnership
with other actors, to respond to crises with the right
tools and in a timely manner. In that regard, and
speaking for a moment in my national capacity, let me
say that my delegation warmly welcomes the call made
this morning by John Holmes for a comprehensive
assessment of the impact of protection of civilians
mandates on the ground, as well as his proposal more
systematically to track instances of internationally
restricted humanitarian access and to create an
incident-reporting mechanism so that Council members
are informed in real time of cases of gravest concern.
CANZ acknowledges, however, that it is risky to
collect and report on violations in the field — both for
the collectors of that information and for victims. It

07-39152

S/PV.5703

can have implications for humanitarian access to
affected populations and it can put the safety of United
Nations and associated personnel at greater risk of
violence. Thus, for monitoring and reporting
mechanisms to be sustainable, the Council must be
willing to act decisively on the reports it receives and
demonstrate that there will be no impunity for attacks
against civilian populations.
A second point is that monitoring and reporting
can be truly effective only if civilian and military
actors have sufficient knowledge of and experience in
addressing protection concerns and priorities. Resident
and humanitarian coordinators, special representatives
of the Secretary-General, and military and civilian
personnel deployed as part of international peace
support operations all need to understand their roles
and responsibilities and the tools at their disposal if
they are to ensure that protection needs are being
addressed.
Finally, in resolution 1674 (2006) on the
protection of civilians, the Council stressed the
importance of developing clear guidelines for civilian
protection mandates. CANZ urges OCHA and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations to make
progress in that area and to update Member States on
how resolution 1674 (2006) is being implemented in
the next Secretary-General’s report. Resolution 1674
(2006) also refers to the Council’s unique
responsibility to protect civilians from the most acute
threats to their personal security — genocide, war
crimes and crimes against humanity — including
through enforcement action under Chapter VII.
Operationalizing the concept of the responsibility to
protect must be the focus of further work by the
Council.
(spoke in French)
In conclusion, when it comes to the protection of
civilians, transforming international legal norms into
practice and commitments into action is no easy task.
We must therefore be prepared to work diligently and
over the long term to achieve those ends. Critical to
that effort will be our capacity to maintain momentum
within the most senior levels of the United Nations and
within the Council to keep this issue at the front and
centre of our work. Later this year, the SecretaryGeneral will report to the Council on the protection of
civilians. The report will be an important tool to ensure
that our collective momentum is maintained and to

07-39152

promote tangible and practical strategies to address
emerging protection challenges.
Collectively, we must ensure that populations at
risk have access at all times to the greatest protection
possible, that perpetrators of abuse will be held
accountable for their actions, and that advocacy,
monitoring and capacity-building deliver real results
and make a positive difference in people’s lives. This
Council, and indeed the international community as a
whole, will be judged on its ability to protect the most
vulnerable. It is a challenge that we simply must meet.
Mr. Ritter (Liechtenstein): The formal
recognition in the World Summit Outcome of the
responsibility of the international community to protect
civilian populations when their Governments fail to do
so constitutes a major breakthrough in our common
endeavour to prevent genocide, war crimes and crimes
against humanity.
The main obligation for its implementation
naturally falls on the Security Council. Diplomatic
means such as targeted sanctions and embargoes, used
in an effective way, should be employed at an early
stage when violations against civilians prevail to signal
the concern of the international community and to
serve as a first step to protect. Collective action to
prevent and respond to genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes must not be made impossible
by a non-concurring vote of one of the permanent
members of the Council. That principle was first
proposed by the High-Level Panel established in
preparation of the World Summit of 2005 and has been
taken up in the proposals on the working methods of
the Security Council presented to the General
Assembly last year that were prepared by the group of
five small nations, to which we belong.
The rest of the United Nations membership also
has a role to play in making the responsibility to
protect operational, in that they can bring situations to
the attention of the Security Council in open debates
and through other means, such as consideration in the
General Assembly. Furthermore, article 8 of the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide allows any contracting party to call
upon the competent organs of the United Nations to
take appropriate action.
The decision of the 2005 Summit is
complementary to earlier resolutions of the General
Assembly, such as Assembly resolution 46/182, which

35

S/PV.5703

stresses the primary, although not exclusive,
responsibility of national authorities to protect their
own populations. The principle of the responsibility to
protect reaffirms that primary responsibility and
complements it with the role of the international
community when that responsibility is not met. That
resolution also calls upon all States whose populations
are in need of humanitarian assistance to facilitate the
safe access of humanitarian actors to such people. All
too often, that fundamental principle is neglected.
Humanitarian access to the vulnerable is a vital
stepping stone to the protection of civilians in armed
conflict.
Where national authorities are unable or
unwilling to ensure that such access is granted and
respected, the Security Council must step in to create
and maintain the operational space needed by
humanitarian actors to provide assistance. In many
situations, security is so precarious that humanitarian
workers remain at considerable risk of violence. That is
where the role of the Security Council in defining and
facilitating the tasks and capacity of peacekeepers is
crucial. At the same time, wider acceptance of the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Safety of
United Nations and Associated Personnel, which
provides for substantial expansion of the scope of legal
protection for such personnel, is urgently needed.
International protection for civilians, whether by
peacekeepers or humanitarian workers, can only be an
interim response. Without political solutions, civilians
continue to suffer and humanitarian workers are faced
with open-ended displacement. Liechtenstein supports
the idea of strengthening the mediation capacities of
the Department of Political Affairs. The early use of
the Secretary-General’s good offices can be an
important tool for a comprehensive preventive
approach to the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. We consider mediation to be a core activity of
the United Nations, in accordance with its purposes
and principles.
An unequivocal and firm stance by the Security
Council that there will be no impunity for the
deliberate targeting of civilian populations would have
a strong deterrent effect in any situation, and thus also
serve as a very useful prevention tool. Prevention is
indeed a key aspect of the protection of civilians.
Preventive action can, however, be effective only if it
is made clear that abuses against civilian populations,
which are often carried out against their most

36

vulnerable members, in particular women and children,
are violations of international law that will not go
unpunished.
In that context, Liechtenstein wholeheartedly
welcomes the first convictions for the recruitment and
use of child soldiers rendered by the Special Court for
Sierra Leone. That constitutes another significant step
in the area of international criminal justice, which has
expanded very rapidly, and is one of the most
important developments in international relations over
the past two decades. That historic judgement also
strengthens the role of the Security Council its fight
against impunity. We believe that the International
Criminal Court (ICC) must play the central role in the
efforts of the international community to end impunity
and hope that the Security Council will give its full
support to the ICC in that respect.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Choi Young-jin (Republic of Korea): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening today’s
open debate on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. This issue is indeed a major concern of the
international community, especially in an era when
intra-State conflicts stemming from ethnic, religious
and cultural differences have become more frequent
and more common than ever. My appreciation also
goes to Mr. John Holmes, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, for his comprehensive
presentation on this important issue.
Since the introduction of the topic of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict into the
Security Council in 1999, progress has been made on
this issue. In particular, the adoption of resolution 1674
(2006) last year was a significant step forward,
reinforcing the legal framework established by
previous resolutions on the subject. Despite the
continued efforts of the United Nations, however, it
remains a sad reality that civilians continue to bear the
brunt of armed conflict and terrorism. The world still
continues to witness massive human rights violations,
unconscionable violence and brutal killings. In both
international and civil conflicts, the international
community today has become increasingly aware of its
responsibility to protect civilian populations.
My delegation would like to emphasize three
issues that we believe are particularly important to the
protection of civilians: conflict prevention, the

07-39152

S/PV.5703

development of a specific mechanism for the
protection of civilians in each armed conflict and the
elimination of the culture of impunity.
Needless to say, the best way to protect civilians
from the dangers of armed conflict is to prevent armed
conflicts from erupting. It is therefore of the utmost
importance to develop a broad strategy for conflict
prevention that addresses the root causes of armed
conflict. In dealing with these causes, the question of
good governance should be a critical concern for the
international community. Any strategy for prevention
will also need to be based on solid analysis of both
ongoing and newly emerging situations that have the
potential to develop into armed conflict. The Security
Council has a significant role to play in this regard.
Secondly, while a generalized approach is
needed, we are of the view that because each conflict is
unique, the Council should develop a mechanism for a
case-by-case analysis for the protection of civilians. A
specific mechanism should be in place to analyse the
particular characteristics of each armed conflict and
develop an individualized approach to the protection of
civilians. In our view, to be effective, such a
mechanism would require a strong system of
information-sharing among all relevant actors,
including peacekeepers and humanitarian nongovernmental organizations on the ground.
Thirdly, to deter the recurrence of crimes against
innocent civilians, the culture of impunity must be
brought to an end. The establishment and operation of
the International Criminal Court, the International
Criminal Tribunals for the Former Yugoslavia and
Rwanda and the Special Court for Siena Leone have
great significance in this regard. Also crucial to ending
impunity is providing assistance for judicial capacitybuilding in war-torn societies, with a view to ensuring
that law and order are restored.
Today’s topic, the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, is a current and compelling security concern
that requires coordinated multilateral action from the
international community. We are still distant from
translating our responsibility to protect into adequate
action. Beleaguered communities still suffer. It is
therefore important that we build upon the progress
already made and strengthen our efforts to achieve a
more secure and orderly world in which every human
being is respected and protected within a culture of
peace.

07-39152

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Rwanda.
Mr. Nsengimana (Rwanda): The Rwanda
delegation commends you, Mr. President, for
convening this important open debate of the Security
Council to discuss the issue of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. We would like to join other
delegations
in
expressing
our
thanks
to
Mr. John Holmes,
Under-Secretary-General
for
Humanitarian Affairs
and
Emergency
Relief
Coordinator, for his briefing.
The Rwanda Government condemns in the
strongest terms the deliberate targeting of civilians in
conflict. Rwanda fully supports Security Council
resolutions on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. The most serious crimes in situations of
conflict are committed against poor, defenceless and
voiceless people, often living in remote locations far
from the sight of the international community and the
media.
It is for such people that the implementation of
resolutions 1674 (2006) and 1738 (2006) is most
urgent. Despite these resolutions, and despite the
endorsement by all States at the 2005 World Summit of
the principles of the “responsibility to protect”, which
my Government strongly supports, too many people
continue to suffer unspeakable horrors in situations of
armed conflict. It is clear that much more needs to be
done, particularly by this Security Council, which is
the
Charter-mandated
body
responsible
for
international peace and security.
We believe that our common humanity should
unite us in the resolve to put an end to the suffering of
millions of people who live in, and are threatened by,
situations of conflict. This resolve entails national
Governments taking full responsibility to protect
civilians, and, where they are unable or unwilling to do
so, the international community acting through the
Security Council to take appropriate steps to provide
such protection. It is essential that, in taking such
actions, the Security Council be seen as consistent and
just, acting in the best interests of the international
community, and that it show special concern for those
who are most defenceless and vulnerable and most in
need of protection from the international community. It
was, after all, to protect such defenceless people that,
in the aftermath of the Holocaust, the United Nations
and its Security Council were established.

37

S/PV.5703

Let the 1994 genocide in Rwanda, and other
similar situations, serve as a lesson that when the
United Nations, and specifically the Security Council,
fails to take appropriate, timely and decisive action to
provide protection for people under threat, the
consequences are catastrophic.
Finally, we would once again point out that the
Interahamwe militia, which was responsible for the
1994 genocide in Rwanda, remains active in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
where they continue to terrorize, murder and rape
innocent civilians with impunity. It is inexplicable that,
13 years after the Rwanda genocide, and despite the
numerous commitments of the international community
to prevent and combat genocide and to protect civilians
in armed conflict, this force continues to kill innocent
civilians. The presence in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo of the largest
peacekeeping force in history has equally failed to
address this problem. We call upon this Council to
address the issue urgently.
The President: I now call on the representative
of Myanmar.
Mr. Wai (Myanmar): Mr. President, I wish to
thank you for giving me the opportunity to participate
in today’s open debate on this important subject. I
would also like to thank the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. John Holmes, for his
comprehensive briefing this morning.
Armed conflict breeds a cycle of violence and
brings untold suffering to innocent civilians. Armed
conflict is exacerbated by the easy availability of illicit
small arms and light weapons. Every year, some
300,000 civilians are killed by small arms and light
weapons in armed conflict. Every day, some 1,400
civilians die in armed conflict because of the easy
availability of small arms and light weapons. One of
the most effective ways to protect civilians in armed
conflict is to have a legally binding international
instrument prohibiting the illicit trade of small arms
and light weapons with non-State actors.
The United Nations Security Council adopted
resolution 1674 (2006), which condemns in the
strongest terms all acts of violence or abuse committed
against civilians in situations of armed conflict.
Myanmar joins the international community in
condemning all such acts. We are in full sympathy with
victims of armed conflict in various parts of the world,

38

because we ourselves have gone through the bitter
experience of insurgent groups committing atrocities
against our civilian population.
Soon after attaining independence, Myanmar had
to face numerous insurgencies. Until recently, there
were 18 insurgent groups in the jungle. My country
continues to face a situation where the insurgents
deliberately target civilians. Throughout the various
periods of the insurgency, our civilian population has
suffered much at the hands of the insurgents.
I wish once again to stress our strong belief that
the most efficient way to protect civilians in armed
conflict is to resolve the root causes and bring armed
conflict to an end. Therefore, the Myanmar
Government has embarked on a national reconciliation
process and has been successful in bringing 17 out of
the 18 insurgent groups back to the legal fold. As a
result, some 100,000 former armed insurgents are no
longer fighting against the Government. The only
major armed group left is the Kayin National Union
(KNU). The Government continues to invite the KNU
insurgents to come back to the legal fold.
In the past, we encountered difficulties in our
discussions with the KNU because of some outside
interference that hindered the peace process. However,
we are gratified that, as a result of the Government’s
continued efforts to bring about national reconciliation,
we were able to reach a peace agreement with an
important faction of the KNU/Karen National
Liberation Army (KNLA) in February 2007. Led by the
Chairman of the KNU/KNLA Peace Council, 320
members returned to the legal fold after the successful
conclusion of peace negotiations. The Government will
continue its endeavours to negotiate with the remaining
faction of the KNU to return to the legal fold, to join
hands with the local populace in developing their
region.
We
categorically
reject
the
groundless
accusations that the Government targets the civilian
population. Even with respect to the insurgents, we
conduct counter-insurgency operations only against
those KNU elements that engage in terrorist activities.
In the Kayin state, where the KNU has not conducted
its insurgent activities, the Government does not
conduct counter-insurgency campaigns. It is only
towards those elements of the KNU and the self-styled
Shan State Army South who are carrying out terrorist
activities against civilians that the Government

07-39152

S/PV.5703

conducts military operations. We will not tolerate
terrorism under any guide or pretext; nor should
anyone else do so.
We continue to strongly believe that a
comprehensive approach aimed at promoting economic
growth, eradicating poverty and bringing about
sustainable development and national reconciliation
would go a long way towards putting an end to armed
conflict. Based on that conviction, the Government
has, in the past decade, spent more than 97.69 billion
kyats and more than $550 million to develop the border
areas where most of our ethnic nationalities reside.
The Myanmar Government will also do its
national duty to protect its citizens and to bring peace,
stability and prosperity to the country.
The President: I invite the representative of
Colombia to take the floor.
Ms. Blum (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like at the outset to convey to you, Sir, my
delegation’s appreciation for the work that you have
been carrying out as President of the Security Council
for this month. We would like also to thank Mr. John
Holmes, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, for his
briefing.
International humanitarian law, including the
Fourth Geneva Convention and its two Additional
Protocols, establishes clear provisions with regard to
the protection of civilians, the issue the Council is
considering today. The Government of Colombia
shares the concerns expressed with regard to violations
of those norms and reiterates its firm commitment to
them.
In that connection, we would like also to stress
several aspects of the issue. In keeping with the
Charter of the United Nations and the provisions of
international humanitarian law, Governments bear
primary responsibility to protect civilians, while
United Nations agencies and other international
community actors can provide support for the
implementation of existing provisions. That should be
done in keeping with State sovereignty and in
accordance with guidelines provided by the
Government in question. In that respect, it is important
to draw a clear distinction between the protection of
civilians and the provision of humanitarian assistance.

07-39152

Colombia appreciates the work done by the
United Nations agencies in the area of humanitarian
assistance, and we stress the importance of such work
being carried out on the basis of the principles of
impartiality, neutrality, humanity and independence.
That will enable us to guarantee the humanitarian
character of any operation of that type. We would like
also to underline the importance of prevention-related
activities as the most effective way of protecting
populations. Efforts to that end should focus on
providing such populations with a favourable and
secure environment so that they can improve their
living conditions.
My delegation likewise wishes to make a few
comments with regard to the reference to Colombia in
the statement made by the Under-Secretary-General,
referring to situations in which civilians have been the
deliberate targets of acts of violence, resulting in a
climate of fear and in destabilization. With respect to
Colombia, my delegation would like to make it clear
that reference must be made to situations in which
crimes were committed by violent groups acting on the
margins of the law. In his briefing, the UnderSecretary-General
referred
to
assassinations,
disappearances and other violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law committed by
armed persons, without making it clear exactly to
which actors he was referring. This should not be
understood as alluding to the legitimate armed forces
of the Colombian State, which are working daily to
improve the security and stability of the country and to
protect the population from the criminal acts of violent
groups.
As we have stated in the Council on previous
occasions, specific incidents of violence have been
caused by illegal armed groups, financed by illicit
activities such as drug trafficking, and have claimed
civilian victims. My Government, which was
democratically elected, remains firmly committed to
the promotion of comprehensive policies aimed at
restoring security throughout our national territory.
Since 2002 those policies have enabled us to reduce
criminality across the board and to bring about stability
and trust and create new conditions conducive to the
effective protection of the population.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
once again to Mr. Holmes to respond to comments
made.

39

S/PV.5703

Mr. Holmes: I shall be brief, given the hour. I
have listened very carefully to the debate and to all the
comments that have been made, and I welcome, above
all, the commitment to this agenda of the protection of
civilians; the recognition, I think, by all speakers of the
need to do more to turn our words into deeds now and
in future; and the general recognition that we need to
be even more proactive than we have been in the past,
not least in the field of conflict prevention.
I should like also to take this opportunity to thank
all those speakers who have paid tribute and
recognition — here I am speaking on behalf of the
humanitarian community as a whole — to
humanitarian workers in the field, and the recognition
of the sacrifices that they have to make, including, on
too many occasions, the ultimate sacrifice.
Let me reassure those who have raised the point
that, of course, I fully recognize the distinction
between the deliberate targeting of civilians and other
actions which result in civilian deaths. There is, of
course, a heavy obligation on the part of those who are
using force in areas where civilian populations are
present to do everything possible to avoid those
civilian deaths. Let me add that I also take full note of
the statement made just now by the representative of
Colombia.
Let me thank several Member States for the
support they gave to the ideas that I put forward in a
preliminary way with regard to taking a more
systematic look in the future at the effect of the
inclusion of protection concerns in peacekeeping
mandates and what effect those have had on the
situation on the ground and, similarly, to looking
systematically and regularly at cases of denial of
access for humanitarian workers, which, as many
speakers have commented, is a fundamental point if we
are going to do our job of attempting to protect
civilians. I will look at how we can take these ideas
further.
I have also taken note of, and we will follow up
on, other suggestions that were made during the
debate, including some for the next report of the
Secretary-General, in October.
I note in particular: the suggestion by the
representative of Canada, speaking on behalf of
Australia and New Zealand as well, regarding a better
evidence base to enable us to measure progress towards
protection objectives; the idea of looking at how far we

40

are succeeding in implementing resolution 1674 (2006)
on the protection of civilians; the idea of an annex to
the Secretary-General’s report precisely on issues of
access, which I have already mentioned; and the
suggestion that the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations should cooperate even more
closely than we do already on the question of
peacekeeping mandates to ensure that protection
concerns are fully included — and let me assure the
Council that that cooperation is already extremely
good.
The representative of Japan suggested that there
could be an updating of the aide-memoire adopted by
the Council on the protection of civilians. I think that is
a good suggestion which we might try to take up,
perhaps during 2008. There was also a suggestion, I
think by the representative of the Republic of Korea,
that there should be a specific mechanism to look at
how we deal with the protection of civilians in each
particular conflict — to look at the specificities of each
case. I agree that that is a suggestion worth taking up.
Several speakers referred to the importance of the
role of regional organizations in the protection of
civilians. I agree that that role is important — and,
indeed, increasingly important. I pay tribute to the
efforts of the African Union and the Economic
Community of West African States to recognize the
importance of the protection of civilians in their
political reconciliation efforts in various conflicts in
Africa. I think the cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union in this area is
increasingly important for the future; it was recognized
as such in the recent agreement. As one or two
speakers mentioned, we held a high-level conference in
Dakar this year, on capacity-building precisely for
these kinds of objectives. We would certainly be
willing to repeat that in other regions.
Several delegations referred to the current
humanitarian issues in Gaza. I fully recognize the
seriousness of the humanitarian situation in Gaza. We,
together with our representatives on the ground, the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, the Office of the United
Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process and others, are making every effort to ensure
that the crossings can be opened as soon as possible.
Without full opening of the crossings, in particular the
Karni crossing, we face the possibility of a

07-39152

S/PV.5703

humanitarian crisis in Gaza in a few weeks’ time
because of lack of food and lack of medical supplies.
Some supplies are getting through at the moment, but
they are certainly not sufficient to deal with the
problem. We are fully focused on that, and I can assure
the Council that we will do our best to make sure that
we can resolve those issues quickly.
Several
representatives
mentioned
the
responsibility to protect and the agreement on that at
the 2005 World Summit. Delegations mentioned it in
different ways, which perhaps illustrates the
complexity of this debate and the complexity of the
discussion we face on how to implement the
responsibility to protect. This is a debate which we
clearly need to continue, and it will be continued this
year, as already promised. I think my only comment
would be that, in debating this issue, we should not
focus too exclusively on the possible actions of last
resort in the responsibility to protect. There are many
stages before that in helping countries to exercise their
responsibility to protect their own civilians.

07-39152

Finally, let me just repeat that I think it is clear
from the debate that this is an issue of great concern to
many Member States, and justifiably so. I take away
the message that we need to go on looking for new
ways to take effective action to protect civilians in
armed conflict. As several members pointed out, this is
an important criterion for judgement of the efficacy of
the Security Council itself. Of course, it was very
useful to have a reminder from the representative of
Rwanda of what it is we want to make sure to avoid in
the future.
Let me conclude by saying that I recognize my
own responsibility in this area and that I will do my
best to fulfil it.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Holmes for the clarifications he has provided.
There are no further speakers on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 2.05 p.m.

41
