United Nations

S/PV.5319 (Resumption 1)

Security Council

Provisional

Sixtieth year

5319

th meeting
Friday, 9 December 2005, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Thomson/Sir Emyr Jones Parry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (United Kingdom)

Members:

Algeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Benin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Greece . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Philippines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Romania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Republic of Tanzania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Baali
Mr. Mayoral
Mr. Zinsou
Mr. Queiroz
Mr. Li Song
Mr. Rehfeld
Mr. Duclos
Mrs. Telalian
Ms. Okagaki
Miss Aguinaldo
Mr. Stamate
Mr. Rogachev
Mrs. Taj
Mr. Wolf

Agenda
The protection of civilians in armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2005/740)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

05-63532 (E)

*0563532*

S/PV.5319 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.10 p.m.
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Rwanda in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kamanzi
(Rwanda) took the seat reserved for him at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President: I would like to remind speakers
that, as indicated at the start of the meeting this
morning and given the number of speakers still on the
list, it would be helpful if representatives would limit
their statements to no more than five minutes so that
we can wrap up at a reasonable time this afternoon.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate them in writing and to deliver a
condensed version when speaking in the Chamber. A
condensed version is considerably preferable to simply
reading a full text at very high speed, which gives the
interpreters a lot of grief and is not fair to them.
Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): The legal
arsenal of international humanitarian and human rights
law and the now constant and sustained interest of the
United Nations system in general, and the Security
Council in particular, in the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, provide real assurances that this
extremely complicated question will be dealt with in an
effective, comprehensive and integrated manner.
Progress has certainly been made since the
publication of the first report of the Secretary-General
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict. The
mandates of peacekeeping operations have been
reinforced, and in many cases disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes have
been implemented.
We must recognize, however, that much remains
to be done. Recent events have been a cause for
concern in many respects. Women, children and the
elderly are continuing to suffer from the devastating

2

effects of armed conflict. The displacement of civilians
and refugees, serious violations of human rights, the
use of sexual violence as a weapon of war, the
conscription of child soldiers, crime in all of its forms,
the proliferation of small arms and light weapons,
cross-border movements, the difficulty of delivering
emergency humanitarian assistance and attacks against
humanitarian personnel are characteristic of many of
the conflicts besetting the world. We must approach the
protection of civilians in armed conflict with a
heightened sense of urgency and in a comprehensive,
coherent and concrete manner.
In this context, we would like to emphasize a
number of points. First, a far-reaching prevention
strategy to tackle the underlying causes of conflict
would make it possible to provide for the protection of
civilians in the long term. Such a strategy would be
based on the promotion of sustainable development,
poverty eradication, national reconciliation, good
governance, the promotion of a culture of peace and
tolerance, the rule of law and the observance of human
rights. That is what we mean by a culture of
prevention.
Secondly, the protection of civilians must comply
with the principles of universality and non-selectivity,
and must be free from political calculation.
Unfortunately, there are situations in which the
humanitarian community is doing little or nothing, as
in the case of peoples under foreign or colonial
occupation — even though the United Nations bears a
special political and legal responsibility in that regard.
Thirdly, we must be firm. We agree that all forms
of impunity must be effectively combated with regard
to violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law involving civilians in armed conflict.
Fourthly, recent events have made clear just how
vulnerable humanitarian workers are. More must be
done to ensure that humanitarian personnel can enjoy
security, gain access to those who are vulnerable and
be treated with respect and dignity. At the same time,
we must take steps against humanitarian personnel who
violate the principles of humanitarian action.
Fifthly, more effective coordination between the
Security Council, the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council remains crucial. It is also
important to encourage regional approaches and to
strengthen coordination with regional and subregional
organizations.

S/PV.5319 (Resumption 1)

My delegation has considered with great interest
the report of the Secretary-General on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict (S/2005/740), which refers
to, inter alia, the responsibility to protect. We would
like to be quite clear and transparent about this. We
recall that the September summit mandated the General
Assembly to continue the debate on that concept — a
concept about which there is still no unanimity within
the international community and whose parameters still
need to be rigorously defined. Furthermore, we believe
that it is important, when it comes to the humanitarian
dimension of the item before us today, to await the
outcome of the ongoing analysis of the United Nations
humanitarian response capacity.
Finally, we can never overemphasize the
importance of complying, everywhere and in all
circumstances, with the principles of the Charter and
those that underpin international relations.
The President: The next speaker is
representative of Uganda, of whom I now call.

the

Mr. Butagira (Uganda): I will try to keep within
five minutes, but if I speak for a minute more, it is
because Uganda is mentioned many times in the report,
and I need to respond.
The delegation of Uganda is grateful to the
Security Council for having afforded us the
opportunity to take part in this important debate. I
should like to thank the Secretary-General for the
comprehensive report on this subject and for the
commendable proposals to address the poor conditions
of civilian populations caught up in armed conflicts.
As we focus attention on addressing humanitarian
crises, we should not forget to ask why there is conflict
in the first place. In other words, the international
community should address the root causes of conflicts,
such as poverty and lack of democratic participation.
In Uganda, in addition to the usual causes of
conflict, we have been fighting a fanatical, satanic
rebel group, the self-styled Lord’s Resistance Army.
We have told the world that this group is not interested
in peace and that they must be eliminated. Despite
several peace proposals, Kony and his gang have not
responded. Even now, the “celebrated” Betty Bigombe
has not used a magic wand to bring Kony to the
negotiating table.
This morning Mr. Egeland reminded us that the
military option is not a solution. We must be realistic.

The group we are being urged to talk to does not want
peace. They are simply seeking to manipulate the
device of peace talks to give themselves a breather, to
get supplies and reorganize themselves to carry out
their
murderous
activities.
The
international
community just watched as civilians were brutally
killed. Sadly, even when displaced persons in a refugee
camp known as Barlonyo in northern Uganda were
massacred in a most brutal manner, not even a word of
condemnation came from this Council by way of a
presidential statement.
Some of the remnants of these rebels have now
fled to the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We call
on the Security Council to have them arrested and
disarmed. It is sad that very often, instead of blaming
the aggressor, the victim — in this case Uganda — has
been blamed for not ending the war.
Let me now touch on some aspects of the report
that make specific reference to Uganda. Paragraphs 8
and 17 refer to displaced persons. It is not correct to
assert that 90 per cent of the population in the districts
of Gulu, Pader and Kitgum are displaced. Most areas,
especially in Gulu and Kitgum, are now safe, and
people are returning home. The Government is
carrying out reconstruction and rehabilitation
programmes in those areas as well as a northern
Uganda reconstruction programme. The departments of
government are functioning. The town of Gulu, for
instance, is one of the fastest-growing towns in the
country.
The conditions in the camps for internally
displaced persons are far from perfect. The
Government, in partnership with some nongovernmental organizations, is addressing issues such
as sanitation, security and provision of food. It should
be remembered that these camps are only a temporary
measure to protect civilians from marauding Kony
rebels.
Now that Kony has been militarily defeated and
the Government is carrying out mop-up operations,
these people will soon go back to their homes. In fact,
the Government has announced the resettlement of
about 700,000 people now in displaced persons camps
in Arua and Teso to their home areas. The Government
will need international assistance to resettle them. In
this regard, the Uganda Government welcomes the
recent launch of humanitarian appeals by the

3

S/PV.5319 (Resumption 1)

Secretary-General, whereby Uganda is earmarked to
benefit from a grant of $223 million.

Security Council. It is not helpful at all. We ask the
Council to reject such a suggestion as uncalled for.

It is asserted in paragraph 20 that the right to
freedom of movement in northern Uganda has been
effectively eliminated as the result of the Government’s
establishment of free-fire zones, where persons moving
outside desert settlements or camps are automatically
considered legitimate targets of attack. With due
respect, this is an alarmist statement. There is no such
policy. When the Uganda Government unilaterally
offered a ceasefire to rebels in order to encourage them
to come to peace talks, it designated some areas where
the rebels should assemble and nothing would happen
to them. Any rebels found outside these areas would be
treated as enemy combatants and dealt with
accordingly. This restriction, however, was never
meant to restrict the free movement of civilian
population.

Lastly, in paragraph 30, the report states that the
Government’s inability to guarantee security continues
to hamper access to northern Uganda. Certainly this is
not correct. The Government has been providing
escorts and, where the food programme has justified it,
relief convoys as well. In some instances where some
relief workers have unfortunately lost their lives as the
result of being targeted by the few rebels remaining,
those concerned had chosen not to ask for Government
escorts, against the Government’s advice. No
Government anywhere in the world can be expected to
guarantee one hundred per cent security to its citizens.
Otherwise, every country would be on the agenda of
the Security Council.

Since the rebels did not respond positively to this
good gesture for peace, the designated areas are no
longer there. There is free movement of people
throughout northern Uganda. The Government is
effectively in control of the entire area. The few
remaining bandits roaming around are being hunted
down. Northern Uganda is not in turmoil, so there
should not be the remotest consideration of
entertaining any idea of sending peacekeepers there, or
any idea of putting Uganda on the agenda of the
Security Council, as was suggested by Canada this
morning.
It is common knowledge that Canada has been
leading a sustained, uncalled-for and unjustified
crusade to have northern Uganda put on the Security
Council agenda. It is indeed sad and ironic that when
we are reaching the tail end of the rebellion there are
calls for such a course of action. The military
campaign so far has yielded tremendous results. For
many months now, there have been no abductions
whatsoever by the so-called Resistance Army, nor has
there been any recruitment or attacks on internally
displaced persons camps. The rebels’ capacity to
commit such acts has been completely curtailed. The
few remnants of the rebel forces are on the run. These
are positive developments for which the Government
of Uganda should be commended, not demonized.
What we need is international assistance to resettle the
displaced people. Uganda, therefore, strongly resists
any move to put northern Uganda on the agenda of the

4

With the cooperation of Sudan and the region,
soon the menace of Kony and his gang will be history.
We appeal to the international community to assist in
executing the warrants of arrest issued by the
International Criminal Court against the top leadership
of the Kony gang who have been indicted. Even at this
late hour, the peace talks option is still on the table.
Further, any rebel who surrenders would benefit from
amnesty extended by the Government.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nepal.
Mr. Acharya (Nepal): Mr. President, I should
like to extend my congratulations upon your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the current month and to thank you for convening
the discussion of this important issue, the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. On behalf of the delegation
of Nepal, I express our sincere appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his fifth comprehensive report on
the subject, as well as our appreciation for the
presentation today by Under-Secretary-General Jan
Egeland.
The safety, security and well-being of civilian
populations who are badly affected by terrorism, armed
conflict and violence are our common interest. We
share the view that national Governments should take
primary responsibility for the protection of their
civilian populations from violence and terrorist
activities. Only recently, our leaders have agreed to
devise methods of taking responsibility to protect
innocent civilians from genocide, ethnic cleansing, war
crimes and crimes against humanity. Protection of

S/PV.5319 (Resumption 1)

civilians, including women and children, in armed
conflicts, especially from the threats of non-State
actors, remains the primary challenge for us to address
effectively. The Security Council should remain
engaged as to how such violations by non-State actors
can brought under control through international justice.
My own country, Nepal, has been the victim of
terrorist activities committed by illegal armed groups
who have shown little respect for human dignity and
even for human life. In their brutal attacks, civilian
lives and livelihoods have been destroyed, as has
infrastructure for essential services. Innocent civilians,
including women and children, are victims of ruthless
killings, maiming, torture, forced recruitment and
kidnapping. These activities have not abated, despite
the declaration of the so-called unilateral ceasefire in
recent months.
I would like to make a few comments with regard
to references to Nepal in the Secretary-General’s
report.
His Majesty’s Government is committed to taking
the necessary measures to protect the lives and
livelihoods of innocent civilians who are the victims of
terrorist and disruptive activities. The Government is
fully conscious of its responsibility to protect civilians,
even in the face of difficult circumstances. The security
forces have exercised the utmost restraint in the
security operations that are carried out to protect
innocent civilians from terrorist and disruptive
activities.
His Majesty’s Government has given the highest
priority to the protection of civilians, including by
mobilizing resources to provide the necessary
assistance to internally displaced persons. The
Government is committed to intensifying its efforts to
provide such assistance, taking into account the shortterm and long-term perspectives. The Government will
implement a comprehensive policy for the welfare of
internally displaced persons. We welcome the efforts of
the United Nations system to complement national
efforts to provide humanitarian assistance and protect
innocent civilians, including internally displaced
persons in Nepal.
Nepal fully respects and strictly observes the
principles of international law on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, through full adherence to
international humanitarian law, in particular the
Geneva Conventions. Security personnel are given

instructions and training on international humanitarian
law and human rights. We have also allowed the
International Committee of the Red Cross to operate in
Nepal with full access to all places in Nepal, including
places of detention. His Majesty’s Government has
allowed unhindered access for non-governmental
organizations, human-rights defenders and international
humanitarian agencies in all parts of the country. The
reference in the report of the Secretary-General to the
registration process does not apply to humanitarian
organizations that are already operational in Nepal.
Non-governmental organizations will be allowed
unhindered access to the civilian population without
any hindrance if they are registered in accordance with
the law.
The office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights in Nepal, which was
established under an agreement this year, is fully
functional in all areas of the country. It has not
reported any access problems, for humanitarian
agencies or other entities, in any part of the country.
The Representative of the Secretary-General on the
human rights of internally displaced persons, who
visited Nepal earlier this year, also reported that there
is no humanitarian crisis in Nepal.
His Majesty’s Government of Nepal is fully
committed to protecting civilians and making every
effort to restore peace and re-energize the country’s
democratic institutions, including through the
municipal elections scheduled for 8 February 2006 and
the parliamentary elections to be held by April 2007, as
commanded by His Majesty the King. We believe that
those elections will help foster a competitive
democratic process, which will pave the way for the
better protection of civilians and put an end to the
ongoing violence.
Nepal welcomes the humanitarian assistance to
the victims of terrorist and disruptive activities. We are
of the view that, in making such efforts, the special
circumstances on the ground must be taken into
account. We support the idea that humanitarian
assistance by the international community for victims
of violence and internally displaced persons should be
provided with the consent of the State concerned, in
accordance with the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. Any guidance by the Security Council
should take into consideration that direct access to
illegal armed groups can be counterproductive to

5

S/PV.5319 (Resumption 1)

efforts to protect civilians in armed conflicts and can
even jeopardize peace and stability.

Council or their mandates, in particular with respect to
preventive diplomacy and post-conflict peacebuilding.

The President: I
representative of Egypt.

Third, the report of the Secretary-General notes
in paragraphs 19 and 36 that peacebuilding and
peacekeeping mandates
should
be
integrated
operationally for the protection of the civilians. It is
our hope that the Peacebuilding Commission will be
the beginning of joint action with the Security Council
in a complementary manner.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): I feel honoured to be
among the only two permanent representatives sitting
at the Council table at this moment.
(spoke in Arabic)
I shall deliver a summary of my statement — I
hope that the interpreters will be able to follow. That
way, I can respect the suggested five-minute time
allowance.
The question of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict is of great importance to the activities
of the United Nations. I welcome the report of the
Secretary-General on this issue (S/2005/740). After
five years of consideration of this issue, it is our belief
that we must continue our work, while remaining
committed to certain basic principles.
First, the Security Council should limit itself to
the cases of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict as defined by the items on its agenda. The
Council should not expand its authority by establishing
general policies for dealing with humanitarian issues
and human rights. The elaboration of such general
policies falls within the mandates of the General
Assembly and its Main Committees. Thus, we are
concerned at the mention in the report and the draft
resolution of the possible role of the Security Council
in legislating and taking action under the so-called
responsibility to protect. Of even greater concern is the
fact that the General Assembly, which has been
mandated by the Summit Outcome (General Assembly
resolution 60/1) to continue its consideration of that
issue in all its aspects, has not yet begun that
consideration.
Second, the protection of civilians requires the
Security Council and the other principal organs of the
United Nations to make greater efforts to consider the
root causes of conflicts and terrorism and not to limit
their action simply to deal with the consequences.
In that regard, we regret that the report of the
Secretary-General, which deals with an issue of such
importance, fails to make any reference to the role of
the General Assembly or the Economic and Social

6

Fourth, we welcome the Secretary-General’s
establishment of a group of legal experts to study the
accountability of United Nations personnel serving in
missions for illegal activities. We look forward to
receiving the details of the integrated strategy that aims
to provide assistance to victims. We also welcome the
proposal to establish an integrated data-collection and
classification mechanism. We request that such data be
made available to the General Assembly, the Security
Council, the Economic and Social Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission.
Fifth, we call on the Secretary-General to give
special attention to African conflicts, which cause
enormous suffering to civilians.
Sixth, the Egyptian delegation is greatly
concerned at the situation in Palestine, as reflected in
the statistics of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and
other humanitarian agencies working in the occupied
Palestinian territories, which are contained in the
report of the Secretary-General. In the period from
January 2004 to July 2005, Palestinians were subjected
to more than 2,000 incidents involving the denial or
obstruction of humanitarian access to the Palestinian
people. That situation calls for effective measures to
prevent such incidents from occurring again and to
ensure that Israel, the occupying Power, abides by its
obligations until the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State.
Seventh, the recommendation of the SecretaryGeneral to impose new, targeted sanctions on States in
order to ensure humanitarian access raises many
questions. Such situations should be dealt with by
means of cooperation with the Member State
concerned, using all measures, including the provisions
of Chapter VI and Chapter VIII of the Charter, not by
imposing sanctions under Chapter VII.

S/PV.5319 (Resumption 1)

Eighth, Egypt closely follows the work of the
Emergency Relief Coordinator and the Inter-Agency
Standing Committee to reinforce humanitarian
protection capacity and affirms the importance of
supporting the Coordinator’s role and activities in
order to enhance coordination among the various
bodies. I express our gratitude to Under-SecretaryGeneral Egeland and Mr. Jacques Forster, VicePresident of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, for their important briefings on the issue this
morning.
Finally, this issue should be addressed by
strengthening the framework of international law,
international humanitarian law and the Charter, with a
view to finding a balance in achieving the protection of
civilians in armed conflicts.
Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, it will come as no surprise to you, Mr.
President, that I associate myself with the statement
that you will be making on behalf of the European
Union.
I thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2005/740)
and
Under-Secretary-General
Jan
Egeland for his presentation.
Following your wise recommendation, Sir, I shall
not read out the full text that we have prepared; the
written version will be circulated to delegations. I shall
limit myself to summarizing a few points.
First of all, this annual meeting on the protection
of the world’s civilian populations has become very
important for the work of the Security Council. We
owe that largely to Jan Egeland. I believe that every
year we become a bit more aware that if we want a
strategic vision of global affairs, we need to have
several cards at our disposal. We need a card on the
balance of power; we need a card on crises; we
undoubtedly need a card on non-proliferation and one
on energy. But we also need — and this has been Jan
Egeland’s contribution for several years — a card on
geopolitics and attacks on people’s rights.
Secondly, our most recent draft resolutions on
this issue date back to 1999 and 2000. I believe it is
useful, now that we have experience, to take account of
the shortcomings that we see. We therefore fully
support the British presidency in its intention to submit
a new draft resolution to the Council. What should be
included in such a draft resolution? We will have many

ideas to contribute during the discussions, but right
now I should like to mention three points.
My first point concerns the responsibility to
protect. Because that is something that has emerged
since our 2000 resolution — namely, at the September
summit — I have noted some misunderstandings about
it in certain statements by previous speakers. I believe
that what the British presidency proposes is not a
reopening of the debate on that subject; we all agree
that the concept will be refined, as agreed at the
summit, within the framework of the General
Assembly.
That said, the Security Council is not exempted
from taking into account the major political and
philosophical progress represented at the meeting of
heads of State or Government: a basic agreement on a
balanced vision of what is now called the responsibility
to protect. We believe that it would not be unusual for
the Security Council to refer to that notion, because it
commanded a consensus among our heads of State or
Government. Of course it is a notion that should guide
the work of the Council, particularly in its role in the
protection of populations.
Secondly, a very important development since
2000 has been the establishment of the International
Criminal Court. That is particularly important because
the Council utilized one of its prerogatives recognized
in the Rome Statute to transfer the situation in Darfur
to the Court’s jurisdiction. In my view, that means that,
now that that has been done — and it was a unanimous
decision by the members of the Security Council — all
of us, regardless of our position on the Rome Statute,
have an obligation to cooperate with the Court so that
it can carry out its role with regard to the matter of
Darfur.
I also believe, more generally speaking, that the
precedent represented by the transfer of Darfur to the
International Criminal Court is perfectly in keeping
with the recommendations made by the High-level
Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change. That is to
say, the International Criminal Court is among the
instruments at the disposal of the Security Council to
manage certain crises. Here again, it is not necessary to
be a party to the Court to recognize its usefulness,
particularly when it is activated by the Council under
certain circumstances.
Thirdly, the protection of civilians requires that
we devote special attention to the most vulnerable in

7

S/PV.5319 (Resumption 1)

armed conflicts — for example, women and children.
As we all know, my delegation feels a special
responsibility with regard to the issue of children in
armed conflict. The Security Council has taken
decisions concerning that subject, in particular, in
establishing a monitoring mechanism. In the coming
months, it is important that that follow-up and
assessment mechanism begin to function. We believe
that that should be one of the tasks to which the
Council should be the most attentive and most vigilant.
Those are the few points that I wanted to make by
way of summary. I would refer delegations to our
written contribution for the remaining points.
Mr. Wolf (United States of America): The
Secretary-General’s report (S/2005/740) and UnderSecretary-General Egeland’s presentation — which is
very much appreciated — paint a disturbing picture.
But we are encouraged that this meeting helps to
reaffirm the international community’s commitment to
the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
The world continues to be plagued by violent
conflicts, with civilians now the major category of
casualties of war worldwide. We would like to stress,
however, that the primary responsibility for protecting
civilians lies with States and their Governments and
that
international
efforts
should
complement
Government efforts rather than assume responsibility
for them. Improving the protection of civilians from
the devastating effects of armed conflict depends
largely not on what we say or do here, but on what
Governments do to protect their own people and on
how they allow others to assist.
Let me now turn to some specific cases of
concern. We continue to be gravely concerned about
the ongoing crisis in Darfur, and especially about the
impact of conflict on civilians in that region. While
large-scale organized violence has substantially
diminished, civilians continue to be subject to
lawlessness and banditry, and women and girls
continue to be raped. More than 2 million people
remain displaced from their homes. In addition,
humanitarian workers and peacekeepers have been
increasingly targeted.
Sadly, there have recently been casualties, both
deaths and injuries, among African Union
peacekeepers who have been working to restore order
in Darfur. This continuing insecurity has a direct
detrimental impact on the international community’s

8

ability to deliver assistance and provide basic services
for the victims of the conflict.
The situation in Darfur illustrates the urgent role
that all parties to a conflict, but especially States, must
play to safeguard civilians, including those who are
internally displaced. Clearly the Sudanese Government
has not fulfilled many of its responsibilities towards its
people in Darfur, and the rebel groups continue to put
them at risk as well. It is also important to reiterate that
internally displaced civilians living in camps can
continue to face serious human rights violations.
Several other countries, including the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, have delicate situations of
transition, where many protection challenges have
increased. United Nations peacekeeping and assistance
missions, together with support from nongovernmental organizations, help ensure that civilians
in these regions are not denied the dividends of peace.
We are encouraged by the fact that the Security
Council has been more consistently addressing the
regional dimension of civilian protection. Furthermore,
Security Council resolutions and peacekeeping
mandates regularly identify key protection issues,
including the deliberate targeting of civilians; forced
displacement; the use of sexual and other forms of
gender-based violence; the recruitment and use of child
soldiers, in violation of international law; the need for
unhindered humanitarian access at reasonable times
and places; and the safety of United Nations and
associated humanitarian personnel.
We are grateful to the delegation of the United
Kingdom for their efforts on this draft resolution. We
look forward to continuing negotiations on the text. As
we once again reaffirm the commitment to reinforce
and strengthen the protection of civilians in armed
conflict and in resulting situations of humanitarian
crisis, let us ensure that our words and intentions
become actions.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my national capacity as the representative of the
United Kingdom.
I have the honour of speaking also for the 25
members of the European Union and 10 other countries
that have aligned themselves with this statement:
Bulgaria, Romania, Turkey, Croatia, Albania, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, the former Yugoslav Republic of

S/PV.5319 (Resumption 1)

Macedonia, Serbia and Montenegro, Iceland and
Ukraine.
The full text of my statement will be circulated. I
shall, to honour my own commitments, try to keep my
statement slightly briefer than the full text.
First of all, I would like to join others in thanking
Mr. Egeland for his briefing and Mr. Forster for his
participation. The subject of today’s debate is of huge
importance; five years after the last Council resolution
on this issue, the situation for civilians caught up in
armed conflict remains critical.
It is time, we think, to take stock of what lessons
have been learned, what progress has been made, what
gaps need to be filled, and how best we can fill them.
The European Union therefore supports the initiative
that my delegation has taken within the Security
Council to pursue this through a new draft resolution.
The gaps are very clear — prevention, protection,
humanitarian access, impunity — and they can be
filled only by combined action: action by parties to
conflict, action by individual States concerned, action
by the international community, and action by United
Nations agencies and peacekeeping and peace support
missions. At a political level, it requires us all to be
alert and active.
We have to do better on prevention. Timely and
adequate briefings to the Security Council by the
Special Adviser, by the High Commissioner for Human
Rights, by the Emergency Relief Coordinator and by
other relevant parts of the United Nations system will
help the Council act sufficiently early on in conflict
situations to effectively protect civilians at risk.
As regards protection, parties to conflict must
comply fully with the requirements of international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law, especially
concerning the prohibitions on physical attack, sexual
violence, the use of child soldiers and forced
displacement. They must also ensure that specific
measures for the protection of civilians are included in
peace agreements. The United Nations must give
peacekeeping missions the mandates and the resources
to protect civilians, in particular those under imminent
threat of physical attack.
Humanitarian access is a crucial part of
protection. The right to food and the right to health are
fundamental human rights, but the denial of
humanitarian access is increasingly used as a political

tool, and even as a weapon of war. All parties to
conflict — as well as neighbouring States — must, as
our draft resolution proposes, provide unimpeded
access to humanitarian assistance and take all
necessary measures to guarantee the safety, security
and freedom of movement of humanitarian personnel.
United Nations peace support operations must have the
mandates and resources to ensure the provision of
humanitarian assistance.
The investigation of crimes under international
law committed against civilians, and the bringing of
their perpetrators to justice, is vital — vital to deter
future abuses, vital to provide some form of redress to
victims, and vital to ensure that a page can be turned in
a country’s history. As the investigation by the
International Criminal Court of atrocities committed in
Darfur and northern Uganda shows, we cannot stand by
while people — no matter how high their rank — get
away with the most egregious crimes.
At the world summit three months ago, our heads
of State and Government reached a historic agreement
on the responsibility to protect populations from
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity. My Government and the European
Union regarded this outcome, embracing the concept at
the highest level, as one of the most important of the
summit. The responsibility to protect is a distinct
concept, carefully set out in the World Summit
Outcome. But it is clearly relevant to the issue of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, and it is only
appropriate that it should be recalled in the draft
resolution on which we are working.
Protection of civilians also includes the special
protection needs of displaced persons, women and
children. The draft resolution calls on parties to
conflict to take concrete measures for the safe and
sustainable return of displaced persons and calls for
peacekeeping missions to have the mandates and the
resources to guarantee this by, for example, providing
security for and around displaced-persons camps.
Given the increasing incidence of sexual
violence, child abduction and the use of child soldiers,
it is more important than ever to have a strong
message, as in the draft resolution, to all parties to a
conflict to refrain from such actions. Peace support
operations should be mandated to employ all feasible
measures to prevent such crimes and to address their
effects where they take place.

9

S/PV.5319 (Resumption 1)

Finally, it would be wrong to address the issue of
the protection of civilians in armed conflict without
raising the issue of illicit small arms and light
weapons. The European Union looks forward to
working with other Member States in 2006 to review
the United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects to ensure that it
remains relevant. We welcome the growing support, in
all parts of the world, for an international treaty to
establish common standards for the global trade in
conventional arms.

Sexual violence against women is a particularly
serious problem in Darfur and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and it is more widespread than ever.
Sexual crimes are not only being committed by the
irregular armed groups, but also by those who have
primary responsibility to protect: the armed forces and
law enforcement agencies. Attacks on humanitarian
organizations in the southern Sudan and in Darfur
during recent months add to the fear that armed groups
are targeting humanitarian personnel as part of their
strategy. That situation makes protection of and access
to civilians extremely difficult.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

In his report to the Security Council, the
Secretary-General points out that humanitarian
assistance does not reach an estimated one third of the
25 million internally displaced persons. That is a
growing problem. Nepal is one of the countries where
such difficulties give reason for grave concern.

The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Norway, to whom I give the floor.
Mr. Løvald (Norway): As we speak, millions of
civilians are trapped in armed conflicts in several
regions of the world. Although the number of conflicts
has decreased during the last 10 years, today’s conflicts
tend to be protracted. They are often fought by groups
using small arms, without clear command structures. In
many cases the armed groups are unwilling to respect
the rights of civilian populations to maintain neutrality,
and this has devastating effects.
In protracted armed conflicts, civilians are
subject to widespread violence, insecurity and
displacement, with no protection against even the
gravest breaches of international humanitarian law. As
societal structures and common norms of behaviour
gradually break down, the vulnerability of the
population increases sharply. Women and children are
at particular risk.
We have seen this happen again and again — in
northern Uganda, in Darfur and in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, just to mention some of the
situations of greatest concern. In northern Uganda, the
humanitarian situation is precarious. Approximately
1.3 million internally displaced persons depend on
humanitarian assistance that cannot be delivered with
regularity due to the unstable security situation and the
acute level of violence. The conflict between the
Government forces and the Lord’s Resistance Army is
also having serious consequences for the whole region
and is affecting the security of civilians in the
neighbouring countries of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Sudan.

10

Norway fully shares the conviction expressed by
the Secretary-General in his report that strict
compliance with international humanitarian, human
rights and refugee law, as well as international criminal
law, by all parties concerned provides the best basis for
ensuring the safety of the civilian population, whatever
threats they are facing. A culture of impunity for mass
atrocities can critically undermine long-term security.
If peace and reconciliation are to be real and
sustainable, they must be built on the rule of law.
Impunity for breaches of international humanitarian
and human rights law is totally unacceptable.
Norway strongly welcomed the 2005 World
Summit Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/1),
which explicitly sets out our common responsibility to
protect populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity. Once again, we
underline the great importance of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) in that respect, serving as a final
safety net provided by the international community for
cases where there is no effective national mechanism to
counter impunity.
A new Security Council resolution on protection
of civilians must bring us closer to an effective
international protection regime. It is our firm belief
that the resolution must include a clear and
unambiguous reference to the responsibility to protect.
Furthermore, the particular role of the ICC in ending
impunity and securing justice should be underlined in
the resolution.

S/PV.5319 (Resumption 1)

There is no doubt that the true challenge for the
Security Council is effective implementation on the
ground. A new and strengthened resolution will
potentially bring us forward — but we have to continue
focusing on implementation of already agreed texts
that are far from fully implemented, such as Council
resolutions 1325 (2000), on women, and 1612 (2005),
on children in armed conflict.
Norway welcomes the data collection announced
by the Secretary-General in his most recent report to
the Council. Our responses to armed conflicts and our
peacebuilding efforts must be based on sound
knowledge of the situation and the needs of the
victims. We would particularly like to draw the
Council’s attention to the need for empirical
information on the situation of women and children in
armed conflict, and on the recruitment and employment
of child soldiers by warring factions, including States
and non-State actors.
Mr. Al-Bader (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to apologize on behalf of
Ambassador Al-Nasser, who is unable to make this
statement as he had to travel outside of the United
States.
I would like to join the others who have
congratulated you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council during the month of
December, and would like to thank Council members,
through you, for holding an open meeting to discuss
this important matter.
The protection of civilians in armed conflict leads
us to the basic reason for the establishment of the
United Nations and for the promotion of respect for the
rule of law, including international humanitarian and
human rights law. As such, the provision of such
protection is not an option, but a duty and a raison
d’etre of the United Nations. It is one of the most
important issues on the Council’s agenda because of its
close linkage to the maintenance of international peace
and security.
We would like to commend the Secretary-General
for his excellent report on this matter in document
S/2005/740. The report clearly sheds light on the
problem and on the road to achieve progress, and
places the humanitarian aspect of the issue before the
Council.

The State of Qatar expresses its grave concern
over the proliferation of war and conflict in poor
developing countries, where the majority of the victims
are women, children and the elderly. Furthermore, war
and conflict directly threaten international peace and
security, adversely affect the sustainable development
of small developing countries and consume valuable
resources directed towards conflict resolution and
peacemaking efforts. To that, we add the life-long scars
and trauma that surviving victims often suffer, which
alone become great impediments to progress and
development.
We also note the dramatic increase in the
recruitment of children and youth as soldiers and the
use of civilians as human shields. Increasingly, modern
wars are no longer confrontations between regular
armies, but more like street and urban warfare fought
by civilian rebels and uniformed soldiers — citizens of
the same country — or local conflicts raging among
civilian factions. Such non-conventional battles are
extremely lethal, with no marked distinction between
combatants and non-combatant civilians and a total
lack of respect for law.
My delegation notes with concern that civilians
are the most adversely affected parties in armed
conflicts and that, by comparison in many instances,
fatalities and injuries are disproportionately high
among civilians, despite the fact that they do not
participate in combat activities. Moreover, civilians are
often attacked and tortured and are subject to other
serious violations of international humanitarian and
human rights law.
Targeting United Nations and other humanitarian
personnel who work in the humanitarian field is clear
evidence of the increasingly vulnerable environment in
which they live, attacked and killed as they often are
because of the lack of any security guarantees. The
international community and the United Nations should
continue to denounce and strongly condemn such
violations and attacks, which are cowardly and
inadmissible acts.
We should therefore spare no effort to
mainstream questions pertaining to the protection of
civilians into State policies, United Nations
programmes and the mandates of peacekeeping
operations. Those questions must include reporting
human rights violations and taking the necessary legal
actions, as well as putting in place strict special

11

S/PV.5319 (Resumption 1)

measures to protect women and girls from rape and
other forms of violence and exposure to HIV/AIDS
infection and the destruction of homes and property, as
well as to put an end to the displacement of entire
communities.
Member States should guarantee the success of
efforts aimed at capacity-building in this field. They
must also be encouraged to sign and ratify existing
legal instruments within the wider framework of
protecting civilians in armed conflict. Pressure must be
also brought to bear on belligerent parties to bring
them into compliance with the rules and principles of
international law. The United Nations has an important
role to play in that regard. It is impossible to develop a
culture of protecting civilians in armed conflict unless
all stakeholders adequately coordinate their actions.
The time has come to act seriously and decisively and
to pursue an integrated and systematic approach to
preventing the outbreak of conflict, promoting a
culture of respect for human rights and putting an end
to impunity from law. Failure to take such action would
mean that the universal culture of protecting civilians
pursued by the international community had failed.
We would like to emphasize that the protection of
civilians — whether in times of transition and armed
conflict or while fighting terrorism — should be
anchored in respect for international humanitarian,
human rights and refugee laws. Respect for the
relevant instruments requires raising awareness among
the ranks of protagonists to ensure that they shoulder
their responsibilities. We must end impunity from law
at the national and international levels. Since
protagonists include States, and in particular their
armed and police forces, as well as non-State armed
groups, we should underscore the fact that the
fundamental humanitarian principles of independence,
integrity and neutrality apply to this question in all
circumstances. Respect for those principles is a sine
qua non condition for the creation of an adequate
environment for humanitarian intervention, whether
inside or outside the United Nations umbrella.
Last but not least, the State of Qatar is
determined to spare no effort to promote those
principles and values during its tenure as a nonpermanent member of the Security Council for the
period 2006 to 2007. We call on the Council to use
monitoring mechanisms and fact-finding missions and
to end the illicit trafficking in small arms and light
weapons, given the adverse impact of such weapons on

12

civilian populations. We also believe that the Council
should devote more attention to the impact of armed
conflict on women and girls, and in particular to the
use of sexual violence as a weapon and tool of war and
suppression, take steps to end the forced displacement
of populations and pursue further approaches and
measures to protect civilians in armed conflict. We
want the dignity of women to become the centre of the
international community’s attention. We also need to
ensure that terrorist groups committing such atrocities
do not escape punishment, as mentioned in the Security
Council’s presidential statement of 14 April 2004. We
would also like to reaffirm that the 1949 Fourth
Geneva Convention remains entirely in effect, and
should therefore be complied with in all circumstances.
The President: As the representative of Qatar
has noted, both he and Ambassador Al-Nasser will of
course have many opportunities to speak in the Council
in the course of the next two years.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Slovakia, who is in the same position.
Mr. Burian (Slovakia): First of all, I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this
important debate.
We fully align ourselves with the statement made
by the representative of the United Kingdom on behalf
of the European Union, in which he stressed the need
to address the wider scope of issues associated with the
protection of civilians in armed conflict and identified
many existing gaps in international humanitarian law
in that area.
Even years after Srebrenica and Rwanda, we are
still witnessing attacks motivated by ethnic or religious
hatred or political confrontation, sexual violence, the
killing of civilians and other grave violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law in conflict
regions such as Darfur, northern Uganda, Côte d’Ivoire
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, among
others. We cannot be neutral or indifferent when other
human beings are suffering.
Slovakia is therefore deeply concerned about the
continued blatant disrespect for international
humanitarian law on the part of armed groups and State
and non-State actors in armed conflicts against
civilians. We welcome the continuing endeavour by the
Security Council and the entire international
community to strengthen the protection of civilians,

S/PV.5319 (Resumption 1)

especially the most vulnerable groups, such as women
and children. The international community must
continue to adopt and implement feasible measures to
put an end to such grave violations of human rights and
humanitarian law.
The establishment of a culture of protection,
which Secretary-General Kofi Annan called for a few
years ago, should become a reality. The
implementation of the principle of the responsibility to
protect, which was outlined during the World Summit
this past September, into the international legal system
is without doubt a major step in that direction. Further
development and enactment of the principle of the
responsibility to protect should also be continued
through a new Security Council resolution on the
protection of civilians.
In the World Summit Outcome, world leaders
agreed that, as appropriate, the international
community should encourage and help States to
exercise their responsibilities and support the efforts of
the United Nations to establish an early warning
capability. Those commitments must be reflected in
practical measures. In that regard, we welcome the
activities of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs undertaken as part of its
advocacy and dissemination work with regard to the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. That work has
been organized with the support of the Security
Council and interested Member States and has included
a series of regional workshops on the protection of
civilians, in an effort to broaden the audience for
protection policies and mainstream them into the
decision-making processes of Member States.
On the other hand, as the organ with the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, the Security Council has a special
role to play in addressing the issue and in
strengthening the response capabilities of the
international community. It must ensure an immediate,
decisive and rapid reaction to emerging situations of
massive attacks on civilians and their livelihoods.
Political questions or selfish national interests should
not be obstacles to the international community’s
taking action through the Security Council, including
through the application of the principle of the
responsibility to protect, especially in situations when
governmental institutions are unable or unwilling to
implement feasible measures for the protection of
civilians. Of course, the international community must

be equipped with credible and effective legal and
coercive instruments.
Only a few days ago, on 7 December, in the
region of western Darfur, armed militia forces attacked
the town of Kongo Harasa and destroyed all water
wells built by humanitarian workers. That is another
example of the kinds of atrocities committed against
civilians. We are convinced that attacks on basic
infrastructure necessary for survival, such as sources of
drinking water and crops, should also be considered as
direct attacks against civilians, and should therefore be
addressed by international criminal and humanitarian
law. The international community should not only
condemn attacks that target the very livelihoods of
people, but also prosecute those who perpetrate such
inhuman acts.
I wish to assure you, Mr. President, that Slovakia,
as an incoming non-permanent member of the Security
Council, considers the issue of the protection of
civilians as one of its priorities, and will devote
increased attention to that question during its tenure.
The President: I call on the representative of
Pakistan.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Let me begin by
extending our warm felicitations to the United
Kingdom delegation on assuming the presidency of the
Council for this closing month of the year. That has no
doubt added to its already onerous responsibilities in
its capacity as the presidency of the European Union.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
express our appreciation to Ambassador Denisov and
the Russian delegation for their able stewardship of the
Council last month.
Pakistan welcomes the convening of this open
debate. Let me thank Under-Secretary-General Jan
Egeland and Mr. Jacques Forster, Vice-President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, for their
informative briefings. We hope the views expressed
here by members of the Council and non-members will
contribute to evolving a more effective response of the
international community to the complex challenges
related to the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
The latest report of the Secretary-General
provides useful insight into the entire range of issues
related to the protection of civilians in aimed conflict.
An overall decrease in the number of armed conflicts
since the 1990s is indeed encouraging. However, in

13

S/PV.5319 (Resumption 1)

today’s armed conflicts, violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law have escalated, with
tragic consequences for civilians, especially women,
children and minorities. As observed by the SecretaryGeneral,
“[i]n the new warfare… the impact of armed
conflict on civilians goes far beyond the notion of
collateral damage. Targeted attacks, forced
displacement,
sexual
violence,
forced
conscription, indiscriminate killings, mutilation,
hunger, disease and loss of livelihoods
collectively paint an extremely grim picture of
the human costs of armed conflict.” (S/2005/740,
para. 3)
That is a sad commentary on the poverty of
implementation of the entire body of international
humanitarian and human rights law that codifies the
protection of civilians.
A comprehensive response entails the proper
identification of underlying problems, which are
multidimensional — legal, moral, political, cultural,
social and economic. One reason for the escalation in
violations is the changing nature of conflicts, which are
now more likely to be internal wars than inter-State
conflicts. Ethnic and religious conflicts, the most
common type of civil war, are by their very nature
directed against entire populations, including civilians.
Secondly, in many instances, it is the politics of
poverty that lead to and exacerbate conflicts, involving
competition between groups, including civilians, for
scarce resources. Here again, civilians are usually in
the front line.
Thirdly, the empirical evidence of recent and old
history shows that systematic and consistent violations
of the rights of civilians are most frequent and
pervasive in situations of foreign occupation and
suppression of the right of peoples to selfdetermination. The list of places mentioned in the
Secretary-General’s report where the gravest violations
of international human rights and humanitarian law are
taking place amply illustrates that point. The list,
however, is not exhaustive. It excludes, for example, a
situation that is of particular concern to my country
and in which the most blatant violations have been and
are being perpetrated against civilians. An important
question that should be posed is how to protect civilian
populations when their very suppression is the object
of the conflict. Moreover, the rationale of suppressing

14

terrorism should not provide an escape route for the
suppression of civilians seeking respect for their
fundamental rights, including the right to selfdetermination.
The challenges of addressing gross violations of
international human rights and humanitarian law are
also exacerbated by the problem of inequity in the
international response. In some situations, there is a
quick and even robust response; in others, the
perpetrators enjoy virtual impunity at both the national
and the international levels. Most often, there is
sufficient public concern, but insufficient political will
to act. The record of the Security Council itself in that
context is not without blemish. In the circumstances, it
is vital to reinforce the concept of the protection of
civilians in all — I repeat, all — such situations of
violations.
Indeed, the desire proclaimed at the 2005 summit
to protect populations from genocide, crimes against
humanity, war crimes and ethnic cleansing can be
fulfilled only if there are established standards to
ensure a uniform and timely response to all situations
in which such crimes occur or are likely to occur. And
if powerful bodies, such as the Security Council, are
unable to act, the international community should
consider utilizing the Charter authority of the General
Assembly to do so. It can also utilize international
judicial mechanisms for that purpose.
Apart from the decisions taken in the past, the
Pakistan delegation would suggest that some concrete
and practical actions be contemplated to ensure the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.
First, all States should undertake a binding legal
obligation to observe and respect international
humanitarian law and refrain from and oppose
genocide and war crimes. That obligation could be
created, preferably, through an international treaty or
protocol.
Secondly, much greater emphasis is required on
preventing the outbreak of conflicts. The SecretaryGeneral and other United Nations mediatory
mechanisms can and must play a more active role in
conflict resolution under Chapter VI and other
provisions of the Charter. The Secretary-General and
this Council have a clear right to insist on a mediatory
role in inter-State conflicts, but even in internal
situations, an early and active role could be pursued —

S/PV.5319 (Resumption 1)

perhaps with discretion — by the United Nations,
together with other influential partners.
Thirdly, international monitoring can play an
effective part in preventing violations against civilian
populations. Where the danger of conflict is perceived,
States should be asked to accept a United Nations or
impartial international presence. Where a conflict has
broken out, the United Nations should apply a standard
operating procedure of dispatching a fact-finding
mission, including for the purpose of observing and
reporting on the treatment of civilians. That would
facilitate both a political and a humanitarian response.
In that context, particular attention should be paid to
the need to abrogate draconian laws and similar legal
or administrative measures that allow arbitrary
detention, torture and extrajudicial executions.
Where United Nations peacekeeping or observer
missions are already deployed, their mandates should
include observation of and reporting on the treatment
of civilian populations and, where possible, measures
to offer them protection. Adequate resources should be
provided to peacekeeping missions for that purpose.
Lastly, the humanitarian response to situations of
violations should be adequate and timely. For that
purpose, the United Nations humanitarian capacity
should be enhanced, predictable financing provided
and coordination reinforced. States should undertake to
allow United Nations assistance to all affected civilian
populations. There should be no “no go” areas where
civilian populations are under serious threat.
Collective action and multilateral solutions to
today’s conflicts offer the best hope for millions of
civilians who are trapped between death and despair.
We must not fail in responding to this challenge. We
must act boldly in all situations where the survival of
millions of civilians caught in the vise of violence and
war is threatened.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Ritter (Liechtenstein): I would like at the
outset to apologize for the fact that Ambassador
Wenaweser, the Permanent Representative of
Liechtenstein, is unable to be here because he is
attending a briefing being given by the SecretaryGeneral at this very moment.
The world summit made it clear yet again that the
protection of civilians in armed conflict is a major

challenge for and concern of the international
community. Several important decisions were taken by
our leaders at that summit and are reflected in the 2005
World Summit Outcome (General Assembly resolution
60/1). They range from the affirmation of the
responsibility to protect and a particular emphasis on
the pressing need to adequately address all forms of
violence against women and children, to the resolve to
increase the protection of internally displaced persons
and to ensure the safe and unhindered access of
humanitarian actors to populations in need.
The call of our leaders to conclude negotiations
on an optional protocol to the Convention on the Safety
of United Nations and Associated Personnel was also
of particular importance. We are pleased to note that
the General Assembly adopted that Protocol just
yesterday, providing for substantial expansion of the
scope of legal protection for such personnel. We invite
all States to become parties to both the Protocol and
the 1994 Convention, in order to strengthen and
universalize that important legal regime.
The recognition of the responsibility of the
international community to protect civilian populations
when their Governments fail to do so constitutes a
major breakthrough in our common endeavour to
prevent genocide, war crimes and crimes against
humanity. The main obligation for its implementation
naturally falls on the Security Council. The SecretaryGeneral’s Special Adviser on the Prevention of
Genocide can play an important role in that respect.
The Council must ensure that disgraceful inaction, as
was seen in the case of the genocide in Rwanda, cannot
occur again.
That responsibility leads almost inevitably to the
conclusion that collective action to prevent and
respond to genocide, crimes against humanity and war
crimes must not be made impossible by a nonconcurring vote of one of the permanent members of
the Council. That principle was proposed by the Highlevel Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change and has
been taken up in a draft resolution on the working
methods of the Security Council prepared by a group
of countries including Liechtenstein.
The rest of the membership also has
responsibility in this respect, in that it can bring
situations to the attention of the Security Council in
open debates and by other means. In particular, article
8 of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment

15

S/PV.5319 (Resumption 1)

of the Crime of Genocide, which was adopted on this
day in 1948, allows any contracting party to call upon
the competent organs of the United Nations to take
appropriate action.

also responds to the need for more consistent and
accurate reporting of protection-related incidents,
would certainly go a long way towards achieving that
goal.

The achievement concerning the responsibility to
protect makes the absence of a reference to the issue of
impunity in the World Summit Outcome even more
anachronistic. More advances have been made in that
area than in most others. Transitional justice is an
inevitable element of any serious discussion of postconflict situations. There is now a close and well
established relationship between the International
Criminal Court and the United Nations, as a result both
of the adoption of a Relationship Agreement between
the two organizations and of the Security Council’s
referral to the Court of the situation in Darfur.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.

Prevention is, indeed, the key aspect in the
protection of civilians. Preventive action can be
effective, however, only if it is made clear that abuses
against civilian populations, often carried out against
their most vulnerable members, in particular women
and children, are violations of international law that
will not go unpunished. An unequivocal and firm
stance by the Security Council that there will not be
impunity for such crimes would have a strong deterrent
effect in any situation and would thus serve as a very
useful tool of prevention.
Such a firm stance by the Security Council was
expressed by the adoption of resolution 1612 (2005) on
children and armed conflict. Our leaders welcomed that
resolution as a landmark decision and reaffirmed their
commitment to promote and protect the rights and
welfare of children in armed conflict. We commend the
convening of the first meeting of the Council’s
Working Group, and look forward to the full
information of the resolution. In order to assess the
progress made in that regard, we would welcome a
decision by the Council to hold an open debate on the
issue during the first quarter of next year.
One of the most tragic aspects of our collective
failure to adequately protect civilians in situations of
conflict over the past five years is, as the SecretaryGeneral’s report points out, the fact that women and
children have continued to suffer extraordinary
hardship and violence. It is high time to reverse that
trend and to take effective measures that have a
tangible impact on the ground. The adoption of a
strong resolution on the protection of civilians, which

16

Mr. Choi Young-jin (Republic of Korea): In this
era of globalization, the nature of conflicts has
radically changed. Classic inter-State wars have
virtually ended. Seeing no profit in it, nations avoid
war. Instead, we are witnessing a marked rise in intraState conflicts based on ethnic, religious or cultural
differences. In such intra-State conflicts, the proportion
of civilian victims has increased drastically. According
to a study, civilian casualties made up just 5 per cent of
all casualties during the First World War, while in the
Second World War that number increased to 50 per
cent. Civilian casualties now constitute a staggering 90
per cent. In the new kinds of conflicts prevalent today,
civilians are harmed in various ways, including by
forced displacement, forced conscription, violence,
indiscriminate killing, starvation, disease and loss of
livelihood.
My delegation would like to emphasize three
issues that we believe are important in protecting
civilians more effectively from armed conflict:
focusing on vulnerable people, taking a regional
approach and ending impunity.
First, we should keep in mind that the most
vulnerable people in armed conflict are women and
children. Indeed, acts of sexual violence against
women continue to be committed in many conflict
situations, while children are frequently recruited or
abducted and used as soldiers. In view of the serious,
lasting social impact of such egregious crimes and the
physical and psychological harm they inflict upon their
victims, effective protection measures are urgently
needed.
Secondly, we note that violence against civilians
in a given country directly affects the surrounding
region as a result of refugee flows, environmental
degradation and the proliferation of illicit arms trading.
Meanwhile, the role of neighbouring countries is
crucial to ensuring humanitarian access to civilians in
regions of conflict. The protection of civilians in armed
conflict therefore requires the further strengthening of
regional cooperation. We welcome the efforts of
regional organizations such as the African Union to

S/PV.5319 (Resumption 1)

protect civilians while peacekeeping and peacebuilding
efforts are ongoing. Regional organizations should be
further supported to facilitate such efforts.
In this regard, we welcome the inclusion of the
concept of the responsibility to protect in the outcome
document of the 2005 world summit (General
Assembly resolution 60/1). The United Nations should
continue to discuss ways to put it into practice. It goes
without saying that national authorities have the
primary responsibility to protect their populations from
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity. But when national authorities fail to
exercise their responsibility to protect, the international
community should use various means to help them to
meet those responsibilities, including through measures
taken by the Security Council under Chapter VII of the
Charter.
Thirdly, in order to prevent the recurrence of
crimes against civilians, the culture of impunity must
be brought to an end. In this regard, the establishment
of the International Criminal Court (ICC), the ad hoc
International Criminal Tribunals for the former
Yugoslavia and for Rwanda and the Special Court for
Sierra Leone has great significance. Also crucial to
ending impunity is providing assistance for judicial
capacity-building in war-torn societies, with a view to
ensuring that law and order is restored.
In
our
globalized
world,
threats
are
interconnected. No State can protect itself by acting
alone. Today’s topic — the protection of civilians in
armed conflict — is an emerging security concern that
requires coordinated multilateral responses from the
international community. Building upon the progress
already made, we should redouble our common efforts
to achieve a more secure and orderly world in which
every human being is respected and protected under the
rule of law.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Spain.
Mr. Yañez-Barnuevo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I wish at the outset to thank the Council presidency for
having convened what we consider to be an extremely
important debate. Spain fully endorses the statement
made earlier by the representative of the United
Kingdom on behalf of the European Union.
Today’s discussion joins other fairly regular
Council debates on an item of great importance, given

the scale of the problems associated with the protection
of civilians in armed conflict — whose dimensions
have in recent years become a matter of particular
concern. Much of this is due to the predominantly
internal nature of conflicts and to the fact that the
majority of conflicts continue at a low level of
intensity which inflicts the bloodiest suffering on
civilian populations, both urban and rural.
Let us recall that the main responsibility for the
protection of civilian populations, including internally
displaced persons, lies with national authorities. But
where the State in question is unable to protect civilian
populations on its territory it is incumbent on the
international community to shoulder the responsibility,
making use of appropriate diplomatic, humanitarian
and other peaceful means, in accordance with Chapters
VI and VIII of the Charter, or when appropriate making
use of enforcement measures pursuant to Chapter VII,
to help to protect populations from genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity.
The outcome document of September’s General
Assembly summit (General Assembly resolution 60/1)
set this concept out as a major advance in the action of
the international community, and we cannot fail to
welcome this.
Of particular concern is the need to ensure access
to affected populations by humanitarian personnel and
humanitarian assistance in situations in which the State
or party to the conflict responsible for providing such
access is unable or unwilling to do so. As the
Secretary-General notes in his report (S/2005/740), and
as the United Nations Emergency Relief Coordinator
has indicated, in 2004 United Nations agencies were
denied access to an estimated 10 million people in need
of assistance. Grave security conditions not only
hamper access for such assistance; often, they also
make it necessary to remove humanitarian personnel
temporarily, leaving affected populations without
support or assistance of any kind. The case of Darfur
provides a clear example of this.
At the same time, it is vital that those responsible
for committing atrocities against civilian populations
not go unpunished. Once again, it is the State in whose
jurisdiction the crimes are committed that bears
primary responsibility for ensuring that. Should such a
State be unable or unwilling to do so, the international
community must use all means at its disposal to
combat impunity for especially serious violations. Such
means include transitional justice, truth commissions,

17

S/PV.5319 (Resumption 1)

special or joint tribunals and, in a broader framework,
the International Criminal Court, which should play —
and in certain cases already is playing — a key role in
investigating and bringing to trial the perpetrators of
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes.
Let me turn now to the leading role that can be
played by the International Fact-Finding Commission
created under article 90 of Additional Protocol I to the
Geneva Conventions, relating to the protection of
victims of armed conflicts — in this context, civilian
populations in particular. The Commission, whose
jurisdiction has already been accepted by 68 States, can
help ensure compliance with the rules of international
humanitarian law, in particular those relating to the
protection of the victims of armed conflict, not only
through investigation and fact-finding with respect to
alleged violations of the relevant rules, but also by
using its good offices to facilitate a return to respect
for the Geneva Conventions and the Additional
Protocol. This fully justifies the reference to the
Commission’s functions in resolution 1265 (1999), the
first of the Council’s resolutions on this matter.

the United Kingdom for scheduling this very important
and timely meeting, which has provided my
Government with an opportunity to take stock of the
achievements made during the more than five years
since the Security Council adopted its first resolution
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
resolution 1265 (1999), and to reflect on those areas
where action remains inadequate. Allow me also
wholeheartedly to congratulate the Secretary-General
on his comprehensive and very enlightening report
(S/2005/740) on the matter.
The Security Council’s agenda on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict addresses a broad
spectrum of violations of fundamental rights, violations
that target the innocent civilian populations. In such
circumstances, those populations are threatened with a
wide range of abuses, including those condemned in
the relevant internationally agreed instruments
pertaining to the promotion and protection of human
rights.

In that regard, we welcome the visit to New York
by a delegation from the International Fact-Finding
Commission, led by its President, Sir Kenneth Keith.
We are confident that this visit will enable us all to
become familiar with the activities the Commission
can undertake, with a view to increasing the number of
States accepting the Commission’s jurisdiction and
encouraging the parties concerned that they should
have recourse to it. The Commission is a unique
instrument for ensuring the proper implementation of
international humanitarian law and for helping prevent
recurrent violations of the rules governing armed
conflict.

It is imperative to underline that the protection of
civilian populations in armed conflict is strictly
mandatory for all States and all parties concerned in a
situation of armed conflict. A higher threshold in that
respect, however, should be contemplated in those
situations where populations are at risk of genocide or
other large-scale atrocities. One most important and
far-reaching development in this regard is the
commitment made by heads of State or Government at
September’s world summit to protect civilians from
genocide, ethnic cleansing, crimes against humanity
and war crimes. My Government wishes to seize this
opportunity to reiterate its sincere gratitude to all
delegations for their solemn adherence to that
commitment.

For that reason, we believe that consideration
should be given to the establishment of formal
channels by which cooperation between the United
Nations
and
the
International
Fact-Finding
Commission can be strengthened, with a view to
realizing the potential of the Commission’s activities in
terms of the work of the Organization, particularly in
the sphere of the protection of civilian populations in
armed conflict.

My Government is of the view that the agreement
and the settlement by our heads of State and
Government in the world summit was a recognition
that collective action is the only way forward if we are
to free humanity once and for all of such grave
violations, which have been recurrent in recent decades
in many parts of the world. It was recognition that
business as usual is inadequate and can no longer
prevail.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Rwanda.

We firmly believe that the responsibility for
protecting populations from genocide, war crimes,
ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity lies first
and foremost with the State itself, as articulated in the

Mr. Kamanzi (Rwanda): My delegation wishes
to put on record its appreciation to the delegation of

18

S/PV.5319 (Resumption 1)

World Summit Outcome (General Assembly resolution
60/1). Yet we also contend that collective responsibility
is needed, and we support all courses of action
envisaged in the outcome resolution, including with
regard to the international community being prepared
to act in a timely and decisive manner through the
Security Council in accordance with the Charter,
including Chapter VII, where a State is manifestly
failing to protect its populations from those atrocities,
whenever necessary and appropriate.
Given that reference to the undeniable role of the
Security Council in that respect, we believe it is
appropriate for the Council to support this important
development on the agenda for the protection of
civilian populations. We urge the Council to seriously
consider including in the draft resolution under
consideration an expression of its willingness to
discharge its mandate and to act accordingly by
endorsing the commitment set out in the outcome
resolution of the world summit regarding the
responsibility to protect populations from genocide,
war crimes and ethnic cleansing.
The safety of civilian populations in all
circumstances, let alone situations of armed conflict, is
the very foundation of the legitimacy of the nations in
the name of which we stand. The claim of the principle
of national sovereignty will be fully valid only when
all our nations, individually or collectively, will have
turned their commitment into effective action and when
they will have set up appropriate preventative and
protective mechanisms to uphold that safety.
Empowering relevant bodies such as the Security
Council to take up that challenge is the first step
forward, which we cannot afford to overlook.
The President: Does the Under-SecretaryGeneral wish to comment in response to the various
contributions we have heard in the course of today’s
debate?
Mr. Egeland: I shall make a few concluding
remarks. First, we are very grateful indeed for the
many expressions of support through this long debate.
This has been a year of disasters and conflicts like no
other. We need your continued support and
encouragement. We need you to help us help the people
in the field do a better job in protecting civilians.
I think this debate has underlined the importance
of mainstreaming protection, providing a clear focus
for future action in addressing some of the critical gaps

in implementation. I am glad to hear that Council
members feel that the Secretary-General’s report
contributes to the Council’s developing a more
strategic and systematic perspective.
Throughout the debate here today there was
recognition of the needy to increase mechanisms for
peacemaking and conflict prevention as one of the
main tools for the protection of civilians. A number of
countries — I recall China, Algeria, Egypt —
emphasized the need to address the root causes of
conflict and to end conflict. The importance of
addressing the root causes of conflict and devoting
greater efforts to conflict prevention cannot be
understated. I think no one sees this more clearly than
our humanitarian workers in the field. We see the
importance of our work, but we also see its limits. As I
said this morning, effective humanitarian action —
keeping people alive — can never be an alibi for real
efforts to end a conflict and provide security for those
whom we feed and cloth and give emergency medical
assistance.
Today once again we focused mainly on Africa
and the unresolved African conflicts and protection
crises. I also very much recall the situation reported by
the Permanent Representative of the Government of
Iraq. With 30,000 civilians killed, according to him, it
is one of the most acute protection crises in the world
today. It only serves to emphasize the scale and
complexity of the problems facing us. I would like to
extend my deepest condolences to the victims of
conflict and violence in Iraq and in all the countries in
Africa, in Asia, and the Middle East and Latin
America, and elsewhere where we have protection
problems.
I am also pleased to hear that the Government of
Uganda today repeated that a negotiated outcome is
still on the table for northern Uganda, as was expressed
by the Permanent Representative. We condemn the
senseless violence of the Lord’s Resistance Army and
its leader, Joseph Kony, but it must also be recognized
that the problems created cannot be addressed solely
by military means. The conflict has lasted for 19 years,
and now all efforts must be used to reduce violence and
save lives.
I repeat that resources devoted to peacemaking,
to the root causes of the conflict and to security efforts
for the most vulnerable are totally inadequate. The
recently documented death rates among displaced

19

S/PV.5319 (Resumption 1)

populations in northern Uganda are at crisis levels,
considerably higher now than even those in Darfur,
where effective humanitarian action has reduced
mortality levels. However, Darfur is also a situation,
described by the colleague from the United States,
where developments are getting worse and where the
protection crisis is deepening. The international
community can begin to assist in addressing this only if
there is sustained access by the international
community to all the displaced, an access that of late
has been reduced both in northern Uganda and in
Darfur.
It was mentioned in the debate that we in the
humanitarian organizations must always observe
humanitarian principles. Over the past five years
humanitarian organizations have done considerably
more to ensure the impartiality of humanitarian work
and that we are always reaching those with the greatest
needs in an impartial manner. We are improving the
instruments at our disposal in line with relevant
General Assembly resolutions in order always to
respond impartially and to provide more predictable
assistance wherever it is required.
I think our neutrality has been strengthened by
improved guidance and training with military forces in
areas of civil-military cooperation to ensure a better
understanding
of
the
respective
roles
and
responsibilities of military and civilian actors, to
prevent a blurring of roles. Improved training for
humanitarian coordinators and greater internal
awareness
within
humanitarian
organizations
themselves have also reinforced humanitarian
principles. We have also worked with Governments in
areas affected by conflict to support them in their
responsibilities and to clearly identify the protection
needs of their populations.
Moreover, as this debate underscored, the
protection needs of civilians are still considerably
greater than our capacity to meet those needs. Because
humanitarian access has increased in many areas, there
is a need for protection activities and services. One
such area — not mentioned today — is the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, where we have much better
access than in previous years. We have provided
medical and psychosocial support to women and
children who have been raped; we have reunited
children with their families; and we have helped people
to obtain the documentation they need to gain access to
basic services.

20

As was recalled by the representative of
Denmark, among others, we are developing a search
protection standby capacity — PROCAP, as it is called.
One-hundred people stand by to go anywhere in the
world to carry out protection work as humanitarians
and human rights workers. The new Central
Emergency Response Fund, which we hope will be
agreed very soon at the level of the General Assembly,
will be a financial mechanism that can be used to allow
early action to save lives and reduce the prospects of
displacement, about which so many speakers raised
concerns today. Other reforms — including the
development of cluster leadership approaches among
all humanitarian actors — will also enable us to
respond more predictably where urgent needs for
protection and humanitarian assistance exist.
The importance of more accurate reporting to the
Security Council was highlighted here today by a
number of representatives of Member States. I, too,
have underlined the importance of providing the
Council with accurate global information. As my
predecessor, Ambassador Oshima, stressed on behalf of
Japan, that is not an easy task, and our progress in
developing comprehensive information systems has
been slower than I would have wished. We have
established the parameters for a reporting framework,
however, in agreement with the relevant United
Nations agencies and departments, and have
established links with many relevant academic research
institutions. The next report of the Secretary-General
will — I am sure, and I promise — show the fruit of
that collaboration.
The representative of the Russian Federation
stressed the importance of ensuring the implementation
of the first two Council resolutions on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict: resolutions 1265 (1999) and
1296 (2000). I agree wholeheartedly that that is
imperative. All of us — Governments, parties to
conflict, regional organizations, the Security Council,
peacekeeping missions and we in the humanitarian
community — need to do much more to implement
those important resolutions so that we can improve our
response to the ongoing protection concerns.
At the same time, as I said in my opening
statement, we now need a new resolution that reflects
relevant developments over the past five years in order
to guide and strengthen our future work in 2006 and
beyond. I urge Council members to redouble their
efforts to adopt not only a resolution, but a strong

S/PV.5319 (Resumption 1)

resolution, and to keep in the forefront of their minds
the children, women and men suffering daily in
conflict situations, for whom that resolution must make
a concrete difference.
Once again, I thank you, Mr. President, for
presiding over today’s debate, which has been most
important and valuable to me, to my team and to all of
us humanitarian actors who are working together to do
our part to protect civilians in need.
The President: Thank you, Mr. Egeland, not only
for that contribution, but for staying with us as long as
you have today. Given all your other pressing concerns,
that is particularly appreciated.
I now give the floor to Mr. Dominique Buff of the
International Committee of the Red Cross to make a
final comment.
Mr. Buff (International Committee of the Red
Cross): I should just like to tell you once again,
Mr. President, how much the International Committee

of the Red Cross — and particularly our VicePresident, who had to leave — appreciated your
invitation and the opportunity for the Committee to
address the Council this morning on this extremely
important issue.
The President: I thank all those who contributed
to this debate, as well as those who observed it and
listened to it.
The discussion on the draft resolution on this
subject will now continue. My hope is that that
discussion will draw upon the richness of the debate
we have had today and that, over the course of next
week, we can move to finalize and adopt a text. That is
what the President of the Council will try to deliver.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.05 p.m.

21
