S/PRST/2011/16

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
3 August 2011
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 6598th meeting of the Security Council, held on 3 August 2011, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
the Middle East”, the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council expresses its grave concern at the deteriorating
situation in Syria, and expresses profound regret at the death of many hundreds
of people.
“The Security Council condemns the widespread violations of human
rights and the use of force against civilians by the Syrian authorities.
“The Security Council calls for an immediate end to all violence and
urges all sides to act with utmost restraint, and to refrain from reprisals,
including attacks against state institutions.
“The Security Council calls on the Syrian authorities to fully respect
human rights and to comply with their obligations under applicable
international law. Those responsible for the violence should be held
accountable.
“The Security Council notes the announced commitments by the Syrian
authorities to reform, and regrets the lack of progress in implementation, and
calls upon the Syrian Government to implement its commitments.
“The Security Council reaffirms its strong commitment to the
sovereignty, independence, and territorial integrity of Syria. It stresses that the
only solution to the current crisis in Syria is through an inclusive and Syrianled political process, with the aim of effectively addressing the legitimate
aspirations and concerns of the population which will allow the full exercise of
fundamental freedoms for its entire population, including that of expression
and peaceful assembly.
“The Security Council calls on the Syrian authorities to alleviate the
humanitarian situation in crisis areas by ceasing the use of force against
affected towns, to allow expeditious and unhindered access for international
humanitarian agencies and workers, and cooperate fully with the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights.
“The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to update the
Security Council on the situation in Syria within 7 days.”
11-44275 (E) 040811

*1144275*
