UNITED NA TIONS

S.ECURITY COUNCIL
r OFFICIAL

RECORDS

TWENTY-NINTH

YEAR

1786’”

MEETING:

28 JULY 1974

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
...... ........ ........ ...... ...... ...

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .,. . . .

1

The situation in Cyprus:
((I) Letter dated 16 July 1974 from the Secretary-General to the President
of the Security Council (S/11334);
(h) Letter dated 16 July 1974 from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 1335);
(c.) :Letter.dated 20 July -1974 from the Permanent Representative of Greece
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 1348);
(tl) Letter dated 28 July 1974 from the Acting Permanent Representative of
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/l 1389) . . . . . . . . ..‘..........

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l786)

S/PV. 1786

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Officid Recode of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions trnd
Decisiom of the Secrrrity Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.
’

.

.

:

*.

SEVENTEEN

HUNDRED

AND EIGHTY-SIXTH

MEETING

Held in New York on Sunday, 28 July 1974, at 9 p.m.
President:

Mr. Javier Pl?REZ de CUfiLLAR

(Peru).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia,
Austria, Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist
Republic,
China, Costa Rica, France, Indonesia,
Iraq, Kenya, Mauritania,
Peru, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Cameroon
and United States of America.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l786)

1. Adoption
2.

of the agenda

The situation in CYDIUS:
(u) Letter dated 16July 1974 from the SecretaryGeneral to the President of the Security
Council (S/l 1334);
(h) Letter dated 16 July 1974 from the Permanent
Representative
of Cyprus to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/l 1335);
e-1 Letter dated 20 July 1974 from the Permanent
Representative
of Greece to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/l 1348);
(4 Letter dated 28 July 1974 from the Acting
Permanent ’ Representative of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/l 1389)
The miaeting

MWS ccrlled to order

trt 9.35 p.m.

Adoption of the agenda

The situation in Cyprus:
(a) Letter dated 16 July 1974 from the SecretaryGeneral to the President of the Security Council
(S/11334);
(6) Letter dated 16 July 1974 from the Permanent
, Representative of Cyprus to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 1335);

(c) Letter dated 20 July 1974 from the Permanent
Representative of Greece to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 1348);

(d) Letter dated 28 July 1974from the Acting Permanent
Representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/11389)
1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretdon
from Sprmish):
In accordance with decisions taken at previous
meetings [1779th-1781st
meetings],
I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite the representatives
of Cyprus, Turkey, Greece, Yugoslavia, Romania,
India and Mauritius to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote.
At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Rossides
(Cyprus),
Mr. Olccry (Turkey),
and Mr. Cwrryannis
(Greece) took plrrces crt the Council table.

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpret&ion
from Spcmish):
In view of the limited number of places available
at the Council table, I propose to invite the representatives of Yugoslavia, Romania, India and Mauritius
to take the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber, on the usual understanding that
they will be invited to come to the Council table when
it is their turn to address the Council.
At the invittrtion
of the President,
Mr. Kiki6
(Yugoslavia),
Mr.
Datcu
(Romania),
Mr.
Jaipal
(In&)
trnd Mr. Rcrrnphrrl (Murrritius)
took the plcrces
reserved for them crt the side of the Council t&de.

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretcrtion
from Spunish):
I have convened this urgent meeting of the Security
Council at the request of the Acting Permanent
Representative of the Soviet-Union which is contained
in document S/11389 and is the subject of agenda
item 2 tl.
4. Mr. SAFRONCHUK
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (tr~rnslrrtion from Russian): Mr. President,
the Soviet delegation,
on instructions
from the
Government of the USSR, has requested you to call
an urgent meeting of the Security Council in order
to consider the question of the implementation
of
resolution 353 (1974) concerning the situation in
Cyprus.
5. The need for the urgent convening of the Security
Council arises from the fact that resolution 353 (1974)
is not being implemented in its basic provisions; in
fact, so far not a single one of its provisions has
been implemented.

6. The foreign military intervention in the territory
of the independent State of Cyprus is still continuing.
There has been no restoration of the legal constitutional Government of the Republic of Cyprus, which
is headed by President Makarios; the institutions of
that Government have not been restored and are .
not functioning.
As a direct result of. the nonimplementation
of resolution 353 (1974), there persists
in Cyprus an explosive, tense situation which is a
direct threat to international peace and security.
7. Gravely concerned by what is happening in and
around Cyprus, the Soviet Government has today
issued a new statement concerning the situation
which is developing in Cyprus. Allow me to read out
the full text of that statement:

would mean in practice the destruction
of the Republic of Cyprus as a State.

or elimination

11. At the present time, when the Security Council
has a specially heightened responsibility
for the
urgent implementation
of resolution 353 (1974) in
its entirety, it should, in our view, have direct
knowledge of what is going on it Cyprus. The
Council should receive information
about Cyprus
from its own representatives.
It should ascertain
directly the reasons why the resolution that it adopted
on 20 July is not being implemented.
12. It is also quite clear that if, in the future,
through anybody’s fault, resolution 353 (1974) is not
implemented, the Council will then have to consider
and adopt measures which would really ensure the
implementation
of all the provisions of that resolution.
This is incumbent upon the Council under the Charter,
under which the Council has every means for
discharging this responsibility.

[The speaker read out the text of the statement
contained in document S/11390.]
8. As is emphasized in the statement by the Soviet
Government, the Security Council must take urgent
and effective measures to implement the key provisions of resolution 353 (1974). This is precisely
what the Soviet delegation has said repeatedly and
persistently at all the recent meetings of the Council.
In particular, no later than at yesterday’s meeting
of the Council, the Soviet delegation once more
drew the attention of Council members to the urgent
need to adopt effective measures aimed at implementing the decisions taken.by the Council concerning
Cyprus, and in particular resolution 353 (1974).

13. It is the first duty of the Council to ensure
that the constitutional Government of the Republic of
Cyprus, headed by President Makarios,
has the
opportunity to exercise its power in the country to
its fullest extent.
14. The Soviet delegation would like to stress once
again that, if the Council does not fulfil the responsibility entrusted to it and does not secure the
restoration of the sovereignty,
independence and
.territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus, the
situation in Cyprus may become even more acute
and lead to the creation of a permanent hotbed of
military conflict.

9. The Soviet delegation feels that the Council
must urgently take a decision requesting all interested
Governments to take without delay all necessary
measures for the practical implementation
of its
resolution 353 (1974) in its entirety-in
other words,
in all its parts and provisions.

15. This is precisely why we urgently appeal to the
Council without delay to adopt measures to ensure
the complete and immediate
implementation
of
resolution 353 (1974).

10. Up to this time, the situation with regard to
the implementation
of resolution 353 (1974), which
defines the basis for a political settlement in Cyprus,
remains unsatisfactory.
That is why the USSR
delegation feels that, in the present situation, it is
not sufficient merely to request all interested States
to take urgent and effective measures for the
implementation
of resolution 353 (1974) in its entirety.
It is necessary at the same time to insist on the
urgent withdrawal from the island of the Greek military
personnel whose blatant intervention in the internal
affairs of Cyprus has been, as everyone knows,
the main cause of the present crisis. But that is not
all. It is also necessary to secure the speediest
possible withdrawal from the island of all-1 repeat,
all-foreign
forces which are in Cyprus in violation
of its sovereignty,
independence
and territorial
integrity. @herwise+ the situation might lead to the
consolidation of the occupation of the independent
and sovereign State of the Republic of Cyprus and
the division of that State into separate parts, which

16. The PRESIDENT
finterpretcrtion from Sprrnish):
I call on the representative of the United Kingdom,
who wishes to speak on a point of order.
17. Mr. RICHARD
(United Kingdom): Mr. President, having been brought here by the Soviet Union
at 9.30 on a Sunday evening, may I ask you, on a
point of order, whether it is not perhaps appropriate
for the Soviet Union to make its position clear and,
since we have been considering resolution 353 (1974),
may I ask the Soviet Union a specific question to
which I hope I may .get a specific answer? Is the
Soviet Union calling for the withdrawal of the Turkish
troops at present on Cypriot soil, and is the Soviet
Union of the view that resolution 353 (1974) calls
for the withdrawal of the Turkish troops on Cypriot
soil? I regret having to interrupt in this way, but it
would seem to me that, if this is an emergency meeting
of the Security Council called to consider the
implementation
of resolution 353 (1974). it might
2

i

perhaps be desirable if the Council were to be told
by the Soviet Union which troops it is calling for
to be withdrawn from Cyprus-the
Turkish troops
or not?

calls upon the Security Council to send a special
mission to Cyprus composed of unspecified and as
yet unknown members of the Council. Finally, it
asks that the Council consider the question of further
measures to be taken.

18. Mr. SAFRONCHUK
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (trcrnslafion from Russian): Of course we
reserve the right to judge whether the representative
of the United Kingdom was speaking on a point of
order or whether he put a question. This is not clear
to us. However, if he has put a question, we shall
answer it.

22. I took the trouble before this meeting started
to inquire of the Soviet delegation what was the status
of this piece of paper. I was told it was not a draft
resolution. I was told it incorporated the thoughts of
the Soviet Union concerning the situation in Cyprus.
It is perhaps unfortunate, if these are the considered
opinions of a Government
as substantial and as
important as that of the Soviet Union, that no one
could have been found to sponsor it so as to bring
it in front of the Council this evening, when no doubt
we should have been able to consider it.

19. The statement by the Soviet Government which
I read out refers quite clearly to the Soviet Government’s insistence on the withdrawal of all foreign
forces from the territory of the sovereign State of
the Republic of Cyprus.

23. This is a mischievous meeting. It has been called
in a mischievous way. It is a propaganda exercise
which has been indulged in by the Soviet Union in
what, if I may say so, has been as unworthy manner,
at a time when negotiations which this Council in
fact sanctioned in resolution 353 (1974)-adopted,
may I say, unanimously a week ago yesterday-are
still going on. For us to have been subjected to the
sort of speech that we have heard this evening from
the Government of the Soviet Union is nothing less
than a contempt of. the Council and a contempt of
the United Nations.

20. Mr. RICHARD
(United Kingdom): In view of
that last answer from the representative of the Soviet
Union, I can be brief. I was both irritated and
curious, as I am sure the rest of the Security Council
was, to know why we were brought here this evening.
We have met on the issue of Cyprus seven or eight
times in the course of the last 14 days. We have been
here in connexion with Cyprus no fewer than six times
within the past eight days. We were indeed here-as
all of us will remember--even
as recently as last night.
What has changed between last night and this evening?
The answer is, nothing at all except that apparently
the Soviet Government decided to make a statement.
Of course the Soviet Government is perfectly entitled
to make a statement on the affairs of Cyprus, as
indeed is any other Government, but, with respect, I
must say that I do not think that the Soviet Government is entitled to bring people here at 9 o’clock
on a Sunday evening merely to listen to a piece of.
propaganda which has been distributed this afternoon
in Moscow. There are other ways, I submit with
great respect to the Soviet representative, particularly
in a free democracy, for distributing governmental
statements that do not require the persona1 intervention of the members of the Security Council.

24. Finally, may I say this. The representative of
the Soviet Union made one point this evening that
was new. He said that he insisted upon the direct
representation
of Cyprus at the talks in Geneva.
That is the first time that point has been made by the
Government of the Soviet Union. I took the trouble
while he was speaking to go through all the verbatim
records of this whole debate since we first talked
about it, and they are in front of me here. There is
not one. word in them by the representative of the
Soviet Union in which he dissented from the
propositions that were made by me in the Security
Council eight days ago concerning the Geneva
conference. There has not been one word from him
to suggest that that conference was not taking place
in the way in which it should have been taking place.

21. There is not even a draft resolution in front of us
tonight. There is a piece of paper, which most
members have seen, and which apparently the Soviet
Union has not had the forensic courage to present
to us. And if one looks at this document, what does it
do? First, it demands that all States take urgent and
effective measures towards the practical implementation of resolution
353 (1974). Secondly, this
document insists on the speediest withdrawal of all
foreign troops and military personnel at present in
Cyprus in violation of its sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity. We are very grateful for one
thing this evening at any rate, and that is that for
the first time we now know that the Soviet Union is
calling for the withdrawal of the Turkish troops in
Cyprus as well as for the withdrawal of the Greek
troops at present in Cyprus. Thirdly, this document

25. I will say no more. I have perhaps ‘said too
much, but I must say that I regard this exhibition
this evening as something which does the United
Nations no good whatsoever.
26. The PRESIDENT
(interpretcrtion
from Spcrnish):
I call on the representative of the Soviet Union on
a point of order.
27. Mr, SAFRONCHUK
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (trcrnslrrtion fionr Russian): Mr. President,
may I point out to you that, in blatant violation of
the provisional rules of procedure, the representative
of the United Kingdom, having asked to speak on
3

a point of order, has in fact made a statement on
the substance of the item now before the Council. I
categorically protest against that. That is the first
point I wish to make.

representative hypocritically
asking why we did not
make such a suggestion from the very beginning,
and why such a provision was not included in the
resolution.

28. Secondly, the United Kingdom representative,
having asked to speak on a point of order and
having taken advantage of that to talk about the
substance of the item, did his utmost’ to distort our
position. All the members of the Council know exactly
how the Council should function. There is already
a list of speakers wishing to take part in this debate.
But the United Kingdom representative, disregarding
the usual practice of this body, suddenly begins to
make a statement. We are simply amazed at this
behaviour on the part of the United Kingdom
representative. If he had wished to speak on the
substance of the item, if he had wished to comment
on our statement or if he had wished to comment on
the statement by the Soviet Government, he could
have had his name included in the list of speakers
and could have made his statement after you,
Mr. President, had called upon him. But, without
waiting to be called upon, he started to speak and
you, Sir, did not interrupt him. We cannot accept
such a blatant violation of the provisional rules of
procedure, and request that in future the United
Kingdom representative strictly respect those rules.
Of course, we must allow for the fact that he is a
comparative
newcomer to the United
Nations.
Perhaps he has not yet sufficiently
studied the
provisional rules of procedure and at the same time
the rules of propriety adopted in the Organization.
But he has advisers: let them prompt him as to the
proper way to behave in the Council.

3 1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from, Spunish):
I call on the representative of the United Kingdom
on a point of order.

29. Mr.
order.

RICHARD

(United

Kingdom):

Point

32. Mr. RICHARD (United Kingdom): It is perfectly
true that I am newer in the ways of the United Nations
than is the representative of the Soviet Union. I am,
however, much older in the ways of a free parliament
than he ever will be.
33. May I also say this to him. He has accused me
of ignoring the provisional rules of procedure. As I
understand the provisional rules of procedure, the
members of the Security Council are entitled to be
heard in general debate before the representatives of
those nations that have been invited to sit at the table
are heard. At the time when I asked to speak and
you, Mr. President, were kind enough to call on me,
the list of speakers had the names of two countries
on it: one was. the Soviet Union and the other was
Greece. The representative of the Soviet Union had,
made his intervention; indeed, we had all heard him.
The only other name on the list of speakers, therefore,
at the time when you, Sir, called on me was Greece.
Greece, as we know, is not a member of the Security
Council-although
we are, of course, very happy to
see its representative sitting at the table. Hence,
new in the ways of the United Nations as I am, it
would not seem to me-with
great respect-that
I
have violated any rule of procedure whatsoever.

of
34. What the representative of the Soviet Union is
really complaining about is not that I have violated
the rules of procedure but that I have exposed this
evening’s effort-for what in fact it is.

30. Mr. SAFRONCHUK
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (trunslufion from Russian):
I have not
finished, Mr. President. Since the United Kingdom
representative, in blatant violation of the provisional
rules of procedure, has spoken on the substance, I
shall not waste the Council’s time but shall proceed
now to answer one question of substance that he
raised. He blatantly distorted the truth by saying that
the Soviet delegation had never raised the question
of the direct representation of the Republic of Cyprus
at the tripartite talks in Geneva; That is not true,
and he knows better than any other member of the
Council that it is not so. The fact is that the Soviet
delegation, during the consideration
of the draft
resolution that became resolution 353 (1974), suggested
to the United Kingdom delegation that a ‘special
paragraph should be added, or a provision inserted
in paragraph 5, regarding the participation
of the
Republic of Cyprus in the Geneva talks. And it was
Mr. Richard,
the . representative
of the United
Kingdom, himself, who categorically disagreed with
that proposal. That is the truth; that is what actually
happened. But now we hear the United Kingdom

35. The PRESIDENT
(ink-pretution
from S&G&h):
I call on the representative of the Soviet Union on
a point of order.
36. Mr. SAFRONCHUK
(Union of Soviet Socialists
Republics) (trunshtion
from Russiun):
We wish to
reaffirm our view that the representative
of the
United Kingdom is not fully acquainted with the
provision1 rules of procedure. He would have had
the right to speak after we had finished if there had
been no other name on the list of speakers; in that
case he could have spoken on the substance of the
item. But he asked to speak on a point of order
and proceeded to speak on .the substance. That is
where the violation
of the provisional
rules of
procedure occurred.
37. Mr. RICHARD
Mr. President.
:
4

(United

Kingdom):

I apologize,

38.. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Spanish):
The next speaker is the representative of Greece,
and
f I now call on him.
39. Mr. CARAYANNIS
(Greece): I was of course
very interested to hear the question put by the
representative of the United Kingdom and the answer
given ‘by the representative of the Soviet Union.
Despite the fact that in his statement the representative of the Soviet Union did not mention the Turkish
army which invaded Cyprus, I take it that he had in
mind all foreign armies which are now in Cyprus-and
that includes the Turkish army. If I am mistaken, I
would expect the Soviet Union representative to
correct me.
40. The representative of the United Kingdom said
that nothing new had happened in regard to ,Cyprus
since the Council last met. I consider that to be
somewhat of an understatement. As a matter of fact,
today has been a very difficult and a very confused
day in Cyprus and in Geneva. There were news reports
that Greece was asking for a meeting of the Council.
As a matter of fact, today there were very many
violations of the cease-fire in Cyprus. Furthermore, in
Geneva Turkish conditions were being put forward
which it would be very difftcult for Greece to accept.
Those conditions were put forward by Turkey as
non-negotiable
conditions.
My Government
had
indeed thought of asking for a meeting of the Council
on the subject. If we did not do so it was because in
the early hours of the afternoon, New York time,
things seemed to be going a little better in Geneva, and
my Government is very anxious not to do anything
at all that might endanger the talks in Geneva.
41. My tiles are full of information on violations of
the cease-tire that have occurred today in Cyprus. I
have all the details. My files are also full of information
on everything that was asked today by Turkey at the
Geneva-talks. But I am not going to enter into’.this; I
am not going to go into the details, in the hope that
the Geneva talks may eventually go better.
,./
42. I should like to turn now to the statement made
by the representative of the Soviet Union. He spoke
of the withdrawal of all military personnel and all
foreign troops from Cyprus. He mentioned the Greek
military personnel in Cyprus; he did not mention the
Turkish troops ‘in Cyprus. .That gives me the oppor-’
tunity to explain several facts about this Greek military
personnel in Cyprus.
43. This personnel was requested from Greece by
the Government
of Cyprus, and I am sure that
Mr. Rossides will not deny that. It was asked for
because the Republic of Cyprus thought that it needed
to set up an army and that it needed that personnel. If
there had been no threats on the part of Turkey, I
think that Cyprus would have never asked for the
Greek military personnel, and that would have been
much better for all of us. It did happen that .that

Greek military personnel stationed in Cyprus was
mixed up in the coup which took place in Cyprus.
We consider that an unfortunate action and I should
like to declare here, before this Council, that we have
no difficulty whatsoever in withdrawing that military
personnel from Cyprus at any time. We would be
very happy if we could withdraw all of that personnel
by tomorrow morning.
44. But the Council would have to agree that there
is a difference between a country which comes here
and says to the Council, “All right, we had in a
foreign country personnel which. carried out a
regrettable action, which we ourselves .consider
regrettable, and we are ready to repair it at any time”,
and another country which carries out an invasion
in Cyprus with a big army, without being asked to do
so by the Government of Cyprus, and not only does
it not agree to withdraw its army when the reason
for which it carried out the invasion has’disappeared,
bu it accepts a cease-fire and is not gallant enough
to honour it.
45. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spunish):
I now call on the representative of Turkey.
46. Mr. OLCAY (Turkey): I did not understand
why we had to meet tonight and I continue not to
understand, but so much has already been said
around the table that I had to make certain notes to
try to unravel this complicated situation and give
answers to certain points which have been raised.
The situation-and
I beg to differ with those who
have a different opinion about it-both
in Cyprus and
in Geneva certainly does not warrant a meeting here.
I say that because my information-and
I am not
boasting-is certainly more accurate than any information emanating from Manhattan or, for that matter,
from many of the capitals of the member countries
around this table. Now, negotiations are continuing
in Geneva, and I -was pleased to hear from the
representative of Greece that there are some hopes
in Geneva. That is a feeling I share with him. The
negotiations are hard, difficult, sometimes bordering
on hopelessness, but they are continuing, and this
afternoon my Prime Minister asked to meet his
Greek counterpart. All this I at least would consider
as genuine steps towards the better, if not the ultimate,
good.
47. I was going to make a longish speech on the
Greek presence in Cyprus. I had a few points to
make, but I think that after at least some of what
has -been said by the representative of Greece there
remains little for me to add. They say they are sorry,
that they. have ,made a mistake. For. the past 15 years
they have been there as a result of a request by
some people in Cyprus, who felt that it would be
better to have Greek troops .over ‘threre. A ‘great
number of them were introduced under false pretences,
armed to the teeth with all kinds of weapons-and

we have had occasion to see in recent days the
arms which were introduced.

would prefer his Government
matter in Geneva.

48. I have had the occasion to speak on this subject
at length in the Council several times-as
did my
predecessor and his predecessors before him. It had
to do with armaments which were introduced as
agricultural implements, arms which had been brought
in under the custody of the United Nations Force
in Cyprus: arms, arms, arms, all the time. We have
seen them in action, used by Greek soldiers, tens
of thousands of them. They were there to train the
praetorian guard of the Archbishop, I suppose.

54. The representative of, the USSR has spoken
about the necessity to reinstitute a legal government
in Cyprus. I certainly do not dispute that necessity.
At this moment it is my feeling that it is not for this
Council at this late hour on a weekend to try to solve
the problem. The implementation
of the constitutional
process in the State of Cyprus, or what is left of
constitutionality
there, is certainly a problem for the
islanders themselves to solve. The present situation
in Cyprus, as far as I know, is that there is, if I am
not mistaken, an acting head of State-a
normal
procedure when the head of State is absent.

49. Turkey would like to remind the Council of what
has happened in the past 15 years in-as now evidenced
by what has been said by the representative of
Greece-a situation of total lawlessness, this for the
greater glory of Hellenism, I suppose. But all that has
not aroused the indignation of the Council, despite
the numerous times that the Turkish representative
sitting here has warned that it’ was leading to a
dangerous situation. And the dangerous situation
we were thinking of was a kind of sudden announcement of the realization of the ultimate aim which
has never been denied by any Greek statesman. I
suppose you cannot both deny it and remain a Greek
statesman either in Cyprus or in Greece. Yet, this
has not happened as we thought it would-with
a
sudden declaration of enosis. It took the form of the
toppling of a regime which was not giving the
movement towards enosis, enough speed. They were
more cautious about it.

to raise the whole

55. What I find a bit difficult to understand is the
over-dramatization
of an already tense situation and
the present way in which, this situation is being
handled. I have said-and I insist that it be said for
future reference-that
if the Council is to be called
to meetings as a result of information or impulses
received from hotel rooms on the island of Manhattan
instead of the island of Cyprus, without due consideration of the local situation and without taking into
account the superhuman efforts being spent in
Geneva to try to achieve an acceptable solution, a
peaceful solution, or at least the first steps towards
such a solution, I think we are in danger of not
achieving what I am sure is our common’ purpose
around this table-a return to normalcy.
56. In Cyprus now the Turkish Cypriots are making
every effort to become once more the masters of their
own fate in a Republic in which, until a fortnight
ago-and I insist on that: until .a fortnight ago, before
the coup and after the coup-the Greek Cypriots were
the only ones who were supposed to have a voice on
their own fate and on the fate of what we considered,
I hope not mistakenly, to be their common State.
Therefore I am very pleased that those views seem
to correspond with those expressed a moment ago by
the representative of the Soviet Union.

50. As a matter of fact, I cannot help but note-as
many around this table have, I am sure, noted-the
most recent change in the seating arrangements,
which are probably an indication of a return to the
previous enosis formula of the soft approach as
opposed to the brutal one we all feared would be the
result of the Sampson coup were it not for the Turkish
action.
51. And again today Greece has spoken for Cyprus.
If that is the result of any doubt concerning legitimacy,
I cannot dispute it. But I would suggest that where
we stand I have as much right as the representative
of Greece to speak on the subject-no more, no less.

57. Again, the Soviet representative
has also
touched upon the intention of the rebel Government
to achieve enosis. But I think that this statement needs
correction. Of course, we do not quarrel with the
contention of the Soviet representative that that was
the intention of the rebel Government-that
is, the
Sampson Government. But that goal was not a new
one. It has never changed, whatever regime has been
in power on the island, before or after the coup.

52. There are in Cyprus two communities, a Greek
community and a Turkish community,
the Turkish
community having always been voiceless but for the
representative of Turkey, who from time to time has
had occasion to speak of what they have been
subjected to.

58. I want to remind the members of the Council-and
I am sure that I have been doing so ad nnuscnmthat when I, during the more or less six-monthly
meetings of the Council on this subject, have
challenged Mr. Rossides to ‘state solemnly that the
Greek Cypriot administration
rejects the, idea of
enosis he has never been able to do so. I certainly
cannot hope he will do so this evening, but were he

53. Now, many points have been made around this
table. The representative of the United Kingdom
has placed special stress on the question of the
presence of the Turkish troops. That is the kind of
question that will raise so many side issues that I
6

to do so I would still have questions on this same
subject to ask him.

never happened before? Is this the time for levity,
for the remarks made.by the representative of Turkey
about the seating arrangement and so on?

59. I should like to make one more, and final, point.
When explaining the presence in Cyprus over 15 years,
or 10 years, or whatever it is-and it is at least a
decade-of a great number of Greek troops coming
from the mainland, or the motherland, or whatever
they like to call it, the Greek representative has
said they were requested by the Government
of
Cyprus. My question is this. Under which Constitution? The one tom to pieces because it gave a kind
of equality to the Turks? If that were so, we should
be faced by a strange situation, because under that
Constitution,
which was trampled
by the last
constitutional
administration
of the Greek Cypriots
in Cyprus, defence questions should have had the
endorsement of the Vice-President.
I have never
imagined he was consulted before Greek troops were
invited to be present in Cyprus.

65. Cyprus has been virtually slaughtered; it has been
subjected to an attempt at dismemberment
through
aggression and invasion from Turkey. Its open cities,
wholly undefended, have been strafed from the air by
Turkish military jets and burned by incendiary bombs;
its farms have been ablaze for days, and its people
have suffered the agonies of napalm bombs; its
hospitals and institutions appear to be almost special
targets in the frenzy of destruction.
66. And all this. was done even after Security
Council resolution 353 (1974) had called for a cease-fire
and that cease-fire had been accepted and consented
to by all the parties. For a whole week after the
adoption of that resolution the attacks continued,
in even greater strength. Instead of withdrawing its
armies, the Turkish Government has been continually
pouring in war InniCriel-tanks
and so forth-in order
to continue its frenzied attack against an ~almost
defenceless population.

60. Now, at this late hour, all this could not lead
us to any constructive result concerning the Cyprus
problem. The Cyprus problem has a long history; it
has been on the agenda of the Council for 10 years,
and for certain reasons. It is not here because the
Turkish Government,
after 10 years of constant
provocations, after having witnessed the increase to
an insufferable level of the presence of Greek
troops in Cyprus, has taken the steps with which all
members here are familiar and which have led to the
restoration of some kind of legality in Cyprus, to
the return to what we all hail now as democracy
in Greece, and to what we still continue to hope
might be the beginning of a definitive solution of the
Cypriot problem.

67. In view of that continued attack, the Security
Council realized the seriousness of the situation and
demanded a cease-fire more emphatically.
The day
after that demand on 24 July, there was quiet; .but
after that, the aggression resumed, with even greater
force.
68. At previous meetings I have given the names of
the cities and townships and villages that have been
occupied by force after the cease-fire. It is a long
list revealing that the areas of occupation in the
north of Cyprus, including the corridor towards
Nicosia, have been broadened. What was the purpose
of that occupation? By what right was it done? Is
the Charter of the United Nations not functioning
at all? What has the Security Council done in the face
of this defiance of its resolution, resulting in the
desolation
and destruction
of a small country
undefended and abandoned to the tender mercies of
the aggressor? What have the big Powers, the
permanent members of the Council, the guardians of
peace, justice and freedom in the world, done?
Nothing of any effectiveness. All they have done is to
delay the obviously needed measures for the implementation of the cease-fire- resolution and the other
measures called for by that resolution. Even the
inclusion of the usual provision in the resolution that
territory should not be acquired by force after the
cease-fire and that in the case of such acquisition
the troops should return to the positions they occupied
at the time of the cease-fire on 22 July-as suggested
by the Secretary-General-was
objected to. Of
course, the fact that such a provision was not
included is an invitation to any of the belligerents
that have accepted the cease-fire to proceed further
and get more territory, since there is no question of
its having to be returned. The absence of such a

61. The PRESIDENT
(inferpretafion
from Spmish):
I call on the representative of Greece to exercise
his right of reply.
62. Mr. CARAYANNIS
(Greece): This will be only
a very brief answer to my Turkish colleague in
reference to the seating arrangement he mentioned.
I should like to assure him that I had nothing to do
with it. As a matter of fact, I should like to assure
him that I very much enjoyed his company yesterday.
It was probably one of the few initiatives the Secretariat
takes, and I shall take the liberty to ask the Secretariat
to put me on the other side next time.
63. The PRESIDENT
(interpretrrtiotlfi.or,l
1 call on the representative of Cyprus.

Sprrnish):

64. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): We have just heard
the representative of Turkey make a very rambling
statement about all sorts of immaterial happenings
of the past. He has even referred to statements made
during the periodic meetings of the Security Council
to renew the mandate of the United Nations Force
in Cyprus. But the point is, what is the situation in
Cyprus today? What is happening in Cyprus that has
7

provision was obviously an inducement that Turkey
could not resist, and it therefore proceeded further.

I should be greatly obliged and I shall apologize for
anything I have said which is not true. But is it
not true that Cyprus is subjected to this attack?

69. Now, what did the Security Council do after
that? The Council seems to have been leaning so
much on the Geneva conference that it has almost
shifted to the shoulders of that conference its
responsibilities
for the maintenance of international
peace and security, and has almost abdicated its
authority on the subject, in spite of the obvious and
growing threats to international peace and security,
not only in regard to Cyprus.

74. Now, probably Turkey says, “I am a guarantor,
and the guarantee I give to Cyprus gives me the right
to invade it, to burn it and to do whatever I like
-because I am a guarantor.” But the guarantee, as
I said before, states that the guarantor, in case of
any breach of the provisions, should consult and make
representations
on measures necessary to assure
observance of those provisions. And as representatives
know, if in legal language you use one term such as
“representations”
or “measures”
it means that
whenever the term occurs it is used ~rneris (of the
same kind) to mean peaceful measures or representations. The term could not imply invasion by fire and
sword or destruction in order to carry out whatever
the provisions may be.

70. The strange situation is this: one of the participants in the conference, combining its role of so-called
guarantor of the independence, security and territorial
integrity of Cyprus with the role of the very aggressor
against that independence and territorial integrity,
is hindering any progress by the conference towards
implementation
of resolution 353 (1974) in order that
it may have the time to continue its aggression
against, and invasion of, the territory of Cyprus and
to occupy more territory. Every member of the
Council can see this by reading any daily newspaper;
he does not need to obtain any particular information
from his country.

75. So Turkey is obviously an aggressor under the
Charter of the United Nations to such a point that it
is really almost abdicating its authority as a guarantor
of Cyprus. That is a problem which has to be considered
in time. But again it is a reality. Every day all these
newspaper correspondents
who see the situation
there are writing with almost a feeling of compassion
concerning the affairs of Cyprus, almost as if they
would act themselves if they were in a position to do
so. And yet the Security Council still holds its tongue
lest it disturb the waters of the conference. But
surely that conference is heading towards nothing
practical when it becomes the instrument to force from
the other side political provisions that could not be
accepted except under the threat, “We are going to
pound and destroy Cyprus”.

71. Now, the fine idea is: “let us not disturb the
calm and cool waters of the Geneva conference”.
That would be an excellent idea if the Geneva
conference were proceeding in accordance with the
Security Council resolution. But the Geneva conference is only the child-the
outgrowth-of
the
Council resolution, and it should act in accordance
with that resolution. The Council has a responsibility
to see to it that the conference does act in accordance
with the Council resolution.
But does it act in
accordance with the resolution when one of the
participants is continually
violating the resolution
by refusing to comply with the cease-fire?

76. For eight whole days Turkey was taking new
forces to Cyprus. Over 100 tanks arrived in Cyprus
after the cease-fire. Only then, when it was seen that
neither Security Council nor the conference would do
anything to protect Cyprus, and was Cyprus found to
need some weapons from Greece to face a war which
the United Nations was not able to stop and.whichthe conference was tolerating without any sort of
protest. This is the peculiar situation that has to be
seen in its reality.

72. And what is still more strange, the country
that is the combined guarantor of and aggressor
against that independence, as we see in the newspaper
today, says to the conference blatantly and without
the slightest hesitation, “I will not comply with the
‘Security Council resolution calling for a cease-fire
unless my conditions for the political future of Cyprus
are accepted.” This means that it turns the discussion
on the political flture of Cyprus, which is a question
before the conference,‘to the subject of the threat of
continued aggression and fire and devastation in
Cyprus.

77. Mr. Denktas said that 20,000 men had arrived
from Turkey, and the newspapers say that this is a.
very conservative estimate because the tree figure
in as 25,000 men. What did the Greek forces in Cyprus
consist of? They consisted of 650 officers who were
subject to removal-and
they would have been
removed long before now if not for this upheaval-and
no others except the legitimate contingents.

73. Could such an event have been conceived of as
possible in the period following the Second World
War? It could have happened during or immediately
before the Second World War, but not at the present
stage of the world’s history. This is true. This is
reality. I should like to hear from those members
who disagree with me if and in what respect I have
said something which is not true and not a reality.

78. The situation which the representative of Turkey
is speaking of is the situation concerning armies that
were there five or six years ago.
79. I do not see how the present situation can
continue without something being done. The repre8

seniative of the Soviet Union brought up the subject
in a letter to the President of the Security Council.
He states:

81. The representative
of Turkey
should address
himself to that and reply to it. Why are those troops
there? What are they doing there? I did not go into
this question here because every man in the street
knows what they are doing there. Perhaps there are
exaggerations: it is possible. I was reading about rapes.
I was reading about all sorts of things. I do not know
whether they are true or not. I do not enter into that.
I do not wish, like the representative
of Turkey, to
cite all sorts of fantastic things. I read these things
in the newspaper, but I do not use them. I use what
I see, and what everyone sees, namely, that this is
a most blatant, ruthless and brutal aggression against
Cyprus that is contrary to all provisions of the Charter
and to the Security Council cease-fire resolution.

At the same time, 10 ships were disembarking military
personnel at Kyrenia port. When there should have
been a withdrawal
of forces further forces were
disembarking,
so that the war machine could be further
strengthened and further destruction could be wreaked
on Cyprus. At 8 a.m. a group of 15 helicopters and
another of 10 helicopters landed in Agyrtas enclave.
A number of tanks was observed
moving from
Kyrenia to Karavas, where a unit of the National
Guard was stationed. At 8.40 a.m. a Turkish armoured
vehicle bearing United Nations ensigns was observed
moving from Larnaca to Ayios Pavlos. At 9.50 a.m.
the village of Ayios Ermolaos,
which the Turks
abandoned yesterday evening, was reoccupied-and
that means war and fighting and bloodshed, a serious
matter which justifies our losing some sleep, so that
we may see what can be done by the Security
Council, which bears the responsibility.
Eight tanks
participated
in the attack on that little village of
Ayios Ermolaos. Previously we had the information,
which I gave here, that the people of that village
were ordered by the Turks to abandon the village
and their property or the village would be bombarded
and destroyed. At 10 a.m. four of the afore-mentioned
tanks continued their advance towards Sisklipos. At
11 a.m. 14 Turkish helicopters landed at the Nicosia
enclave south of Agyrtas
village, bringing new
personnel. At 12.33 p.m. Turkish vessels disembarked
artillery units eight kilometres
west of Kyrenia. At
1 p.m. Turkish troops opened fire against the village
of Lymbia. So this continues.
It is not as if all
were quiet in Cyprus. Things are quiet only in the
sense that Cyprus has not exploded altogether, while
forces are being built up. At 4.30 p.m. the region
of Klepini, Pakhyammos
and the village of Ayios
Epiktitos was attacked with artillery and the region
was shelled. There were further violations at 6 p.m.,
at 6.30 p.m. and up to 6.45 p.m., when Turkish troops
supported by tanks attacked Greek Cypriot units in
the region of Ayios Yeoryios,
and Turkish vessels
continued disembarking
war mcrtPrie/,
vehicles and
arms in the region of Karavas. This preparation for
further war has continued under a cease-fire.

82. Therefore, the Security Council is meeting on the
question of Cyprus. Whatever objections there are
about the letter of the Soviet Union is a matter that
I am not entering into. We see the situation as one of
aggression by Turkey and of the need for the Council
to act immediately to stop that aggression and to see
that the armies are withdrawn.
When that is done,
progress in the Geneva conference will be possible
-not under the threat of war and through the killing
of people and the occupation of territory,
but in the
free atmosphere of peace, or at least a cease-fire.
That is the important
matter. 1 think this is the
occasion for considering what is happening and for
dealing with it.

84. I have said before-and
I must say again-that
something has to be done to stop this, even though
it may not seem important to some. How long are
we to be left at the mercy of the aggressor, who
happens to be a participant in the Geneva conference
and who prevents progress towards
a solution or
implementation
of the resolution? This is a serious
matter that must be looked into by the Security
Council; it should not be left to the conference, whose
duty is not to maintain international
peace and
security but to look for a solution to the problem.
The solution to the problem can come only if the
Council obtains the implementation
of the cease-fire
which it called for in its resolution 353 (1974).

83. On
violations
Ermolaos

85. The PRESIDENT
(i/lfErplettrtiorl,f~o/l?
I call on the representative
of Turkey,
exercise the right of reply.

“The need for an urgent meeting of the Security
Council is created by the fact that the basic provisions of the resolution [353 t/974)] are not being
implemented.”
[S/f 13891
80. What are those basic provisions? They are, first,
the cease-fire, and, secondly, the withdrawal
of the
foreign troops.
And the military
intervention
is
continuing. Perhaps the representative
of the Soviet
Union should have specified more distinctly who the
violent aggressor is today. That would have been
more proper and would have made unnecessary
the
pertinent question by the representative
of the United
Kingdom. But the fact remains that the resolution
says all foreign troops., But, of course, “all” includes
the 25,000 Turkish troops which are there and the
650 officers which have been there, and perhaps some
that have arrived today as well. So we take this to
mean, even without saying so specifically,
Turkey.
Even if the representative of the Soviet Union wanted
to be so delicate as not to mention that name in the
document
itself,
the meaning is obvious
and
undoubted.

28 July-that
is, today-the
following
have occured. At I.45 a.m. the villages of
and Sisklipos were attacked with mortars.
9

Sprrrlish):

who wishes

to

86. Mr. OLCAY
(Turkey):
Out of respect for the
members of the Council at this late hour, I will be
brief-or
at least as brief as I can.

Their predecessors
are the welcome brothers from
northern Greece-that
is the term used by Archbishop
Makarios,
not me-coming
to the southern part of
the country. That was. said two months .ago, and I
have already had occasion to quote it.

87. The adjective “immaterial”,
lightly used by
Mr. Rossides about what I had said, reminds me of
his attitude and the attitude of the forces he represents
towards all the warnings we have given for years in
this chamber. I think that it is obvious to those who
study this problem in depth that this is the root of
all the evils in Cyprus. Mr. Rossides and the forces
he represents
have lightly disregarded
all Turkish
rights in Cyprus, the plight of the Turks on the island,
the many appeals for attempts to find a workable
constitution.
But they had the might; they had the
superiority.
They had also invited the Greek troops
to train their forces. Then suddenly one morning
we reached a position where these Greek troops
ceased to be welcomed and the red carpet was rolled
up. Then it was said:

89. Mr. Rossides has reproached me for using certain
newspapers as my sources. Of course, I have no other
sources in regard to what is said by the supreme
authorities in the Greek Cypriot administration
and
I have to read what the press says about that.
90. Mr. Rossides also reproaches me for speaking
of the past. What is important is the present, because
at present it is the Greeks in Cyprus who are the
sufferers. As long as it is not the Greeks in Cyprus
that are the sufferers there is no Cyprus problem and
there is no reason to bring the matter here. This is
a matter of fact. The Turks are a small minority
who have to abide by the rules of the game and wait
until the day when they become members of greater
Greece, ,even a minor minority in greater Greece.
That was the plan, which we have thwarted,
and
that is the reason for this outburst of indignation on
the part of Mr. Rossides.

armoured cars and tanks had passed the
fence . . . of the Presidential
Palace, which was
shaking from mortar shells.”
“

. .

.

‘L... I am afraid that the number of casualties
is large and that the material destruction is heavy.”

91. Now, Mr. Rossides, the present is always built
on the past. Today’s harvest is bitter because the
seeds were bitter. I know
how you personally,
Mr. Rossides, feel about these questions; I know that
you want to see a fair solution. But I know also
that some of those you have been representing here
have not been of the same view.

“... The capture of the airport outside the capital
was carried out by officers and men of the Greek
contigent camping near the airport.
certain photographs
appearing in the world
press show armoured vehicles and tanks belonging
to the Greek contingent in Cyprus.
‘I

.

. .

92. Whenever we have raised the possibility
of a
State which, like a great number of others around
this table and in the United Nations as a whole, would
have a kind of federal constitution,
the immediate
response has been, “You want to dismember the
State; you want to occupy it”. But we know that the
aim, and the steps used to ensure its smooth achievement, has always been not to give any kind of status
to the other element in Cyprus. However,
that other
element refuses to be Greek;. it has never been Greek;
it never will be Greek. It will never agree to live under
a Greek State-whether
that Greek State is called
“Greece”
or “Cyprus”-which
has a strictly Greek
approach to the problem of the constitution
of the
State. I proclaim this very clearly for anyone who
wants to hear it: Turkey and the members of the
Turkish Cypriot community will never accept a Greek
State, a second Greece in Cyprus. That is very clear.
Everything has to be done to see to it that the independent, soirereign State of Cyprus faces that reality,
which up to now it has refused to face. Everything
has to be done to see to it that the two communities
which constitute the State, which 10 or 15 years ago
willingly decided to live together, can continue to
live together on a basis of full equality. That is the
only way to ensure that in future the problem of
Cyprus does not have to come to the Security Council
again at midnight on a Sunday.

6‘ . . . night flights of Greek aircraft transporting
to Cyprus person’nel in civilian clothes and taking
back to Greece dead and wounded men . . .
the brutal force of the armoured
tanks may have, prevailed.”
6‘

. . .

cars and

It was an invasion,
which violated the
independence and the sovereignty of the Republic.”
“

. . .

11780th

meeting,

pcrtus.

13,

16,

18-21

rind

23.1

Those are not my words.
88. Mr. R&sides
has said that Turkish
forces
numbering 20,000 or 25,000 men are in Cyprus and
that this is an invasion. May I ask what is the limit
at which the word “invasion”
applies? The tens of
thousands
of Greek forces on the island are not
forces of invasion, because they happen to speak
Greek. They’happen to be there to promote Hellenism.
They are there to promote, I suppose, the ultimate
goal, to which, again, there is no reference-and
I do
not expect any such reference, because I know what
they think about it, I know what their aim is. Of
course, when finally the Turks appear on the island,
the Turks are the invaders-not
their predecessors.
10

discussion,
if need be. If the United
Kingdom
representative
has a draft text to submit regarding
this situation, we are ready to consider it very carefully.
We are also ready, in a constructive
spirit, to listen
to any comments he may wish to make on our ideas.
It would appear that he is not willing to listen to our
remarks, and brushes them aside from the very outset.
Yet, for our part, we are prepared to listen to him.

93. Mr. SAFRONCHUK
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (rranskrtion
from Russian):
Earlier in the
meeting I spoke on a point of order to draw attention
to the arbitrary way in which the United Kingdom
representative
used his right to speak on a point of
order. I should now like to exercise my right of reply
with regard to the matters of substance that he raised.
94. The Soviet delegation requested this meeting of
the Council not merely to inform members of the
contents of the statement by the Soviet Government
dated 28 July-although,
of course, the contents
of that statement are of the utmost importance and
urgency, and we hope that the members of the Council
will study the statement carefully.

100. I wish to make one final remark regarding the
situation
in Cyprus
and the statement
that the
situation there remains unchanged. It is not true to
say that nothing has happened in Cyprus during the
past 24 hours. From the statement
made by the
representative
of Cyprus, and from those by other
representatives
at this meeting, it is clear that the
situation has taken a turn for the worse. The foreign
military interference
and intervention
continues; it
has even been stepped up. The Government of Cyprus,
the lawful Government of Cyprus, headed by President
Makarios, is still unable to function. Bu’t the situation
has been complicated by the fact that, as pointed out
in the statement by the Soviet Government,
attempts
are being made and preparations
are under way to
dismember the Republic of Cyprus, a sovereign State,
by all kinds
of behind-the-scenes
manoeuvring
elsewhere:
in other words, attempts are being made
in certain
NATO
circles,
as we have already
pointed out, to settle the fate of Cyprus behind the
backs of the Cypriot people without regard to their
legitimate interests-indeed,
to the detriment of their
vital interests.
Are these not facts? Can anyone
present here deny them?

95. We regret that the representative
of the United
Kingdom rejected our statement and resorted to the
old, stereotyped routine calumny in the spirit of the
worst period of the cold war.
96. Now, regarding the fact that the Soviet delegation
distributed a document which the United Kingdom
representative
has described as a draft resolution, a
Soviet draft, and so on, I should like to remind the
United Kingdom
representative
that the Security
Council folIows an established
practice known to
all: before a given draft resolution is circulated, the
members of the Council usually hold consultations
and exchange views on the substance of the draft
which a given delegation may wish to submit.
97. The Soviet delegation requested the convening
of this ‘meeting of the Council because it had certain
ideas and proposals to put forward. In keeping with
established
practice,
we have the right, during
consultations
before the Council meets, to inform
all members of our ideas. We respect the views of all
the members of the Council; we are prepared to hear
their views, and they have heard ours. Why has the
representative
of the United Kingdom made such a
fuss about this, especially in the form of a point of
order? Where have we violated the provisional rules
of procedure?
We have simply followed
standard
practice.

101. Thus, the situation is changing for the worse;
is not remaining static.

it

102. That is why we ask all members of the Council
to make a Serious assessment of the present situation
with a full sense of the responsibility
entrusted to us
undtir the Charter. We therefore request that tomorrow
the Council should be convened so that we may
continue the discussion of this question.
103. The PRESIDENT
(interprefafion
from
ish): I call on the representative
of Cyprus.

98. We have taken note of the statement by the
United Kingdom
representative
that he has had
considerable experience of the workings of the United
Kingdom Parliament. He was a member of the House
of Commons. That is very good; we understand the
value of that experience;
and we respect it. But,
fortunately
or unfortunately,
the rules of procedure
of the United Kingdom House of Commons and the
rules of procedure of the Security Council differ;
they are not identical. In the work of the Council,
we have to use as our guide the provisional
rules
of procedure of the Councii.

Span-

104. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): I shall not take any
time to reply to the representative
of Turkey because
he has not answered any of the points that I have
raised. He speaks about the past and things which
have no relation to today. What about the invasion,
the bombings, the burnings? What about the violations
of the cease-fire? What does he have to say about
that? What about his double role as guarantor and
as invader and aggressor? None of those things have
been answered.
Then he talks about all sorts of
insignificant
things which have been raised and
answered on previous occasions.

99. Naturally,
after consulting all members of the
Council, the Soviet delegation would not hesitate or
fear to put its draft text on the Council table for

105. He speaks about the plight of the Turks in
Cyprus. Well, all the reports of the Secretary-General
11

-and they are there on record-speak
highly of the
conduct of the Government in allowing freedom of
movement to all, the Turks in Cyprus, even at times
when such movement was dangerous because of
fighting. Yet, the Greek Cypriots have no freedom
of movement and they do not have it today: they did
not and do not have freedom of movement over a
hundred public roads held by the Turks, while every
Turk in Cyprus has had a right to move anywhere in
the island, except in military posts, which were
equally prohibited to Greek Cypriots. The Turks had
this freedom of movement, and it was commented
upon. The situation was criticized by many correspondents who came there and said that it was an
intolerable situation that the Greek Cypriots, the
majority of the population,
had no freedom of
movement, whereas the Turkish Cypriots had had it
for years.

morning had to take refuge in a foreign base on the
island-as a result of the machinations of people that
he himself had invited in.
110. I have nothing to add, and I apologize once
again for taking the floor. If I receive an answer, I
shall not take the floor again.
111. Mr. RICHARD
(United Kingdom):
I would
not wish at this hour of the night, with the Council
in a mood of accustomed good humour, to raise the
temperature yet again. I would only, if I might, make
two observations. First of all, I do not really think that
the representative of the Soviet Union is entitled to be
quite so sensitive. If he comes along and makes the
sort of speech that he made this evening, and indeed
makes it at the sort of hour at which he made it his
evening, I do not think he can really be totally
surprised if he is answered in the same vein.

106. So what was the plight of the Turkish Cypriots?
Their plight was that they were put in enclaves by
their own military and where not allowed to move
out except with the permission of the military, and
that their political life was stifled by the military. I
shall not enter into that matter because those are
things which happened in times of peace. But one
should not speak about the plight of the Turks. There
was no plight. The Turks were in a better position
than the Greek Cypriots in many ways. Economically,
they would have been better off if they had consented
to form one economic unit with the Greek people of
Cyprus, as was repeatedly
suggested by the
Secretary-General. Many offers were made to them to
this effect, but they were disallowed by those who
were ruling them from outside because they wished to
maintain separation with a view to partition. Now they
try to achieve partition by blood and iron. On all
this the representative of Turkey has given no reply.
107. The PRESIDENT
(inferpretafion from
ish): I call on the representative of Turkey.

112. The Soviet Union representative has made a
suggestion that we should definitely have a meeting
tomorrow. I wonder if I might make one observation
in relation to a meeting tomorrow. I do not know,
and I do not think any of us can tell. at this time,
whether a meeting tomorrow will or will not be
appropriate. It may be that something might happen
as a result of the Geneva conference that makes a
Council meeting desirable and necessary; but it may be
that the opposite will take place. I would have thought
that, particularly after this evening’s experience, it
might be better, Mr. President, if you were to consult
in the usual way tomorrow, to see whether there
was ageneral feeling among the members of the Council
that a meeting was necessary and, indeed, if they
felt that a meeting was necessary, at what time it
ought to be held.
113. So I do not wish, as I say, to diverge too much
from the representative of the Soviet Union on this,
but it does seem to me that it might perhaps be more
appropriate to hold consultations
tomorrow than
definitely to take adecision to schedule a meeting now.

Span-

108. Mr. OLCAY (Turkey): I really apologize to all
the members of the Security Council, but Mr. Rossides
has to be answered because he has said some things
which are not true, to say the least. If Mr. Rossides
qualifies the statements of Archbishop Makarios which
I read as insignificant,
I have nothing to add. But
there are some other things I have said which he has
also qualified as insignificant.
Mr. Rossides’ should
realize that on these insignificant things depend the
fate of Cyprus and of the Turkish Cypriots. I referred
to their future on the basis of what we know of their
past.

114. The PRESIDENT
(intqwetation
from
ish): I call on the representative of Cyprus.

Span-

115. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): I wanted to point out
to the representative of Turkey that what the President
of Cyprus said in his statement here about the
intervention of the junta regime in Greece has nothing
to do with the ordinary conduct of Greek affairs.
Secondly, it shows the spirit of independence of
Cyprus: there is exactly the same reaction whether
it is one side or the other that intervenes by force.
But the difference between the two is that in this
case the intervention is a partitionist one destroying
the territorial integrity of Cyprus. That makes the
difference. And then of course there is the war effort,
which also makes quite a difference.

109. In Cyprus, his country, tens of thousands of
Turks have.lived as refugees for the past 10 years,
and for him to imply that that situation was due to
the machinations of some politicians suggests a very
strange conception of what went on in his own island.
As a matter of fact, the leaders knew so little about
what went on in their island that the head of State one

116. Mr. SAFRONCHUK
(Unionof Soviet Socialist
Republics) (trwdntion
from Russirm): The Security
12

Council is entitled to discuss the question of measures
to implement earlier resolutions that it adopted on
Cyprus, without regard to the progress or outcome
of the current talks in Geneva. The Council is not a
subsidiary organ of the three-Power talks in Geneva.
It is the most important
organ of the United
Nations; it would be wrong for the Council to be
bound by the work of other organs or for its work to
be made contingent upon the work of other organs in
other places.

Geneva-we
would not wish the Council
meeting simply for the sake of meeting.

to go on

121. Therefore I would again address this appeal to
our Soviet colleague: Rather than attempting
to
schedule a meeting for tomorrow now, could we not
first see if consultations among us at the request of
the President might lead us to determine whether a
scheduled meeting would be useful?
122. Mr. SAFRONCHUK
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (trunslation from Russian): As we see it,
a very clear tendency is emerging on the part of
certain delegations to carry the discussion of the
situation in Cyprus beyond the framework of the
Security Council, to discuss the question elsewhere
and to make the work of the Council contingent
upon the outcome of the Geneva talks-in
which,
as we know, Cyprus is not participating.
Such a
tendency is, of course, a dangerous one. It could lead
to a situation whereby the Council would be unable at
the proper time to implement its earlier decisions,
since it might simply find itself faced with a fait
accompli. Furthermore, from the standpoint of the
prestige of the Council and its obligations under the
Charter, it would, of course, be wrong to postpone
the work of the Council, to delay it merely because
talks are going on in Geneva. That is why the Soviet
delegation will tomorrow once again insist that the
Council be convened, if the Council does not take a
decision to that effect today.

117. The Soviet delegation has made a number of
constructive and practical proposals which are now
under consideration by the members of the Council.
The Council can and should meet tomorrow to consider
the substance of these proposals. By that time, we
expect the Council to have before it a draft resolution
on this question. That is why we urge that the Council
should be reconvened. The situation is such that the
consideration and the adoption of the most urgent
measures is imperative, and the Council has the duty
to take the necessary action.
118. Sir Laurence MCINTYRE
(Australia): I wonder
if we might appeal to the representative of the Soviet
Union to respond to the suggestion that has been made
by the representative of the United Kingdom. It may
be that by tomorrow we shall have some substantive
proposals-emanating,
perhaps, from the representative of the Soviet Union-to
which we can apply
ourselves. But my delegation is not aware tonight of
any, as it were, definitive proposals being before us.
Some rather indefinite ideas have been circulated
among us, but my delegation would not at this stage
regard them as having anything of the nature of
definitive proposals.

123. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from
ish): I call on the representative of Cyprus.

Span-

124. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): I have no right to
enter into a discussion among members as to whether
the Council should meet tomorrow. I should like to
refer to another, entirely independent question.

119. As I have said, by tomorrow we may have
something rather more definitive to consider. Would
it not be preferable not to attempt to schedule a
meeting of the Council for tomorrow, but rather
perhaps, at the discretion of the President, to engage
in consultations? It could be that before the end of
tomorrow we would find ourselves in a position in
which we could usefully meet. But my delegation still
does not quite know why we have been called here
for this emergency meeting this evening. So far as I can
see, this meeting has not greatly helped the cause of
Cyprus or the people of Cyprus or aided the restoration of constitutional government in Cyprus.

125. I understand from what the representative of
Australia has said that he wants the Geneva talks to
proceed constructively.
Indeed, we all do. But we
know from official reports, and also from newspaper
reports, that one of the sides is using the question of
the cease-fire as a weapon so that the negotiations
will be conducted under threat and not in a free
atmosphere suitable for finding a political solution of
the problem. In those circumstances, as long as the
Security Council does not perform its duty of enforcing
the cease-fire but instead allows it to be used as a
weapon, as a means of making threats in the Geneva
negotiations, those negotiations are bound to fail. That
is why the Council must meet to solve the problem
of the cease-fire.

120. Meanwhile,
the latest reports, which are
coming in even this evening, tell us that, as far as we
can judge, the negotiations in Geneva are still going
ahead. We are told that all participants have been
working without sleep and are still carrying on the good
work, if I may call it that. As far as my delegation
is concerned, so long as there is any prospect of
some progress towards agreement in those negotiations-and
I think that as of 24 hours ago all of us
here had agreed that the most important thing for us
to wait for, if we could, was some sign of progress in

126. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from SpanDoes any member wish to speak in connexion
with the proposal of the representative of the Soviet
Union that the Council meet tomorrow? Since I hear
no objection, the Council will be convened tomorrow
at 3 p.m.

ish):

The meeting rose trt 11.40 p.m.

13

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS’PUBLICATIONS

United
Nations
publications
may be obtained
throughout
the world. Consult
your bookstore
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES

PUBLICATIONS

or

from bookstores
and distributors
write to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
ddpositaires
du monde entier. Informes-vous
aupms de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
B : Nations Unies, Section des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
KAIC

HOJIY’ISiTb

Hanamx
JHHaX
aameY
HawiR,

OpraHmauww
(M-be~weemiarx
HaqHR
YOR(~O nymmb
B WAHX(HLIX
~a&H areHTCIB&X
130 acex
paRORaX
aaxpa.
HaBoAHTe
CnpaBltx
06 XJAaHHxX
B
KHHxcH016
Yaramme
HIIW nHmHTe
no azlpecy
: OpraHH3aIViR
06'beAHxeHEblX
C~K~HR no nponmce
wAaH&i.
HMO-Hopx
RRH XCemesa.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

H3JJAHHll

PUBLICACIONES

OPI-AHH3AUHH

DE

OEi’bE&HHEHHhIX

LAS

NACIONES

HAI&HH

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas estAn en venta en librerfas
y casas distribuidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Gonsulte
a su librero
o dirfjase
a: Naciones
Unidas. Secci6n de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

00300

74-82001-April1983-2,200
