s

UNITED
NATIONS

Security Council

Distr.
GENERAL
S/25002
22 December 1992
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

NOTE BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL
Following consultations with the members of the Security Council, the
President of the Council made the following statement, on behalf of the
Council, at its 3152nd meeting, held on 22 December 1992, in connection with
the Council's consideration of the item entitled "Letter dated
18 December 1992 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the
Security Council":
"The Security Council has taken note of the letter dated
18 December 1992 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of
the Council (S/24996) concerning the situation in Angola. It expresses
serious concern at the lack of progress in implementing the 'Acordos de
Paz para Angola' and at the continuation of the dangerous political and
security situation in the country.
"The Security Council reiterates its strong appeal to the two
parties to engage in a continuous and meaningful dialogue aimed at
national reconciliation and at the participation of all parties in the
democratic process, and to agree on a clear timetable and programme of
action to complete the implementation of the 'Acordos de Paz'. The
Security Council urges that the military forces of the Uniao Nacional
. para a Independencia Total de Angola (UNITA) be immediately withdrawn
from Uige and Negage and that the Government administration be fully
restored there and that the two parties resume the direct talks started
in Namibe on 26 November 1992. It again urges both parties to
demonstrate their commitment to the 'Acordos de Paz', in particular with
regard to confinement of their troops and collection of their weapons,
demobilization, formation of the national armed forces and restoration of
the central administration throughout the country.
"The Security Council also considers it essential that both parties
agree without delay on security and other arrangements which would allow
all ministers and other high-ranking officials to occupy the posts which
have been offered by the Government and for all deputies to assume their
functions in the National Assembly.

92-83962

3625c (E)

221292

I• • •

S/25002
English
Page 2
"The Security Council also considers it imperative that both parties
agree on a realistic plan of action for full implementation of the
'Acordos de Paz', and to facilitate a continuing United Nations presence
in Angola. It underlines the need for the two sides to produce early
evidence of their willingness and ability to work together to implement
the 'Acordos de Paz', so that the international community would feel
encouraged to continue to commit its scarce resources to the continuation
of the United Nations operation in Angola on its present scale.
"The Security Council fully supports the action of the
Secretary-General aimed at resolving the present crisis and appeals to
President dos Santos and Dr. Savimbi to accept the Secretary-General's
invitation to attend, under his auspices, a joint meeting at an agreed
location, to confirm that real progress has been made in the reactivation
of the Bicesse Accords with a view to their full implementation and that
agreement has been reached on a continuing United Nations presence in
Angola."
