General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

106

Health Organization by the 1971 Convention on Psychotropic Substances.
102nd plenary meeting
16 December 1976

31/126.

Emergency assistance for South African
refugee students

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 31/6 I of 9 November 1976
relating to the item entitled "Policies of apartheid of
the Government of South Africa",
Noting, in particular, that paragraph 12 of the abovementioned resolution calls upon Member States and
the specialized agencies, through emergency joint projects and financial assistance, to help Lesotho and other
countries bordering South Africa to ensure the provision
of educational facilities to the rapidly growing number
of refugee students from South Africa,
Concerned about the continuing influx of refugees,
including in particular large numbers of South African
students fleeing to the bordering States of Botswana,
Lesotho and Swaziland, thus imposing a heavy burden
on the limited resources and employment opportunities
of these countries,
1. Reaffirms that humanitarian assistance by the international community to all those persecuted under repressive and discriminatory legislation in South Africa,
Namibia and Southern Rhodesia is appropriate and
essential;

2. Recognizes the urgent need to organize an effective programme of international assistance to help in
dealing with the recent South African student refugee
problem in countries bordering South Africa;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, as a matter of
urgency, to consult with the Governments of Botswana,
Lesotho and Swaziland and the liberation movements
concerned with a view to taking immediate steps to
organize and provide appropriate emergency financial
and other forms of assistance for the care, subsistence
and education of these refugee students;
4. Urges all States to respond generously to any
appeals which the Secretary-General might make for
assistance for these refugees;
5. Calls upon the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization, the United Nations
Development Programme, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the United
Nations Trust Fund for South Africa, the United Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa and other United Nations bodies and organs,
as may be appropriate, to co-operate fully with the
Secretary-General in the implementation of the programme of assistance;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the situation under review and to report to the General
Assembly as and when necessary.

102nd plenary meeting
16 December 1976

31/127.

Measures to improve the situation and
ensure the human rights and dignity of
all migrant workers

The General Assembly,
Recalling the terms of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights 49 and of the International Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,00
Considering the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic
Relations of 1961 51 and the Vienna Convention on
Consular Relations of 1963, 52
Considering also the Migrant Workers (Supplementary Provisions) Convention, 1975,53 and the Recommendation concerning Migrant Workers, 1975,H
adopted by the General Conference of the International
Labour Organisation,
Recalling its resolutions 2920 (XXVII) of 15 November 1972, 3224 (XXIX) of 6 November 1974
and 3449 (XXX) of 9 December 1975 concerning
migrant workers, and Economic and Social Council
resolution 1749 (LIV) of 16 May 1973, in which
the Council affirmed the need for the United Nations
to consider the situation of migrant workers in an interrelated manner and in relation to general factors which
have a bearing on human rights and human dignity,
Aware that the problem of migrant workers continues
to be of major importance to many States, despite the
existence of international instruments and despite efforts
exerted by certain States, including the adoption of
bilateral agreements,
Believing that this problem is becoming more serious
in certain regions for political, economic, social and
cultural reasons,
Seriously concerned at the de facto discrimination
frequently suffered by alien workers in some countries
despite the legislative and other efforts exerted to
prevent and punish it,
Noting with satisfaction the work done in the field
of migrant workers by the specialized agencies, particularly the International Labour Organisation, and by
other United Nations organs, such as the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection
of Minorities,
I. Calls upon all States, taking into account the provisions of the relevant instruments adopted by the International Labour Organisation and of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Racial Discrimination, to take measures to prevent
and put an end to all discrimination against migrant
workers and to ensure the implementation of such
measures;
2. Invites all States:
(a)
To extend to migrant workers having regular
status in their territories treatment equal to that enjoyed
by their own nationals with regard to the protection
of human rights and to the provisions of their labour
legislation and their social legislation;
·19 Resolution

217 A (III).
r,o Resolution 2106 A (XX), annex.
,,I United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 500, No. 7310, p. 95.
r, 2 Jbid., vol. 596, No. 8638, p. 261.
r,:l International Labour Office, Official Bulletin, vol. L VIII,
1975, Series A, No. 1, Convention No. 143.
04 Ibid., Recommendation No. 151.

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

( b) To promote and facilitate by all means in
their power the implementation of the relevant international instruments and the adoption of bilateral agreements designed, inter alia, to eliminate the illicit traffic
in alien workers;
(c) To adopt, pending the conclusion of such
agreements, the appropriate measures to ensure that
the fundamental human rights of all migrant workers,
irrespective of their immigration status, are fully respected under their national legislation;
3. Invites Governments of host countries to make
arrangements for information and reception facilities
and to put into effect policies relating to training,
health, housing and educational and cultural development for migrant workers and their families, and to
guarantee the free e~ercise by them of activities calculated to preserve their cultural values;
4. Further invites Governments of countries of
origin to give the widest possible dissemination to
information calculated to pre-advise and protect migrants;
5. Invites all States to intensify efforts to enlighten
public opinion in host countries on the importance of
the contribution made by migrant workers to economic
and social development and to raising the level of living
in such countries;
6. Calls upon all States to give consideration to
ratifying the Migrant Workers (Supplementary Provisions) Convention, 1975, adopted by the General Conference of the International Labour Organisation;
1. Calls upon the United Nations organs and specialized agencies, including the International Labour
Organisation, concerned with the question of migrant
workers to continue devoting their attention to this
question;
8. Recommends that the Commission on Human
Rights and the Economic and Social Council should
consider this question at their next sessions on the
basis of the instruments adopted and the documents
and studies prepared by the United Nations and the
specialized agencies, including the study by the Special
Rapporteur on the exploitation of labour through illicit
and clandestine trafficking 55 and the report of the Seminar on the Human Rights of Migrant Workers, held
at Tunis from 12 to 24 November 1975.116
102nd plenary meeting
16 December 1976

31/128.

Human rights and scientific and technological developments

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2450 (XXIII) of 19 December 1968, 2721 (XXV) of 15 December 1970,
3026 (XXVII) of 18 December 1972, 3150 (XXVIII)
of 14 December 1973 and 3268 (XXIX) of 10 December 1974,
Recalling the Declaration on the Use of Scientific
and Technological Progress in the Interests of Peace
and for the Benefit of Mankind, proclaimed by the General Assembly in its resolution 3384 (XXX) of 10
November 1975,
55 E/CN.4/Sub.2/L.640.
56 ST/TAO/HR/50.

107

Convinced that the application of scientific and technological progress in the interests of peace and for the
benefit of mankind is an important factor for the observance of fundamental human rights and freedoms,
Noting that the achievements of scientific and technological progress have a great influence on the course
of social and economic development in both the developed and the developing countries,
Expressing its concern at the fact that scientific and
technological achievements may be used to the detriment of fundamental human rights and freedoms, the
dignity of the human person, international peace and
security and social progress,
1. Calls upon Member States, in their programmes
and plans, to take account of the provisions and
principles contained in the Declaration on the Use of
Scientific and Technological Progress in the Interests
of P,eace and for the Benefit of Mankind;
2. Requests the International Labour Organisation,
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, the World Health Organization and other
specialized agencies to take fully into account, in their
programmes and activities, the pertinent provisions of
the Proclamation of Teheran57 and the provisions of
the Declaration;
3. Requests the Commission on Human Rights, in
its consideration of the question of scientific and technological progress and human rights, to give special attention to the implementation of the provisions of the
Declaration;
4. Decides to consider at its thirty-second session
the question of the implementation of the provisions
of the Declaration under the item entitled "Human
rights and scientific and technological developments".
I 02nd plenary meeting
16 December 1976
31/129.

Policies and programmes relating to
youth

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2037 (XX) of 7 December
1965, 2447 (XXIII) of 19 December 1968, 2497
(XXIV) of 28 October 1969, 2633 (XXV) of 11
November 1970, 2770 (XXVI) of 22 November 1971,
3022 (XXVII) and 3023 (XXVII) of 18 December
1972 and 3141 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973,
Noting with satisfaction that, in the eleven years
since the promulgation of the Declaration on the Promotion among Youth of the Ideals of Peace, Mutual
Respect and Understanding between Peoples, substantial progress has been made in implementing its principles,
Reaffirming the principles inscribed in the Declaration and the importance of their universal implementation,
Emphasizing that efforts to educate youth in those
principles must be closely related to programmes for
their active involvement in all aspects of economic and
social life,
5 7 Final Act of the International Conference on Human
Rights (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.68.XIV.2),
chap. II.
