182

General Assembly-- Fortieth Session

- - - - - - .. ··-· -·-- -.. --------------------=------------------(b) To keep the situation in Guinea-Bissau under constant review, to maintain close contact with Member
States, specialized agencies, regional and other intergovernmental organizations and the financial institutions concerned, and to apprise the Economic and Social Council, at
its second regular session of 1986, of the status of the special programme of economic assistance for Guinea-Bissau;
(c) To report to the General Assembly at its forty-first
session on the implementation of the present resolution.
120th plenary meeting
17 December 1985

40/226.

Assistance to Cape Verde

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions on assistance to Cape Verde, in
particular its resolution 39/189 of 17 December 1984, in
which the international community was requested to provide an appropriate level of resources for the implementation of the programme of assistance for Cape Verde as
envisaged in the reports of the Secretary-General, 156
Recalling United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development resolutions 142 (VI) and 138 (VI) of 2 July
1983 38 on the progress made in the implementation of the
Substantial New Programme of Action for the 1980s for
the Least Developed Countries, 42 and on activities in the
field of island developing countries,
Noting that Cape Verde is one of the least developed
countries and a small archipelagic State, with a fragile and
open economy, aggravated by endemic and severe
drought,
Reiterating that increased substantial, continuous and
predictable assistance from the international community is
needed for the effective completion of the First National
Development Plan (1982-1985), which is still being implemented,
Gravely concerned at the critical food situation in Cape
Verde resulting from the failure of seasonal rains, the continuing recurrence of drought and the spreading desertification,
Recognizing the strenuous efforts deployed by the Government and people of Cape Verde in the process of the
economic and social development of their country despite
existing constraints,
l. Takes note of the summary report of the SecretaryGeneral; 15 7
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the efforts deployed in mobilizing resources for the
implementation of the programme of assistance for Cape
Verde;
3. Expresses its gratitude to States and to international,
regional and interregional organizations and other intergovernmental organizations for their contribution to the
programme of assistance for Cape Verde;
4. Reaffirms the need for all Governments and international organizations to implement their commitments
undertaken within the framework of the Substantial New
Programme of Action for the 1980s for the Least
Developed Countries, particularly those undertaken at the
round-table conference of Cape Verde's partners in development, held at Praia in June 1982;
5. Urges Governments and international, regional and
interregional organizations and other intergovernmental
organizations to extend and intensify substantially their
156 A/33/167 and Corr. I; A/341372 and Corr. I; A/35/332 and Corr I: A 1
36/265; A/37/124; A/38 12 I 6, sect. V; A/39/389

assistance for the early implementation of the programme
of assistance for Cape Verde;
6. Invites the international community, in particular
donor countries, to take appropriate and urgent measures
to support the effective completion of the First National
Development Plan (l 982-1985) of Cape Verde;
7. Calls upon the international community to continue
to contribute generously to all appeals for food and fodder
assistance made by the Government of Cape Verde, or on
its behalf by the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system, to help it cope with
the critical situation in the country;
8. Once again draws the attention of the international
community to the special account established at United
Nations Headquarters by the Secretary-General, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 32/99 of I 3
December 1977, for the purpose of facilitating the channelling of contributions to Cape Verde;
9. Invites the organs, organizations and bodies of the
United Nations system, in particular the United Nations
Children's Fund, the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Fund for Population Activities, the World Food Programme, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the World
Health Organization, the World Bank, the International
Fund for Agricultural Development and the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization:
(a) To maintain and expand their programmes of
assistance for Cape Verde;
(b) To co-operate closely with the Secretary-General in
organizing and carrying out the special programme of economic assistance for Cape Verde;
(c) To bring to the attention of their governing bodies,
for urgent consideration, the special needs of Cape Verde;
(d) To report the measures they have taken and the
resources they have made available, as well as the decisions of their governing bodies regarding assistance to
Cape Verde, to the Secretary-General by 15 July 1986;
l 0. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for implementing the programme of development assistance for Cape Verde;
(b) To arrange for a review of the economic situation
in Cape Verde, in consultation with the Government of
Cape Verde, to report thereon to the Economic and Social
Council at its second regular session of 1986, and to make
a substantive report on the implementation of the special
programme of economic assistance for Cape Verde to be
considered by the General Assembly at its forty-first session.
120th plenary meeting
17 December 1985

40/227. Assistance to Djibouti
The General Assembly,
Recal/ing its resolution 39/200 of 17 December 1984
and its previous resolutions on assistance to Djibouti, in
which it drew the attention of the international community to the critical economic situation confronting Djibouti
and to the country's urgent need for assistance,
Deeply concerned at the lingering adverse effects of the
drought on the economic and social development of Djibouti,
157 A/40/441, sect. Ill.

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Commiltee

Bearing in mind its resolution 37/133 of 17 December
1982, in which it decided to include Djibouti in the list of
the least developed countries,
Having examined the summary report of the SecretaryGeneral, 158
Noting the critical economic situation of Djibouti and
the list of urgent and priority projects formulated by the
Government that require international assistance,
I. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the steps he has taken to organize an international programme of economic assistance for Djibouti;
2. Notes with appreciatwn the assistance already provided or pledged to Djibouti by Member States, organizations of the United Nations system and other organizations;
3. Draws the attention of the international community
to the difficult economic situation confronting Djibouti
and to the severe structural constraints to its development;
4. Renews its appeal to Member States, the appropriate
organs, organizations and programmes of the United
Nations system, regional and international organizations
and other intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations, as well as international financial institutions, to provide assistance bilaterally and multilaterally,
as appropriate, to Djibouti in order to enable it to cope
with its difficult economic situation and to implement its
development strategies, including the programme of assistance that was presented at the round-table conference of
development partners convened by the Government of
Djibouti in November 1983;
5. Requests the appropriate specialized agencies and
other organizations of the United Nations system to maintain and increase their current and future programmes of
assistance to Djibouti, to co-operate closely with the Secretary-General in organizing an effective international programme of assistance and to report periodically to him on
the steps they have taken and the resources they have
made available to help that country;
6. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessarv
resources for an effective programme of financial, technical
and material assistance to Djibouti;
(b) To keep the situation in Djibouti under constant
review, to maintain close contact with Member States, the
specialized agencies, regional and other intergovernmental
organizations and the international financial institutions
concerned, and to apprise the Economic and Social Council, at its second regular session of 1986, of the current status of the special programme of economic assistance for
Djibouti;
(c) To report on the progress made in the economic situation of Djibouti and in organizing and implementing the
special programme of economic assistance for that country
in time for the matter to be considered by the General
Assembly at its forty-first session.
120th plenary meeting
17 December 1985

40/228.

Assistance to the drought-stricken areas of
Ethiopia

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 39/201 of 17 December 1984
and Economic and Social Council resolutions 1984/S of 17
158 Ibid., sect. VI.
159 A/401431.

183

May 1984 and 1985; I of 24 May 1985 on emergency
assistance to the drought victims in Ethiopia,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
assistance to the drought-stricken areas of Ethiopia, 159
Noting with appreciation the unprecedented effort made
by the Secretary-General to mobilize international humanitarian assistance for the drought victims in Ethiopia,
Noting further with satisfaction the able manner in which
the Office for Emergency Operations in Africa has effectively handled its task of co-ordination and the admirable
manner in which the organs and organizations of the
United Nations system, including the specialized agencies,
have carried out their roles,
Having heard the statement made by the Commissioner
for Relief and Rehabilitation of Ethiopia on 12 November
198S 160 concerning the current situation in the droughtstricken areas,
Aware that, despite adequate rain, the emergency situation still exists in most parts of the country,
Recognizing that, owing to insufficient agricultural
input, full advantage could not be taken of the rain,
Convinced that long-term solutions are imperative in
dealing with the root causes of the tragic human drama
that has recently unfolded in the disaster-stricken areas,
I. Commends the international community for its
cmrpassion, solidarity and generous response to the tragic
situation in Ethiopia;
2. Expresses its deep gratitude to all States, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and individuals that have provided emergency humanitarian
assistance to Ethiopia;
3. Commends further the relentless efforts made by the
Secretary-General through the Office for Emergency Operations in Africa, in particular those of the Assistant Secretary-General for Emergency Operations in Ethiopia, in
mobilizing and co-ordinating emergency humanitarian
assistance for the drought victims in Ethiopia;
4. Appreciates fully the unprecedented role played by
the organizations and programmes of the United Nations
system - in particular, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the World Food Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund, the Office
of the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator, the
World Health Organization, the United Nations Development Programme, the World Bank and the International
Labour Organisation -- which they have carried out in a
concerted and efficient manner to save the lives of millions
of people in Ethiopia;
5. Urges all Member States, organs and organizations
of the United Nations system, including the specialized
agencies, and non-governmental organizations to assist the
Government of Ethiopia in its efforts to provide for the
emergency needs of the drought victims and to deal with
the problem of medium-term and long-term recovery and
rehabilitation;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his
efforts to mobilize international assistance for relief and
rehabilitation, including assistance to the victims of
drought who want either to return to their villages of origin
or to settle in areas less prone to drought, and to report to
the Economic and Social Council, at its first regular session
of 1986, on the response of the international community
to these efforts.
120th plenary mcetmx
17 December /985
160 (~tficial Records td tht' ( ;,,ner.;i ·hS( mhfr. J·ort1eth \, ,.H1>n. ,j,;e<·,,,,d
< (~mmll:n·. 31st meeting, pa1a'i. _::3 . )J
