S/PV.8840

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8840th meeting

Monday, 23 August 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Tirumurti . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(India)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Lipand
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kiboino
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Mr. Aougi
Mr. Kvalheim
Ms. Evstigneeva
Ms. King
Mr. Ladeb
Mr. Kariuki
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield
Mr. Dang

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-23210 (E)
*2123210*

S/PV.8840

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Yemen to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Mohamed
Khaled Khiari, Assistant Secretary-General for the
Middle East, Asia and the Pacific, Departments
of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and Peace
Operations; Mr. Martin Griffiths, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs; and Ms. Henrietta Fore,
Executive Director of the United Nations International
Children’s Fund.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Khiari.
Mr. Khiari: I am pleased to join you today,
Mr. President, to brief the Security Council on current
developments in Yemen.
Unfortunately, since the most recent Council
meeting on Yemen (see S/PV.8797) there has been no
further progress in the ongoing efforts of the United
Nations to reach an agreement based on the four-point
plan presented to the parties, which is composed of a
nationwide ceasefire, the reopening of Sana’a airport,
the easing of restrictions on the flow of fuel and
other commodities through Al-Hudaydah port, and
the resumption of face-to-face political negotiations
between the Yemeni parties.
The Houthis have continued to condition the
resumption of their participation in the political process
on the opening of Al-Hudaydah ports and Sana’a
airport, as well as on the ending of what they call the
“aggression and occupation”. On the occasion of Eid
al-Adha, the Head of the Houthi Supreme Political
Council reiterated that stance.
The negotiations facilitated by Saudi Arabia on the
Riyadh agreement, which were focused on the return
2/21

23/08/2021

of the Prime Minister and other ministers to Aden,
have yet to resume following the Eid break in July.
No date has been set for recommencing those efforts.
Timely progress on the implementation of the Riyadh
agreement remains vital to addressing the tensions
in the south, particularly since the security situation
in Aden and the southern governorates continues to
deteriorate. The situation is compounded by continued
problems with the provision of basic services, including
the electricity supply, despite the Saudi transfers of fuel
grants. That has been accompanied by further protests
and industrial action in Aden and other areas of the
southern governorates. All stakeholders must cooperate
to avoid further escalation.
Military activity in Yemen continues to ebb and
flow. Sporadic fighting has been observed in Al-Jawf
and Taiz, but Ma’rib appears to remain the key strategic
focus. In Al-Bayda, to the south of Ma’rib, the initial
gains made by Yemeni forces supported by the Saudiled coalition were subsequently reversed by the Houthis,
who have now moved further north around the border
between Ma’rib and Shabwa governorates. Based on
those continued evolutions in the military situation, the
main arterial routes to Ma’rib are now more seriously
threatened. In the light of this, we reiterate our call to
all parties to completely and immediately cease such
attempts to achieve territorial gains by force.
Following a brief lull in cross-border ballisticmissile and drone attacks against southern Saudi
Arabia, land- and sea-based infrastructure in this area
have once again been targeted in recent weeks. There
have also been continued reports of air strikes being
launched by the coalition.
The difficult economic situation is palpable
throughout the country. The value of the Yemeni rial in
Government-controlled areas continues to deteriorate,
reaching a record low, trading at 1,000 rials to the United
States dollar. The gap in exchange rates between Sana’a
and Aden has also increased to approximately 400 rials.
The Southern Transitional Council recently threatened
to enforce an independent local exchange rate in
Aden and other areas under their control in southern
Yemen — a situation that is likely to further complicate
efforts aimed at a cohesive economic recovery. The
Houthis and members of the private sector have also
opposed the Government’s increase in the price of the
customs dollar fee from 250 to 500 rials for imports.
21-23210

23/08/2021

The situation in the Middle East

Lastly, I would like to address the concerning
issue of the fuel supply, which continues to worsen,
particularly in Houthi-controlled areas. Only three
commercial fuel vessels have been given clearance to
berth at the port of Al-Hudaydah since the beginning of
July. Four fuel vessels remain in the coalition holding
area. All but one petrol station of the Yemen Petroleum
Company in Houthi-controlled governorates have
reportedly closed. The Yemen Gas Company indicated
that there are increasingly severe cooking-gas shortages,
with waiting times understood to be approximately one
month to refill empty cylinders. That has significantly
driven up prices in the parallel market. We reiterate our
call on the Government of Yemen to urgently allow the
entry of all essential commercial supplies — including
fuel ships — to Al-Hudaydah without delay. All
parties must prioritize civilian needs and refrain from
weaponizing the economy, particularly in the light of
the critical humanitarian situation in the country.
The appointment of Mr. Grundberg as new Special
Envoy for Yemen presents an opportunity to build
on the tremendous efforts of Martin Griffiths in his
role as Envoy; assess the overall mediation approach;
and focus on overcoming the obstacles that remain
ahead of us. In that regard, it is imperative to resume
an inclusive Yemeni-led political process to reach a
negotiated solution to the conflict. We call on all parties
and stakeholders, including the Council, to extend their
full support and cooperation to Mr. Grundberg in his
upcoming efforts.
The President: I thank Mr. Khiari for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Griffiths.
Mr. Griffiths: I thank Mr. Khiari for his briefing.
I am very pleased to join Council members today for
what is, of course, quite a familiar topic, although from
a rather different point of view. This is my first outing
in the Council in my new functions. I am therefore very
glad it concerns Yemen.
Yemen really is a magnificent country. We were
talking about that just before today’s meeting started.
It is home to a rich culture, amazing history, beautiful
places and wonderful people. It is so much more than
the war that we discuss here every month. However,
after six years of war, the war overshadows everything.
As Mr. Khiari mentioned, in my previous role, I had
the immense privilege of trying to help Yemenis to get
across that line, make peace and end the war. During that
time, I was repeatedly struck by the shocking brutality

S/PV. 8840

of the humanitarian crisis and listened carefully to the
briefings of Mark Lowcock. I am therefore grateful to
have an opportunity now to address those issues before
the Council.
There is much to address, and, in all cases, it is
civilians, and, as members will hear from Ms. Fore,
particularly children who bear the brunt. The war
grinds on, as Mr. Khiari has described, including
the devastating Ansar Allah offensive in Ma’rib and
clashes along nearly 50 other front lines. Hostilities this
year have so far reportedly killed or injured more than
1,200 civilians. Institutions and public services have
imploded, depriving people of clean water, sanitation,
education and health care, and helping to spread
diseases such as cholera and coronavirus, as we were
discussing before the start of the meeting.
The war has also decimated the economy. That
collapse, as I will describe, if I may shortly, is perhaps
the biggest driver of people’s humanitarian needs,
including the risk of famine. As if all that were not
enough, climate change is taking a direct and immediate
toll. Rains this year have been among the heaviest ever,
with more than 100,000 people affected by flooding in
the past few weeks alone.
The list goes on and on. More than 20 million people
in Yemen need humanitarian assistance and protection.
That is approximately two thirds of the population, and
it continues to be quite an astonishing figure. However,
out of all those needs, there is perhaps one overarching
humanitarian priority, and that is to stop the famine.
Today, approximately 5 million people are just one step
away from succumbing to famine and the diseases that
go with it. Some 10 million more are right behind them.
Famine is not just a food problem; it is a symptom
of a much deeper collapse, as everyone knows. In many
ways, it is all of Yemen’s problems rolled into one, and
it demands a comprehensive response. That means, of
course, providing immediate relief to the millions of
people who are on the verge of famine. It also means
attacking the problems that are pushing Yemen towards
famine in the first place. It is on that particular point I
think the world can do more to help.
Let us start with what the aid agencies are already
doing. On that point, we have a good story to tell for
a change. Humanitarian funding has surged since the
March pledging event. I would like to thank all donors,
many of them in this Chamber, that have made that
happen, including major new funds announced over

21-232103/21

S/PV.8840

The situation in the Middle East

the past six weeks by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia,
Qatar and the United States. Today the Yemen response
plan — the annual humanitarian programme — is
50 per cent funded and has received more money than
any other appeal in the world. It is therefore a testament
to those who have advocated for the needs of the people
of Yemen. I would like to thank all our donors.
Those funds enable humanitarian partners and
agencies to help 10 million people across the whole
country every single month. Without that help, Yemen
would, of course, succumb to famine. I should add that
the majority of our partners — those humanitarian
partners and agencies — are Yemeni non-governmental
organizations, working in every single one of Yemen’s
333 districts, during a live war, and that is no small feat.
We are also working to deepen the aid presence
across the country. I should like to pay tribute here
to David Gressly and his team, who have travelled to
many parts of the country in recent weeks. That means
more staff in field locations, more aid flights to places
like Ma’rib, where we needed to build up the staff, and
more road missions to front-line areas, and that is quite
a change.
Delivering aid, as we have often discussed here, is
often harder than it should be, mostly due to bureaucratic
impediments. We are working with everyone to resolve
those access challenges, and support from donors and
Member States will continue to be crucial on that
point. Naturally, we are also asking donors to increase
their contributions to ensure that funds are adequately
distributed across various sectors.
Although the appeal is indeed, as I said, relatively
well-funded relative to other appeals around the world,
agencies will soon start running out of money again
in certain sectors in the months to come. By October,
for example, food aid will probably face cuts and
programmes in other sectors, especially health, water,
sanitation and shelter — I am sure that Ms. Fore will
speak about that — are already struggling. If aid levels
fall sharply, the risk of famine roars back. Next month,
the European Union, Sweden and Switzerland will host
a humanitarian event on Yemen during the high-level
week of the general debate of the General Assembly.
That meeting is an opportunity for the world to reiterate
its commitment to addressing the crisis with new funds.
However, I must be clear that even a well-funded
humanitarian operation does relatively little to
empower people to look after themselves, which is
4/21

23/08/2021

what most Yemenis want. The biggest challenge is the
economy. Indeed, Mr. Khiari already discussed that.
As Mark Lowcock often said, people in Yemen are not
starving because there is no food in the country; they
are starving because they cannot afford it. One reason
is because incomes have dried up. The gross domestic
product has plummeted by 40 per cent since 2015,
taking many jobs with it. A quarter of the population,
including doctors, teachers, health professionals, social
workers and water and sanitation workers, rely on civil
servant salaries, which, as Council members know,
are paid only sporadically, erratically and unreliably.
Paying civil servant salaries, which is not a new issue
but one that has been much discussed, would put money
in the pockets of millions of people. It is also essential to
keeping basic services running, many of which are key
institutions for the humanitarian response. Therefore,
we are, of course, eager to work with the parties to
continue to try to find a solution to that. I think that
a lot of work has been done on that, certainly by the
mission but also by the United Nations Development
Programme and others, with regard to how to meet
those immediate needs.
However, we must also take steps to boost other
people’s incomes, as well, protecting remittances, for
example, which are a lifeline for millions of families and
constitute Yemen’s largest source of foreign exchange.
There was recently a story about the possibility of
remittances from Saudi Arabia being at risk, and they
are, of course, a very important source of income for
many people in Yemen. That means promoting economic
opportunities for farmers, fishing communities and
local business. I want to stress that it is not unusual for
a humanitarian official, as I now am, to talk a great deal
about the need for livelihoods, development funding
and institutions to survive through that kind of support
and assistance.
Another reason that many people in Yemen cannot
afford to eat is because, as I said, commodity prices
are skyrocketing — not only food, which now is more
than three times as expensive as before the war, but also
fuel, which is four times as expensive and which, of
course, has knock-on effects for other products. Prices
are rising in part because the Yemeni currency, the rial,
has collapsed — a disaster, of course, in a country that
relies on imports. As Mr. Khiari mentioned, foreign
exchange injections through the Central Bank of
Yemen would help to stabilize the rial. In that regard,
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia was very generous in the
21-23210

23/08/2021

The situation in the Middle East

past. It is very good news to hear today’s announcement
by the International Monetary Fund that Yemen will
receive, I think, $665 million in special drawing rights,
which will also help the liquidity and, hopefully, stem
the fall of the rial.
Prices are also rising because the parties interfere
with the market. With the exception of food, Government
restrictions now re-route nearly all commercial imports
away from ports held by Ansar Allah — Al-Hudaydah,
of course — to Aden and elsewhere. Many of those
imports are then shipped by road up to the north of the
country, adding to the cost and, indeed, affecting the
black market. That approach is much more expensive.
It opens the door for market manipulation, and the end
result is much higher costs and prices for people who
cannot afford the previous prices.
I want to be very clear about the fact that restrictions
on commercial imports beyond the international arms
embargo should be lifted right away. That means that
Al-Hudaydah and Saleef ports should be open without
additional impediment. Other market manipulation,
such as profiteering downstream through the informal
market, must also stop. Doing that, as Mr. Khiari
already said, would boost civilians’ access to the goods
that they need to survive. He talked about the need for
fuel ships to enter those ports. That is consistent with
the obligation of all parties to treat the civilians under
their control humanely, as is required by international
humanitarian law, It is an obligation and a responsibility;
it is not an option.
It is also consistent with the obligation under
international human rights law to uphold an adequate
standard of living. Refraining from interference with
access to essential goods and services is an important
step towards fulfilling that obligation. I want to make
that appeal to the Council.
On a related point, I believe that Sana’a airport
should be reopened — at least for the thousands of
civilians to travel abroad for medical care. International
humanitarian law requires all parties to care for the
wounded and the sick, and that should include travel
abroad when treatment is not available.
To conclude, I have gone on perhaps excessively
about the way in which the economy is driving needs
and risking famine in Yemen and that it is also the
economy to which we need to pay attention in order
to give people safety from that threat. But we must
not forget what caused the economy to collapse in the

S/PV. 8840

first place, that is, the war. The world must push, as we
have so often done in this Chamber, for the nationwide
ceasefire that Mr. Khiari mentioned today. A ceasefire
will give desperate civilians a break. It will create space
to address the drivers of the crisis, which I described
at some length, as well as to provide the basis, as
Mr. Khiari said, for the resumption of the all-inclusive
political process necessary to end the war.
From my own experience, I know that resuming
that political process is no easy task but it is essential.
I want to congratulate Hans Grundberg, whom I know
well, on his appointment as Special Envoy. He, of
course, has all our support for his difficult and essential
central task. I hope that the war, which has gone on for
too long, can now come to an end.
The President: I thank Mr. Griffiths for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Fore.
Ms. Fore: More than six years ago, adults started a
war in Yemen. They did so despite knowing the terrible
toll that violent conflict exacts on children. The war in
Yemen, now in its seventh year, has created the largest
humanitarian crisis in the world — one made worse by
the public health and socioeconomic consequences of
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Since
I last spoke to the Security Council about Yemen in
the Chamber two years ago (see S/PV.8525), little has
changed for the country’s civilian population. Each day,
the violence and destruction wreak havoc on the lives of
children and their families. This year has seen growing
displacement, with 1.6 million children now internally
displaced because of the violence, particularly around
Al-Hudaydah and Ma’rib. Basic services, such as health
care, sanitation and education, all of which are vital to
the humanitarian response, are incredibly fragile and
on the brink of total collapse. The widespread lack
of access to safe and sufficient water is of the utmost
concern. Those who are internally displaced are
particularly vulnerable to the ongoing water cuts taking
place across the front lines.
As both Mr. Griffiths and Mr. Khiari thoughtfully
outlined, Yemen’s economy is in a frighteningly poor
condition. The gross domestic product has dropped by
40 per cent since 2015, causing jobs to disappear and
family incomes to plummet. Approximately a quarter
of the population, including many doctors, teachers and
sanitation workers, rely on civil servant salaries, which
are paid erratically, if at all. There is food in Yemen, as

21-232105/21

S/PV.8840

The situation in the Middle East

Martin Griffiths just said, but those who cannot afford
it are at risk of starvation.
Today in Yemen, almost 21 million people,
including 11.3 million children, need humanitarian
assistance to survive. There are 2.3 million children
who are acutely malnourished and nearly 400,000
children under five are suffering from severe acute
malnutrition and are at imminent risk of death. More
than 10 million children and close to 5 million women
cannot properly access health services. In Yemen, one
child dies every 10 minutes from preventable causes,
including malnutrition and vaccine-preventable
diseases. As Mr. Griffiths said, children’s education in
Yemen has also been gravely impacted by the war. Two
million children are out of school and one in six schools
can no longer be used. Two thirds of teachers — more
than 170,000 teachers in total — have not received
a regular salary for more than four years because of
the conflict and the geopolitical divides. That places
approximately 4 million additional children at risk
of disrupted education or of dropping out, as unpaid
teachers quit teaching to find other ways of providing
for their families. Children who do not finish their
education are trapped in a self-perpetuating cycle of
poverty. If out-of-school children or those who have
dropped out recently are not properly supported, they
may never return to school, so we are deeply worried.
These are the numbers. But the numbers do not
really tell us what it is like to be a child growing up in
Yemen today. Being a child in Yemen means watching
one’s parents struggle to provide enough food for the
family to eat in order to not starve. It means that a child
who is fortunate enough to have a school to go to could
be killed by a bullet, an explosion or by stepping on a
mine walking along the road simply to get to school. It
means possibly being one of the children recruited to
join the fighting, used by a party in a non-combat role
or forced into marriage the family is out of options.
Being a child in Yemen means probably experiencing
or witnessing horrific violence to which no child should
ever be exposed. Children who survive the war might
carry physical and emotional scars for the rest of their
lives, undermining their development and happiness
as adults. Fighting around their communities means
that it may be impossible for children to get vaccinated
against polio or other diseases. And if they do get sick,
there may be no hospital or clinic for them to safely
visit. Being a child in Yemen is the stuff of nightmares.
6/21

23/08/2021

We are doing everything we can to help children
get through this ordeal. Shoulder to shoulder with our
local partners, we are providing access to clean water
and sanitation along with health, nutrition, protection
and education services. Those efforts include delivering
vaccines and supporting primary health-care centres
and hospitals to remain operational. We are responding
to COVID-19 and are providing emergency cash
transfers to 1.5 million households every quarter,
benefiting approximately 9 million people.
Across the country, UNICEF is supporting the
treatment of acute malnutrition in more than 4,000
primary health-care facilities and 100 therapeutic
feeding centres. We are working to rehabilitate schools
and have provided financial support and supplies so
that secondary-school students can sit for national
exams. But none of that is enough given the scale of the
humanitarian needs amid the ongoing violence.
There have been glimmers of progress on the
political front and occasional signs of hope that this
nightmare could soon come to an end. Yet there are no
tangible signs of peace on the ground. In fact, hostilities
have increased significantly in places such as Ma’rib.
All the while, children continue to suffer. After six
years of war, when will parties to the conflict and those
with influence over them place children first? I once
again call on them and the members of the Council to
make every possible effort to keep children safe and
to abide by their legal obligations to keep them out of
the line of fire. That includes sparing from attack the
essential infrastructure on which children depend, such
as health facilities and water and sanitation systems.
I want to emphasize that respecting and protecting
education, including schools, students and teachers,
is of the utmost importance for Yemeni children and
youth. We remain gravely concerned about the severity
and frequency of threats and attacks against education
and the use of schools for military purposes. The
implications of such attacks on the safety of students
and their ability to enjoy their right to education cannot
be overstated. All parties bear responsibility for killing
and maiming children. All parties have regularly failed
to take the necessary precautions to protect civilians.
This must end.
In addition, UNICEF and our partners need
sustained,
unconditional
and
uninterrupted
humanitarian access to people in need wherever they
are in Yemen — no matter who controls the areas in
21-23210

23/08/2021

The situation in the Middle East

which they live. Bureaucratic hurdles should not get in
the way of our ability to deliver aid. We value support
from donors and Member States in resolving those
challenges. We need help to safely and effectively carry
out the crucial demining work needed.
Yemen imports nearly everything, including
humanitarian supplies. We must reopen the port of
Al-Hudaydah to commercial imports and fuel. Millions
more could be plunged into famine if vital imports
remain restricted.
The last time I addressed the Security Council
on Yemen was before the pandemic (see S/PV.8525).
As Mr. Griffiths has noted, COVID-19 has further
complicated this already dire humanitarian situation.
The health system is hanging by a thread. So is the
economy. Vaccination campaigns across the country
must be urgently expanded, especially with the
emergence of highly transmissible COVID-19 variants.
I also take this opportunity to urge the international
community to increase its financial support to help meet
the immediate needs of children and make longer-term
investments to prevent the complete collapse of health,
water, sanitation, nutrition, protection and education
systems — all of which Yemeni children need now and
over the years to come.
UNICEF and our partners are ready to work with
the parties to ensure that the salaries of civil servants
are paid regularly — a step that would put money back
in the pockets of millions of people, helping families
to survive. It would also support the functioning of
the basic services that are essential to a successful
humanitarian response.
Likewise, we must also take steps to boost people’s
incomes. That means protecting remittances, which
are a lifeline for millions of families and constitute
Yemen’s largest source of foreign exchange.
Ultimately, children in Yemen need a comprehensive
and lasting peace. Parties to the conflict must work
to reach a negotiated political solution. They must
prioritize and uphold the rights of children. Only then
will children be able put this nightmare behind them
and turn hopefully towards their dreams for the future.
The President: I thank Ms. Fore for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.

S/PV. 8840

Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I welcome
Mr. Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs, in his new functions. I would like to thank
all of our briefers today, and I would like to welcome
the Secretary-General’s appointment of Ambassador
Grundberg as Special Envoy to Yemen. We look
forward to working with him, as we did with UnderSecretary-General Griffiths.
Ambassador Grundberg’s appointment is an
opportunity to inject new momentum to peace efforts
in Yemen. We all know that there is no military
solution. Over a year and a half since it began, the
Houthi offensive on Ma’rib remains entrenched, and
they resort to enlisting child soldiers. The Houthis must
not replicate previous patterns of behaviour and should
engage in good faith with the new Special Envoy to
secure a political solution to the conflict.
As highlighted by our briefers, urgent steps are
needed to address the economic crisis. In the south,
the Yemeni rial recently passed the symbolic mark of
1,000 rials to the dollar for the first time. That decline
is symptomatic of the health of the wider economy.
As Mr. Griffiths said, dire humanitarian conditions
are driven by the lack of purchasing power, not by the
lack of goods themselves. The Yemenis cannot afford
food or to pay for a trip to the hospital, let alone pay
for treatment once they get there. External financial
support is needed, but urgent reform is required by the
Government of Yemen in order to facilitate that.
I would also like to recognize and thank the United
States and Gulf donors for their recent additional
contributions to the humanitarian appeal, which
have helped Yemen avoid famine for now. However,
a relatively well-funded humanitarian response
will not be able to keep pace with the deteriorating
economy forever.
We also continue to be concerned about the
spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). It is
only a matter of time before the delta variant reaches
Yemen and exacerbates an already terrible situation.
The authorities must acknowledge that impending
risk rather than suppress the collection of health
data. They should encourage rather than impede
the vaccination programme. In partnership with the
World Bank and the World Health Organization, the
United Kingdom will fund the roll-out costs for nearly
2 million doses of the Oxford AstraZeneca vaccine

21-232107/21

S/PV.8840

The situation in the Middle East

allocated to Yemen by the COVID-19 Vaccine Global
Access Facility.
The conflict is having a disproportionate effect
on the marginalized people of Yemen, particularly
children, as we heard from the Executive Director of
UNICEF, and each day that peace is delayed, they are
being robbed of a future. The United Kingdom supports
the important work of UNICEF, having provided more
than $16 million so far this year, with a further payment
of at least $6.5 million expected next month.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to our briefers today, Mohamed
Khaled Khiari, Martin Griffiths and Henrietta Fore, for
the information that they provided.
We are concerned about the continuing escalation
of violence in Yemen. Reports indicate an increase in
the number of Yemeni deaths in Ma’rib province as a
result of the Houthis’ attempts to take control of the city
and the Government army’s retaliation, with massive
air support from the Arab coalition. Attacks on civilian
infrastructure, including in Saudi Arabia, are of serious
concern to us. In the six years since the conflict began,
it has become clear that there is no alternative to
intra-Yemeni talks that take into account the interests
and concerns of all.
In that regard, we call on all parties to the conflict to
immediately and fully cease military operations, strictly
observe the provisions of international humanitarian
law and pursue political and diplomatic paths towards
resolving all differences. We intend to continue to
support the relevant United Nations efforts to achieve
a comprehensive and lasting settlement to the conflict
and actively encourage all sides to adopt a constructive
approach to and show a readiness for compromise. In
that context, we note and welcome the mediation efforts
of the States of the region, including Oman.
We are convinced that a cessation of hostilities must
be accompanied by the implementation of a number of
confidence-building measures in the political, military
and socioeconomic spheres, which would truly help
alleviate the dire situation of the Yemeni population,
which the United Nations has characterized as the
worst humanitarian crisis in the world.
We call on donors to scale up efforts to provide
the necessary financial support for United Nations
humanitarian assistance. At the same time, we stress
the need to fully lift the naval, land and air blockade
8/21

23/08/2021

of Yemen and restrictions on the delivery of food,
medicines, fuel and other essential goods. We would
recall that the assistance provided must not be biased
or discriminatory.
Furthermore, we are convinced that mutually
acceptable solutions, free from hidden political
agendas, can also be found to resolve the issue of
the FSO SAFER oil tanker. Unfortunately, we are
compelled to note that talks have yet to bring about the
desired result. At the same time, it is important that
other nationally conceived solutions to the issue have
emerged and that the Ansar Allah movement is showing
its willingness to engage in dialogue with the United
Nations. Confidence-building measures constitute one
of the keys to solving the FSO SAFER issue. In that
regard, we count on the assistance and efforts of the
new Special Envoy to restore such measures through
contacts with all Yemeni and regional stakeholders.
We hope that the new Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Yemen, Mr. Hans Grundberg,
will be able to develop fresh approaches to resuming the
comprehensive negotiation process under the auspices
of the United Nations. We eagerly look forward to his
first briefing before the Security Council in September,
as well as to actions and initiatives to achieve a swift
political settlement. We hope that he will act impartially
and neutrally. For our part, we will continue to assist
United Nations mediation in Yemen through regular
contacts with all parties concerned.
We believe that the role of the Security Council
is not to take sides but to support the Special Envoy,
including by creating a constructive environment in
relations among the parties concerned in the region.
We call on colleagues once again to cooperate together
at the international level to achieve a region-wide
de-escalation. In that regard, we draw attention to
the updated Russian concept for collective security in
the Persian Gulf region, which we recently circulated
within the Security Council and the General Assembly.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
We begin by welcoming the remarks provided by
Assistant Secretary-General Khaled Khiari and UnderSecretary-General Martin Griffiths, with whom it
is indeed a pleasure to continue working. We also
welcome Ms. Fore, Executive Director of UNICEF, and
thank her for her remarks.
The recent UNICEF report entitled “Education
disrupted” is illuminating. The figures highlighting the
21-23210

23/08/2021

The situation in the Middle East

number of children out of school and those in need of
emergency education support are of concern, as well as
the number of children in need of humanitarian help,
including those without access to safe water, sanitation
or hygiene — all of which contribute to a very desolate
and disheartening picture.
Of particular concern is the fact that some of the
children born into the conflict have known only this
dismal quality of life, which is indeed heartbreaking.
They are living their lives against the backdrop of
crisis-level food insecurity, a pandemic, ongoing
hostilities and a humanitarian crisis so grave that it has
been designated the world’s worst humanitarian crisis.
Restricted access to education is directly impacting
those children and indirectly damaging the prospects
for building a stronger and more stable Yemeni civil
society. We take this opportunity to welcome the work
that UNICEF and its partners have been doing to
combat the collapse of the education situation, provide
access to formal and non-formal education and ensure
the healthy and sustainable growth of children.
On the humanitarian front, we welcome the
additional funding of the humanitarian response
plan, which has preserved a number of life-saving
humanitarian operations. We also welcome the recent
funding announcements made by international partners
and call on the international community to maintain
the momentum. We take this moment to underscore
the link between the economic and the humanitarian
situations, both of which are dependent on one another.
Without support for the economy, many Yemenis are
unable to afford the basic food and services needed for
everyday survival.
In that context, we emphasize the importance of
remittances from abroad, on which many Yemenis rely.
Those remittances are a crucial lifeline to those within
Yemen, the loss of which would only exacerbate the
humanitarian and economic situation. We must also
emphasize a humanitarian and existential risk that is
beyond the control of the parties in Yemen, namely,
climate change. Let all of us around this table fulfil our
responsibilities to the most vulnerable in the world and
tackle the problem of climate change in earnest.
As the world continues to grapple with the
ongoing coronavirus disease pandemic, let us not
forget that for many in Yemen, this is another toxic
dimension to the conflict that further exacerbates its
socioeconomic impact. We recognize all international

S/PV. 8840

efforts made towards providing aid to Yemen, but
there must be internal accountability as well. We
urge all authorities to continue their efforts and divert
their attention away from fighting. The pandemic
is affecting an already vulnerable population, and a
fragile health-care system is now breaking under the
weight of it all. We call on all actors within Yemen to
ensure unhindered and equal access to health care and
to humanitarian assistance.
Mohamed Khaled Khiari began his briefing this
morning by underscoring that since the most recent
briefing on Yemen to the Security Council (see
S/PV.8797), there has been no progress. Let me close
by emphasizing that the unrelenting efforts towards
military gain, the impact of which is unjustifiably borne
by the civilian population, must cease immediately.
Nothing in the six years of this conflict has indicated
that this approach is an appropriate or justified one.
The only way to achieve a successful end to the war
is through an inclusive and balanced Yemeni-led,
Yemeni-owned and Yemeni-focused dialogue. We call
on all actors on the ground, and those with influence
over them, to concentrate efforts on achieving a
nationwide ceasefire that would support credible
political negotiations undertaken in good faith and in
the spirit of compromise.
Mr. Lipand (Estonia): I thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Khiari, Under-Secretary-General Griffiths
and Executive Director Fore for their briefings. I also
welcome the nomination of Mr. Hans Grundberg as the
new Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen.
We wish him success and look forward to working with
him in his efforts to achieve peace in Yemen. We also
call upon all parties to engage constructively with the
new Special Envoy.
It has been very disappointing to witness the lack
of progress over the past months, as was also lamented
by Mr. Khiari. If the past six years of war have
shown anything, it is that the conflict has no military
solution. It is vital that all parties show willingness to
compromise and agree to a sustainable and nationwide
ceasefire and resume an inclusive political process,
with the participation of women and youth.
We call upon the Government of Yemen and the
Southern Transitional Council to refrain from actions
that will further increase tensions in an already volatile
situation. We urge them to resume the implementation

21-232109/21

S/PV.8840

The situation in the Middle East

of the Riyadh agreement, which is an essential step on
the path towards achieving a wider peace.
We are deeply concerned about the ongoing
hostilities, which continue to have a devastating effect
on the people of Yemen, especially in Ma’rib, where
the Houthis’ assault continues, but also in Al-Bayda
and elsewhere. Alarmingly, the number of civilian
casualties has reached levels higher than before the
signing of Stockholm Agreement in December 2018. In
Ma’rib alone, tens of thousands have been displaced this
year. This all adds to the already dire socioeconomic
conditions, the impending famine, the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic and the widespread
flooding, as was well illustrated by Mr. Griffiths.
Turning to the effects of the conflict on children,
we fully share the concerns raised by Ms. Fore. Without
an end to the hostilities, humanitarian organizations
have only limited means to help the 400,000 children
suffering from acute malnutrition, the families affected
by COVID-19, the children being deprived of education
and the record number of families forced to flee their
home due to the conflict.
We are deeply worried about the high number of
child casualties in attacks by various parties to the
conflict. We also condemn the continued attacks on
schools and hospitals, as well as the recruitment and
use of children in hostilities, in clear violation of
international humanitarian law.
In order to alleviate the dire humanitarian
situation, it is important to ensure unhindered access of
humanitarian actors, so as to reach all in need. It is also
essential to guarantee a regular flow of fuel and other
essential commodities to all parts of the country.
Finally, we reiterate our call upon the Houthis to
ensure immediate and full access to the FSO SAFER oil
tanker for the United Nations team.
Mr. Aougi (Niger) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Khiari, Mr. Griffiths and Ms. Fore for their briefings.
The Niger deplores the fact that after so many years
of a multifaceted crisis and intensive diplomatic efforts,
the parties to the conflict in Yemen are unable to agree
on the minimum necessary for a return to peace in the
country. That minimum, as we all know, is the cessation
of hostilities throughout the country, which is a sine
qua non condition for making real progress on all other
aspects of the crisis.
10/21

23/08/2021

Two months ago, Martin Griffiths’ assessment at
the end of his three-year mandate (see S/PV.8797) was
that there had been a failure of the various proposals
aimed at reconciling the positions of the parties in
order to achieve a national truce that would create the
conditions for resuming the political process.
The parties to the conflict must come to terms
with the fact that the civil war between them cannot be
resolved by military force but rather through sincere,
inclusive dialogue without any conditions. Achieving
a ceasefire remains essential to giving the political
process a chance to resume for a comprehensive and
sustainable settlement of the crisis, which has been
tearing the country apart for seven years.
We call on all actors to show not only responsibility
and restraint but also great compassion for the people of
Yemen, who have suffered so much, by putting an end
to this tragedy, which has lasted far too long. Indeed,
that is our only hope for a return to peace in this country
and an improvement of the humanitarian crisis that has
plagued Yemen for several years.
With regard to the humanitarian situation, my
delegation remains concerned about the distressing
conditions of the people of Yemen, primarily caused
by the continued war in the country. Nearly 20 million
people need assistance to survive, but the humanitarian
response plan is only 47 per cent funded. My delegation
calls on donor countries, in particular those in the
region, to be more generous in order to prevent further
loss of life. It is equally crucial that the obstacles to
the delivery of humanitarian assistance in the country,
in particular through the port of Al-Hudaydah and
the airport in Sana’a, be lifted immediately to prevent
Yemen from slipping into a large-scale famine.
The situation of the FSO SAFER oil tanker also
remains a source of great concern, particularly because
of its condition and the increased risk of environmental
disaster that it poses. It is high time that the Ansar Allah
authorities assume their responsibility to avert an oil spill
by granting without delay all necessary authorizations
and guarantees to the United Nations team.
In conclusion, the Niger welcomes the appointment
of Mr. Hans Grundberg as Special Envoy for Yemen
and assures him of its full support for all his efforts to
ensure a resumption of dialogue between the parties in
Yemen and restore peace in the country.
21-23210

23/08/2021

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Kvalheim (Norway): Norway would like
to start by thanking the briefers. We join Council
members in welcoming Mr. Griffiths back, now in his
new capacity as head of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA). We extend a special
thanks to Henrietta Fore of UNICEF for her remarks.
Indeed, children are the main victims of war, and we
thank UNICEF, as well as Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict Gamba de Potgieter,
in her briefing last month to the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2140
(2014), for bringing attention to the war’s horrific toll
on children.
The United Nations has long characterized Yemen
as the world’s worst man-made humanitarian crisis.
There is an urgent need for a nationwide ceasefire. A
ceasefire would allow for much-needed humanitarian
relief, the opening of roads to many parts of the country
and children to safely attend school. We are therefore
concerned about the offensive continuing in the area
around Ma’rib and other parts of Yemen, worsening
the already dire humanitarian situation. We continue to
be worried about increasing tensions in the south and
the lack of cooperation in accordance with the Riyadh
agreement. Rivalry and fragmentation, whether in the
south or on the west coast, only derail efforts to secure
peace and stability.
It is clear that humanitarian needs are immense.
Restrictions on imports through the Al-Hudaydah
port continue, thereby contributing to severe fuel
shortages and price increases. Restrictions on freedom
of movement across the country and bureaucratic
impediments are a real challenge for people in need
of humanitarian aid and basic services. Despite the
difficulties, I am glad to hear from OCHA that the
United Nations is delivering aid to all provinces.
Norway is also concerned about reports from the
World Health Organization of attacks on health-care
workers and patients. Protecting the health, welfare
and lives of health-care workers on the front line is
critical to enabling a better humanitarian response.
Additionally, camps for the growing population of
internally displaced persons lack basic infrastructure
and services. According to Save the Children, nine out
of 10 children in camps for displaced persons do not have
sufficient access to basics, such as food, clean water
and education. Overall, we call on all actors to ensure
immediate, safe and unhindered humanitarian access.

S/PV. 8840

We welcome the appointment of Hans Grundberg
as the new Special Envoy for Yemen and hope that
he can push forward towards much-needed progress.
Mr. Grundberg has Norway’s full support, and we look
forward to working with him. We would also like to
once again stress the need for progress on the FSO
SAFER oil tanker issue and urge the Houthis to engage
constructively with the United Nations and others to
avert an environmental and humanitarian catastrophe.
Norway will also continue to advocate for an
inclusive political process that prioritizes the full,
equal and meaningful participation and leadership of
women. Indeed, participation should not be limited
to those who resort to violence. The process must be
Yemeni-owned and Yemeni-led, with regional actors
and diverse Yemeni actors also playing a key role. Only
a political solution can bring about lasting peace and
prosperity in Yemen.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I, too, would like to thank Mr. Khaled Khiari,
Martin Griffiths and Henrietta Fore for their briefings.
I would like to take this opportunity to commend the
work done by Martin Griffiths as Special Envoy for
Yemen. I thank him for all his efforts and wish him
all the best in his new role. I also welcome Ms. Fore to
today’s meeting. The plight of children in the armed
conflict in Yemen deserves the Council’s full attention.
We have repeatedly stated that only a political
solution will bring an end to the war in Yemen. However,
today the Houthis reject all solutions. Instead of seeking
peace, they continue their offensive against Ma’rib and
Saudi territory. We strongly condemn such actions.
Instead of preventing an environmental, humanitarian
and economic disaster, they continue to engage in
unacceptable blackmail, refusing to allow the United
Nations mission to inspect the FSO SAFER oil tanker. It
has been more than a year now. The Houthis must grant
the United Nations immediate and unconditional access
to the oil tanker.
Instead of allowing Yemeni children to return to
school, they recruit and enrol them in summer camps,
and make heavy use of them on the battlefield. We firmly
condemn such acts and call for them to end. We call
for respect for Security Council resolutions, including
those on children in armed conflict and international
humanitarian law. The Council must be ready to take
the necessary measures. The Houthis must also engage
in good-faith dialogue towards a political solution with

21-2321011/21

S/PV.8840

The situation in the Middle East

the new Special Envoy, Hans Grundberg. Of course, he
can count on France’s full support.
We know what is needed to end the crisis in
Yemen — a comprehensive ceasefire, the reopening
of Sana’a airport and the port of Al-Hudaydah and
discussions on a comprehensive, inclusive political
solution that will allow for the effective participation
of women. Here in the Council, we have also repeatedly
expressed our concerns about potential threats to
Yemen’s territorial integrity. We firmly reiterate that it
must be fully respected.
So long as the Houthis reject peace, the Yemeni
people will continue to suffer. We must do our utmost
to ease the suffering of the 20 million people depending
on humanitarian assistance, as Martin Griffiths
recalled, including the more than 4 million displaced
persons, of whom nearly 2 million are children. The
risk of large-scale famine increases each day. We have
a collective responsibility and moral duty to stop this
humanitarian tragedy in its tracks.
We must do our utmost to accelerate the
coronavirus disease vaccination campaign and enable
equitable access to vaccinations. Now more than ever
before, immediate, comprehensive, safe and unimpeded
humanitarian access must be guaranteed to all persons
in need, in particular in all Houthi-controlled areas.
Lastly, and we cannot stress this point enough, the
protection of civilians, including humanitarian and
medical staff, must remain an absolute imperative.
Arbitrary detentions, torture, gender-based sexual
violence and the use of children in hostilities
are intolerable. The perpetrators of violations of
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law will not go unpunished.
France will remain fully mobilized to bring an end
to the war in Yemen and resolve tensions in the region.
The Council has in unison made its demands clear, and
it is high time for them to be met.
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Assistant Secretary-General Mohamed
Khiari, Under-Secretary-General Martin Griffiths and
Executive Director Henrietta Fore for their briefings.
We welcome Mr. Griffiths in his new capacity and wish
him every success in his latest role. Lastly, I welcome
the delegation of Yemen, here with us today.
We are again deeply concerned about the increase
in violence. In addition to Ma’rib, pockets of fighting
12/21

23/08/2021

continue to break out in several areas, including Abyan,
Ad Dali’, Al-Hudaydah, Lahij and Taiz. We also note
the continuing attacks on Saudi targets.
Mexico welcomes the biannual report of the Group
of Eminent Experts on Yemen. We call for the Group’s
inspection of the weapons seized near the Yemeni coast
to be facilitated. We are deeply concerned about the
numerous violations of international humanitarian law
reflected in the report. We urge the parties to comply
with their obligations under international humanitarian
law, protect civilians, allow unhindered access to
humanitarian assistance and promote respect for human
rights, in particular with regard to vulnerable groups
such as women and children.
We also express deep concern about the
approximately 3,500 Houthi-run summer camps
and centres for the recruitment of minors, which are
attended by children as young as seven years old.
Mexico calls upon Ansar Allah to put an end to such
practices, which radicalize Yemeni youth. We would
recall that instigation of and incitement to violence are a
serious threat to peace, security and stability in Yemen
and the region, and must therefore cease. We also note
that, while recruitment by armed groups affects mostly
boys, the number of girls who fall victim to sexual
violence or are forced into early marriage continues to
grow at an increasing rate.
Such actions not only jeopardize the peace
and prosperity of future Yemeni generations but
also represent serious violations of international
humanitarian law. While we appreciate the coalition’s
commitment to ceasing and preventing violations
against the rights of children, we urge it to redouble
its efforts to uphold its obligations under international
humanitarian law, as well as to further mechanisms
to identify and bring to justice those guilty of crimes
against children.
Mexico reiterates the importance that all parties to
the conflict protect Yemeni children. Finally, we urge
the continuation of efforts to strengthen cooperation
among the Committee established pursuant to resolution
2140 (2014), the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict, the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
and UNICEF.
On other issues, we applaud the efforts by Saudi
Arabia and Oman, as well as the United States Special
Envoy, to mediate between the parties. We emphasize
21-23210

23/08/2021

The situation in the Middle East

that the solution to the Yemeni conflict will not be by
armed means but requires a nationwide ceasefire and
a political process led by the Yemenis themselves. We
therefore urge the Houthi leadership, as well as the other
parties to the conflict, to participate constructively and
actively in the United Nations-facilitated dialogue. We
also stress that the broad participation of the various
political, civil society and minority groups, including
the full, equal and meaningful participation of Yemeni
women, is indispensable to the political transition.
Unfortunately, we must reiterate our deep concern
about the situation of the FSO SAFER tanker and the
risk that it poses to the environment, humanitarian
access and trade in general. Mexico urges Ansar Allah
to cease obstructing the inspection of the vessel by
United Nations technical bodies.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): The United States greatly appreciates today’s
informative briefing. We welcome Under-SecretaryGeneral Griffiths back to this monthly meeting on
Yemen in his new capacity. I also thank Executive
Director Fore for her briefing and Assistant SecretaryGeneral Khiari for his update. We also welcome
the participation of the Yemini Government in this
meeting today.
We warmly welcome the Secretary-General’s
appointment of Hans Grundberg as the United Nations
Special Envoy for Yemen. The United States is eager
to work with Special Envoy Grundberg as he consults
widely with a broad cross-section of the Yemeni people.
We look forward to his plan for the next stage of the
United Nations peace efforts and to his briefing the
Security Council soon. We were disappointed to hear
today that there has been no progress on these talks since
the last briefing by Assistant Secretary-General Khiari.
Today I would like to discuss three aspects of
the conflict in Yemen: the need to put an end to all
violence; the need to address the humanitarian crisis;
and the need to address the underlying economic and
fuel grievances exacerbating the conflict.
The new Special Envoy presents us with a real
opportunity. The conflict in Yemen is a rare case where
the Security Council and the international community
share a broad consensus. We all agree that the fighting
must end, and we all agree that a political path to peace,
one with meaningful participation by women, minority
leaders and civil society, must be pursued. Let us seize

S/PV. 8840

this moment because time is precious and lives are
being lost.
The Houthi offensive on Ma’rib has stalled but it
has not become any less brutal. June was the deadliest
month for civilians in nearly two years. That offensive
is costly. We have all seen the images of Houthi missile
strikes that killed women and children. We urgently
need a nationwide ceasefire so that other areas of Yemen
do not endure unnecessary violence and suffering.
The Saudi-led coalition and the Government
of the Republic of Yemen have shown openness to a
ceasefire but the Houthis seem determined to continue
their military campaign. This is the moment to change
their minds. Between the stalemate in Ma’rib, the
appointment of a new United Nations Special Envoy and
an unprecedented regional consensus on resolving the
conflict, we have a valuable opportunity for dialogue.
The parties must seize that opportunity and finally
bring the conflict to an end.
Only a durable peace agreement between
the Yemeni parties can begin to reverse the dire
humanitarian situation facing Yemenis, with more
than 2 million young Yemenis facing life-threatening
malnutrition. To address that situation immediately,
the United States announced nearly $165 million
in additional humanitarian assistance for Yemen
earlier this month. That will support the World Food
Programme in providing emergency food assistance for
more than 11 million people every month.
We reiterate the call for other countries, especially
those in the region, to increase their support for the
United Nations Yemen humanitarian response plan,
which remains severely underfunded. In that regard, I
thank Qatar for its recent contribution of $100 million
to support humanitarian operations in Yemen.
We also cannot lose sight of another heartbreaking
dimension of this conflict — the abuses that the Houthis
continue to inflict on children. I thank Henrietta Fore
for raising such concerns. The United States is alarmed
by the latest reports of the Houthis’ recruitment of
thousands of children into military training and
indoctrination camps. That threatens the country’s
long-term stability, but, more important, it is just plain
wrong and gut-wrenching. Children are not warriors.
That cannot continue, as Council members heard from
the Executive Director of UNICEF. We must place
children first and we must keep them safe, allowing
them to pursue their education.

21-2321013/21

S/PV.8840

The situation in the Middle East

Finally, taking a step back, we must address the
economic issues in Yemen because they are inextricably
linked to the broader peace and humanitarian efforts.
We cannot reach a durable solution to the conflict or
adequately address food insecurity if the underlying
economic grievances that have driven the conflict since
its beginning are not addressed. Martin Griffiths laid
out the concerns quite effectively, noting that 5 million
people are on the verge of famine.
For the same reasons, the United States urges Saudi
Arabia, the Yemeni Government and the Houthis to take
steps to ensure that fuel is adequately imported and
distributed throughout Yemen at a fair price. We again
urge all parties to the Riyadh Agreement to redouble
efforts aimed at its implementation and to return the
Yemeni Government to Aden so that it can restore basic
services and take steps to improve economic stability.
We continue to have grave concerns over the state of
the FSO SAFER tanker, as the Council heard from other
members today. With their delays and unreasonable
demands, the Houthis have thus far squandered the
opportunity that the United Nations has afforded them
to avoid an environmental and economic calamity.
Despite all those challenges, I would like to end
where I started — with a note of hope. We have a real
opportunity here for peace in Yemen. Let us therefore
stand together, our voices united as one Council, and
do everything we can to support some of the world’s
most vulnerable people. Let us put an end to this
terrible conflict.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I thank Mr. Khiari,
Mr. Griffiths and Ms. Fore for their comprehensive
briefings, and I welcome the participation of
the Permanent Representative of Yemen in our
meeting today.
On the peace process, despite the increasing efforts
of regional partners and the international community,
we have not seen any progress in the negotiations of
the relevant parties in Yemen. The continued fighting
in parts of Yemen is one of the biggest obstacles
to the peace process. Casualties, including women
and children from all sides, have been on the rise in
recent months.
In that context, we reiterate our view that there is
no military solution to the conflict in Yemen. Instead,
all parties should heed the Secretary-General’s call
for a global ceasefire, in accordance with resolution
14/21

23/08/2021

2532 (2020), and explore opportunities for face-toface negotiations. It is also important to work closely
with the new Special Envoy, regional partners and the
international community on the United Nations-led
peace proposal for Yemen.
On the humanitarian front, it is encouraging to
learn about recent contributions from donors to the
humanitarian work in Yemen. However, we would
like to stress the importance of greater funding and
increased reimbursement so that the humanitarian
agencies are able to provide aid for those in need in the
country for the rest of the year.
In addition, we remain concerned about the
dire humanitarian situation in the country. Military
escalation, economic crisis, food insecurity, famine
risk, heavy rain, floods and subsequent displacement
and the coronavirus disease pandemic have put Yemen
in extremely difficult and miserable circumstances.
Around 21 million people, including more than
11 million children, need humanitarian assistance.
About 2.25 million children are at risk of acute
malnutrition, and more than 2 million school-aged girls
and boys are now out of school. In Ma’rib, at least 154
civilians have been killed and 21,500 people displaced
since the beginning of 2021.
Against that backdrop, we would like to
re-emphasize the importance of providing safe and
unimpeded humanitarian access for those in need in
Yemen. It is urgent to fully remove the sea blockade
in order to ensure food and fuel supplies. Moreover,
we reiterate our support for UNICEF’s calls for all
stakeholders in Yemen to uphold children’s right
to education and work together to achieve lasting
and inclusive peace. All parties must also comply
with international humanitarian law and implement
resolution 2573 (2021), including the protection of
civilian infrastructure.
On the FSO SAFER oil tanker issue, it is crucial
now more than ever to turn commitments into actions.
The United Nations technical team should be allowed
to access the tanker without further delay. We cannot
emphasize enough the threat that the tanker poses to
the environment, economy and people in the region.
Last but not least, we believe that the full
implementation of the Stockholm Agreement and the
Riyadh agreement should be honoured and promoted.
21-23210

23/08/2021

The situation in the Middle East

Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I would like to thank
today’s briefers and welcome Mr. Martin Griffiths to
the Chamber. It is good to see him here in his new role.
I am always very happy to see Ms. Henrietta Fore in
the Chamber.

S/PV. 8840

children, particularly girls, remain the primary victims
of this horrific crisis.

I would also like to welcome the appointment earlier
this month of Mr. Hans Grundberg as the new Special
Envoy for Yemen. We look forward to working with
him as he takes forward the crucial work of seeking
solutions to this devastating crisis, building, of course,
on the valiant and tireless efforts of Mr. Griffiths.

As we approach the International Day to Protect
Education from Attack, we are reminded that every
child should have a desk where they can learn in safety
and security and begin to build a brighter future for
themselves, their family and their country. We know
that when girls have access to education, they are
empowered and equipped to participate fully in political
and social life in later years and to break devastating
cycles of violence, conflict and poverty.

Regrettably, as we have heard from other
speakers, the summer months in Yemen have seen a
further deterioration of the political, security, human
rights and humanitarian situations, with devastating
consequences for the ordinary people in Yemen — the
civilian population.

It is therefore shameful that more than 2 million
Yemeni children are currently out of school; that a
harrowing 70 per cent of Yemeni girls are married
while still children, which automatically denies those
girls access to education; and that schools in Yemen
continue to be attacked and used for military purposes.

Ireland reiterates our firm conviction that there can
be no military solution to this conflict. A nationwide
ceasefire is urgently needed in order to open the way
for inclusive negotiations on the badly needed political
way forward. Such processes require the full, equal and
meaningful participation of women.

Ireland fully supports the critical work of UNICEF
in addressing those vitally important issues, including
in providing access to education and in supporting
teachers and school staff whose salaries have gone
unpaid for many years.

Ireland also calls for the full implementation of
the Riyadh agreement and for all parties to set their
differences aside and, finally, to act in the interests of
the Yemeni people. We reiterate our strong support for
the unity Government of Yemen and call on all sides to
resume dialogue, with the aim of the safe return of the
Government to Aden.
The continued absence of any women in the cabinet
is very regrettable. We hope that this issue will be
addressed in the very near future. The voice of Yemeni
women in finding a pathway to peace is critical. We
will return to this point again and again until it is done.
I repeat Ireland’s call for all parties to comply with
their obligations under international humanitarian and
human rights law, as well as for accountability for
crimes committed against the Yemeni people, which is
critical for any lasting peace.
The briefing we just heard from Ms. Henrietta
Fore, taken together with recent reports, lays bare the
devastating combined impact of war and poverty on
the innocent children of Yemen. I will not repeat the
horrifying facts and figures. They are staggering and
all too familiar by now. They make clear that Yemeni

Ireland remains deeply concerned about the
humanitarian consequences of the protracted conflict
in Yemen, further compounded by the continuing
violence across the country and the serious economic
pressures that Yemenis currently face.
Today, we heard again from Under-SecretaryGeneral Griffiths that the humanitarian and
economic crises in Yemen are conflict-driven. The
lack of fuel entering Al-Hudaydah port directly and
indirectly affects the ability of millions of Yemenis
to access food. Rising fuel prices means rising food
prices. The only food on shelves in Yemen today is
food that few can afford. Let us not forget that the
effects of famine, horrific as they are, are not only
immediate, but also intergenerational. The effects are
intergenerational. The effects of stunting and education
lost will undermine the ability of Yemenis to rebuild
their country once this brutal conflict finally ends. In
other words, Yemen’s future will be marked for decades
to come by famine. We call for the lifting of restrictions
of imports into Al-Hudaydah port, the payment of civil
servant salaries and the preserving and strengthening
of critical humanitarian access to all those in need.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by thanking Mr. Mohamed Khaled Khiari,

21-2321015/21

S/PV.8840

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Martin Griffiths and Ms. Henrietta Fore for their
valuable briefings on the situation in Yemen. I also
welcome the presence of the Permanent Representative
of Yemen at this meeting.
The multidimensional crisis in Yemen has been
ongoing for several years. The security, living,
humanitarian and health conditions in the country have
continued to deteriorate. Despite diplomatic efforts, the
fighting goes on in many regions, while the prospect
of a political solution has stalled and the parties to the
conflict insist on the military option. That has led to
thousands of deaths, millions of displaced Yemenis,
the wide-scale destruction of infrastructure and an
unprecedented humanitarian crisis. The coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic and recent flooding
have further exacerbated the situation.
In that context, Tunisia reiterates its firm position
that military options will only lead to greater suffering
for the Yemeni people and that ending the crisis can
be achieved only through a political settlement based
on an immediate and comprehensive ceasefire and the
active engagement of the parties to the conflict in a
political dialogue that first and foremost prioritizes the
interests of Yemen and leads to a settlement that restores
security and stability in Yemen while preserving its
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.
Furthermore, Tunisia stresses the need for the political
process to be inclusive and for women and youth to
actively participate in it.
We welcome the appointment of Mr. Hans
Grundberg as Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Yemen, and we underscore our support for continued
United Nations, international and regional efforts
to end the hostilities and launch the political process
and negotiations among the parties to the conflict. We
also emphasize the need to end military operations,
in particular the Houthi attack on Ma’rib governorate,
as they further complicate the crisis and jeopardize
civilian lives. We reiterate Tunisia’s condemnation of
the repeated attacks by the Houthis on the territory of
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, and we call for an end
to be put to such attacks. In addition, we stress that the
parties must refrain from attacking civilians and respect
their commitments in accordance with international
humanitarian law.
The deteriorating humanitarian situation in Yemen
is a source of deep concern. Living and economic
conditions continue to deteriorate, as we have heard
16/21

23/08/2021

from Mr. Martin Griffiths, and the health situation
continues to worsen because of the COVID-19 and
other pandemics and diseases in addition to the
decline in purchasing power and the deteriorating food
situation. Millions of Yemenis are at risk of famine,
and millions of children are suffering from acute
malnutrition. Furthermore, more than 2 million schoolage children are unable to attend school, and internal
displacement is continuing. That has very serious
implications at different levels today and will continue
to do so in future. In that context, we reiterate the
need to allow unimpeded access for humanitarian and
medical assistance and to open seaports and airports
for the delivery of basic living necessities to the Yemeni
people. We also emphasize the importance of providing
the necessary funding for humanitarian operations in
particular, as the number of persons reliant on such
humanitarian assistance continues to increase and
as living conditions continue to deteriorate amid the
continuing military operations, leading to displacement
and the destruction of infrastructure.
The continued presence of the FSO SAFER even
as its structure deteriorates threatens an unprecedented
environmental, economic and humanitarian disaster in
the region. Therefore, we call on the Houthis to facilitate
the necessary measures for the arrival of international
experts to carry out the necessary technical inspection
and repairs as soon as possible.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): Let me begin by welcoming
Mr. Martin Griffiths, in his new capacity as the UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, with whom we look
forward to working. We also thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Mohamed Khaled Khiari and UNICEF
Executive Director Henrietta Fore for their briefings.
We welcome the participation of the Permanent
Representative of Yemen in this meeting. We would also
like to take this opportunity to congratulate Mr. Hans
Grundberg on his appointment as the new Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen. We wish
him every success and assure him of our cooperation.
However we look at it, the protracted conflict in
Yemen has no winners — only losers. Those who lose
the most are the vulnerable — children, youth, women
and the elderly, whose daily prayer is for an end to
the ravaging civil war, a return of peace and, with it,
the opportunity to rebuild their lives and regain their
ability to fend for themselves.
21-23210

23/08/2021

The situation in the Middle East

The continuing lack of progress on the political track,
including the stalled ceasefire talks, is disappointing. It
is reflective of the failure of the parties to prioritize
the needs of their own people. We appeal to all Yemeni
stakeholders to realize that there is no military solution
to the conflict. The time has come for them to engage
in soul-searching and participate constructively in an
inclusive Yemeni-led and Yemeni-owned process, with
the support of the United Nations as well as regional
and international partners.
In such a process, the parties must be willing to
make the compromises necessary to break the existing
stalemate and achieve a working nationwide ceasefire
within an agreed time frame and, ultimately, a
sustainable, negotiated political solution to the conflict.
We remain disturbed about the escalation of fighting
in Ma’rib, Abyan, Al-Bayda, Al-Hudaydah, Al-Jawf,
Taiz and other areas. Of particular concern is the fact
that some parties have resorted to recruiting children to
fight in those battles. I reiterate Kenya’s condemnation
of the use of children in military trainings or on the
front lines of battle, or even exposing them to weapons
of war.
The congratulatory message sent by Al-Qaida in
the Arabian Peninsula to the Taliban is an indicator
of the fact that the recent events in Afghanistan could
inspire and embolden jihadist groups in the region
and beyond. It is important that the Security Council
respond in a united and assertive manner to counter
such threats globally.
Kenya is gravely concerned about the worsening
humanitarian situation, including the heightened risk
of famine affecting more than 20 million people.
We continue to support calls for not only increased
humanitarian assistance but also guarantees for
humanitarian access. Special attention should, in
this regard, be accorded to addressing the surge in
coronavirus disease infections.
We are also concerned by suffering of millions of
children, including the more than 2 million who remain
out of school owing to the protracted conflict. That will
affect their ability to have meaningful livelihoods and
instead serve as a reservoir for recruitment by armed
and terrorist groups.
Kenya commends the efforts undertaken by
UNICEF to ensure the continuity of learning for children
in Yemen. We call on the international community to
enhance support for the education sector, including by

S/PV. 8840

ensuring that teachers receive their salaries and are
enabled to continue teaching.
We condemn any attacks on, or conversion of,
civilian infrastructure such as schools and health
facilities for military use. We urge the concerned
parties to desist from such and allow the boys and girls
of Yemen to receive medical care, education and other
services necessary to their well-being.
The increasing number of mysterious attacks using
water-borne improvised explosives and other explosive
devices on ships off the coast of Yemen and other nearby
waters are deeply concerning. Such acts threaten the
safety of international shipping and navigation, with
a possible costly disruption of international trade and
commerce affecting the region and beyond.
On this note, it is disappointing that little progress
has been made towards resolving the situation around
the FSO SAFER tanker. Once again, we call on the
Houthis to engage constructively in finding a solution
and avert an environmental catastrophe.
In conclusion, I reaffirm Kenya’s solidarity with the
people of Yemen. We support efforts to find innovative
ways of helping them to surmount their challenges in
order to rebuild their country and their lives.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I thank Assistant Secretary-General Khiari, UnderSecretary-General Griffiths and Executive Director
Fore for their respective briefings. I welcome the
presence of the Permanent Representative of Yemen at
this meeting.
No progress has been made in alleviating Yemen’s
economic and humanitarian crisis or its political and
security challenges. The Yemeni people, especially
Yemeni children, are still suffering a great deal. All
parties in Yemen and the international community
must step up their efforts to find a way out of the
current predicament.
First, a comprehensive ceasefire must be achieved
as soon as possible, and the peace process must be
resumed at an early date. A military solution is not an
option for Yemen; a political solution is the only way
to overcome the crisis there. The Secretary-General
recently appointed a new Special Envoy for Yemen
of whom all parties have high expectations. We hope
that Special Envoy Grundberg, upon assumption of
his new function, will perform his duties objectively
and impartially in accordance with his mandate, fully

21-2321017/21

S/PV.8840

The situation in the Middle East

listen to the views of all parties, actively respond to the
concerns of the international community to promote the
implementation of Security Council resolutions, strive
to achieve a comprehensive ceasefire at an early date
and make progress in dialogues and peace talks. China
has always supported the work of the Special Envoy
and looks forward to Mr. Grundberg’s briefing to the
Council on his work plan and considerations as soon
as possible.
Secondly, we must give full play to the role of
the countries of the region and create synergy so as
to promote peace talks. Recently, the countries in
the region, including Saudi Arabia and Oman, have
continued to engage in mediation efforts, for which
China expresses its appreciation. The United Nations
and the countries in the region should compare notes
on their good offices in a timely fashion and strengthen
coordination and cooperation. Countries with important
influence on Yemen should continue to play an active
and constructive role to promote mutual trust among
all parties to the conflict and adhere to the general
direction of a political settlement.
China has always actively supported and
constructively participated in the Yemeni peace process.
When State Councilor and Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the People’s Republic of China Wang Yi visited the
countries in the region in the first half of this year, he
put forward a five-point initiative on achieving peace
and stability in the Middle East. China stands ready to
maintain communication and close coordination with all
parties on the five-point initiative in a concerted effort
to seek peace, build security and promote development
in the Middle East.
Thirdly, we must scale up international
humanitarian assistance to ease difficulties in Yemen’s
economy and people’s livelihood. The Yemeni people
are suffering from the many-faceted distress of war,
famine, pandemic and flooding. China notes that the
Yemeni Government has taken tailored measures and
made active efforts to restore the economy, stabilize
the currency and protect people’s livelihood. China
appreciates and supports those efforts. The international
community, especially donors, should honour its
commitments and increase assistance and support to
Yemen. All parties to the conflict in Yemen should
provide safe and unimpeded humanitarian access
to ensure that channels for humanitarian assistance
remain open and conditions conducive to easing the
humanitarian situation are established.
18/21

23/08/2021

Last but not least, with regard to the FSO SAFER
oil tanker, China once again urges the Houthis to
strengthen communication with the relevant United
Nations agencies and provide United Nations technical
personnel with cooperation and access as soon as
possible to prevent an avoidable economic, humanitarian
and marine environmental catastrophe.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of India.
I thank Assistant Secretary-General Khaled Khiari
and Under-Secretary-General Martin Griffiths for their
briefings. In particular, allow me to welcome UnderSecretary-General Martin Griffiths to our meeting
in his new role. I thank the Executive Director of
UNICEF, Henrietta Fore, for sharing her insights on
the situation of children in Yemen. I also welcome the
presence of the Permanent Representative of Yemen to
this meeting today.
The continued military escalation in Ma’rib
has triggered counteroffensive operations in other
provinces of Yemen. Violent clashes continue to rage
along multiple front lines across Yemen, which have
undermined the prospects of peace in the country. We
call on all parties to refrain from military action that
could lead to a further escalation of hostilities. We also
reiterate the importance of the full implementation
of the Stockholm and Riyadh agreements, which is
an essential requirement for maintaining calm and
stability in Yemen. Countries in the region are also
encouraged to continue their efforts, and we support
efforts in that direction.
While the security situation remains precarious,
the humanitarian situation worsens with every passing
day. The recent rise in coronavirus disease infections
and deaths has triggered fears of a third wave of the
pandemic. The recent torrential rains and widespread
flooding have resulted in the loss of life and property,
and consequently worsened the humanitarian situation
in the country. All those developments only underscore
the need for regular, predictable and unimpeded delivery
of humanitarian assistance and adequate funding for
humanitarian operations on an urgent basis. India calls
for enhanced and effective humanitarian assistance to
the Yemeni population throughout the country without
any discrimination.
We heard from the Executive Director of UNICEF
about the grave impact of the protracted conflict on
Yemeni children. Women and children have suffered
21-23210

23/08/2021

The situation in the Middle East

the most during these long years of conflict in Yemen.
Around 1.7 million children have been uprooted from
their homes and displaced multiple times. The ongoing
conflict has also deprived them of access to immediate
basic medical care, safe water and sanitation. The
education of children in Yemen has also been severely
disrupted. The forcible recruitment of children and
their indoctrination through camps remain a cause for
concern. If that situation continues, it will have a longlasting impact on an entire generation in Yemen, as
well as on the future of Yemen.
The recent oil spill created by the Dia oil tanker
off the coast of Aden is a pertinent reminder of the
urgent redressal of the situation surrounding the FSO
SAFER tanker. An oil spill in the Red Sea as a result
of FSO SAFER’s dilapidated condition would have a
far more serious and long-lasting environmental and
humanitarian impact on Yemen and the region. We
therefore strongly support the call for urgent access to
the FSO SAFER tanker for the United Nations team.
The time has come for the international community,
in particular the Council, to step up its efforts for an
immediate cessation of hostilities. As a long-standing
friend of Yemen, with historical ties that have been
nurtured and strengthened over centuries, India
reiterates its call for an urgent nationwide ceasefire,
followed by a robust and inclusive political process,
with full respect for Yemen’s unity, sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity. Only such an
approach can result in enduring peace in Yemen.
In that regard, we welcome the appointment of
Hans Grundberg of Sweden as the new Special Envoy
for Yemen and hope that he will infuse new momentum
into the negotiations, which have reached a stalemate.
We urge all parties in Yemen to immediately end the
fighting and engage with the Special Envoy in good
faith without any preconditions, for the well-being of
the Yemeni people.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Yemen.
Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me, Mr. President, to congratulate you
on your country’s assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council this month. I wish you and your
friendly delegation every success in your tasks. I would
also like to thank your predecessor, the Permanent

S/PV. 8840

Representative of France, for a successful presidency
last month.
I thank my dear brother Assistant SecretaryGeneral Khaled Khiari for his briefing and welcome
Mr. Martin Griffiths, who is present with us today
and briefed us on the most recent developments on the
humanitarian situation in Yemen since he assumed his
new post. I wish him every success. We stand ready
to cooperate with him so as to ensure success in his
upcoming tasks.
The Government of Yemen once again welcomes
the appointment of Mr. Hans Grundberg as the new
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen. He
has our full support in his efforts to resume the political
process and reach a comprehensive political solution to
put an end to the coup d’état and war fuelled by the
Houthi militias. We call for recent efforts to continue
and be built upon while discouraging any new tracks
and ideas that would prolong the suffering of the Yemeni
people without investing in the achievements registered
to date. I would also like to thank Ms. Henrietta Fore
for her briefing.
Our Yemeni people cannot endure any more
humanitarian suffering or additional burdens. Houthi
militias, supported by the Iranian regime, continue
with their destructive approach and aggression against
the country and its social fabric. They continue with
their intransigence and arrogance while rejecting all
regional and international solutions and initiatives
aimed at bringing about a comprehensive and lasting
peace. Houthi militias continue their military escalation
against cities and camps for displaced persons while
targeting civilians and civilian locations in the sisterly
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
The Government of Yemen, represented by His
Excellency Mr. Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi, President of
the Republic, underscores once again its eagerness to
put an end to the conflict, which has led to the worst
humanitarian crisis and to the displacement of millions
of Yemeni people. We have responded positively to the
various options and endeavours to bring about peace
and end this loathsome and absurd war in order to
maintain the security, unity and stability of Yemen and
ease the humanitarian suffering.
We have agreed to compromise in order to stop
the bloodshed among the people of Yemen and reach
a comprehensive political settlement, in line with the
political terms of reference agreed, namely the Gulf

21-2321019/21

S/PV.8840

The situation in the Middle East

Cooperation Council Initiative and its Implementation
Mechanism, the outcome of the Comprehensive
National Dialogue and Security Council resolutions,
in particular resolution 2216 (2015). Those terms of
reference are the basis for a genuine national partnership
and peaceful coexistence among all segments of the
Yemeni population. They pave the way for a new and
democratic Yemen.
In that regard, we stress the need for the international
community and the Security Council to shoulder their
responsibilities and bring pressure to bear on the
Houthi militias to choose peace and stop the escalation
of violence and killing of Yemenis. The lack of decisive
action has encouraged the militias to continue the war
and reject peace initiatives and any engagement with the
international community and the Security Council. We
look forward to productive regional and international
efforts to reach a political solution in Yemen, with
positive results that would meet the aspirations of the
Yemeni people for stability, security and development
while easing the humanitarian suffering that they have
endured since the coup d’état perpetrated by the Houthi
militias in 2014. All Yemeni people want to live in
peace and enjoy stability and prosperity. They would
like to overcome the current challenges caused by the
coup d’état and move towards reconstruction while
addressing the economic and humanitarian impacts of
the conflict.
The Houthi militias have used Al-Hudaydah and
its ports as a base from which to prepare and launch
booby-trapped vessels that are controlled remotely
and to plant sea mines, in addition to engaging in
piracy. That constitutes a threat to regional and
international peace and security, in particular because
it targets, in an unprecedented manner, international
navigation and trade routes, which, in turn, affects
global energy security on one of the most important
international maritime waterways in the Red Sea and
the Bab el-Mandab Strait. Those militias also use the
Stockholm Agreement to destabilize Yemen and the
region while targeting civilians and civilian locations
in Al-Hudaydah, where scores of attempted attacks
by Houthi militias supported by the Iranian regime
have been thwarted. The militias impose limitations
and place obstacles to obstruct the work of the United
Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement
(UNMHA). The Government has stressed before the
Council in many occasions the need to move UNMHA
20/21

23/08/2021

headquarters from Houthi-controlled areas so that it
can discharge its mandate.
The continued attacks by the Houthi militias on
Ma’rib governorate and the systematic targeting of
civilians and camps for internally displaced persons
using ballistic missiles, drones and various heavy
weapons have led to increased suffering of the more
than 2 million displaced people. They have also
led to the killing of civilians, the majority of them
women and children, in addition to the daily killings
perpetrated by those militias using heavy and medium
weaponry on inhabited areas in Tazz. Snipers have
also targeted civilians, causing a significant number
of casualties. Those represent crimes against humanity
and a flagrant violation of international humanitarian
law and international human rights law. We call
upon the international community and human rights
organizations to shoulder their legal and ethical
responsibilities with regard to such systematic crimes
against civilians and internally displaced persons,
which aim to thwart international efforts to bring about
peace. We also call upon the Security Council to assume
its role, stop such attacks, alleviate the suffering of the
Yemeni people and push towards a political solution to
end the conflict.
Houthi militias are also obstructing relief efforts
by international organizations and United Nations
agencies in areas under their control. They are adopting
starvation policies while disregarding the humanitarian
suffering and the loss of livelihoods of millions of
Yemenis. The militias are exploiting the tragic situation
of Yemenis to mislead the international community. We
call for an end to such practices in order to ensure that
humanitarian assistance reaches the millions who are in
need. We also call for an end to attempts by the militias
to widen the scope of the humanitarian disaster.
The considerable efforts made by the Yemeni
Government to alleviate the destructive economic
repercussions of the war are insufficient. In that
regard, we reiterate the call to the international
community to contribute by providing urgent support
to the Government’s efforts and by assisting its
measures and plans to achieve economic stability and
prevent the dangerous consequences of the growing
humanitarian disaster. That would be achieved by
supporting the efforts to strengthen the capacity of
the national economy and prevent the collapse of the
national currency by taking many measures, such
as establishing a mechanism for the disbursement
21-23210

23/08/2021

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8840

of donor funds for relief work in Yemen through the
Central Bank of Yemen, which would help to support
the value of the national currency and economic
stability, as well as by including development priorities
and needs in all humanitarian interventions towards
achieving an early recovery by focusing on community
economic activities, implementing the Sustainable
Development Goals and shifting from relief work to
supporting development areas and the productive and
economic sectors.

which would have serious economic, humanitarian
and environmental consequences in the event of the
largest oil spill in history due to the repeated rejection
by the Houthis. It would damage the ecosystems in
the Red Sea, lead to a collapse of the fishing sector in
the region and affect international shipping lanes and
the global economy. We once again call on the United
Nations to step up its efforts to reach the tanker and
carry out the necessary measures without delay before
the occurrence of that impending disaster.

The Yemeni Government holds the Houthi militias
fully responsible for any damage caused by the
floating FSO SAFER oil tanker after they obstructed
the arrival of the United Nations technical team to
conduct an assessment and maintenance operations.
We warn against the worst disaster in the Red Sea,

The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I will now adjourn the meeting
so that the Council can continue its discussion on the
subject in closed consultations.
The meeting rose at noon.

21-2321021/21
