TWENTY-THIRD

YEAR
st

MEETING: 16 FEBRUARY 1968
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 39 1) ..............................
Adoption of the agenda ......................................
The question of South West Africa:
Letter dated 12 Februarv’ 1968 addressed to the President of the Security
Council by the representatives of Chile, Colombia, Guyana, India, Indonesia,
Nigeria, Pakistan, Turkey, United Arab Republic, Yugoslavia and Zambia
(S/8397);
Letter dated 12 February 1968 addressed to the President of the Security
Council by the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Ceylon, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville), Congo
(Democratic Republic of), Cyprus, Dahomey, Ethiopia, Ghana, Guinea, Iran,
Iraq, Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Nepal, Niger, Philippines,
Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Sudan,
Syria, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania, Upper
Volta and Yemen (S/8398 and Add.l/Rev.l and Add.2) . . . . , . , . . . . . . .

Page

-1

s/w.1391

1

1

THIRTEEN

HUNDRED

AND NINETY-FIRST

Held in New York on Friday,

16 February

President: Mr. Miguel SOLANO LOPEZ (Paraguay).

MEETING
1968, at 4 pm.

Syria, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania, Upper Volta and Yemen (S/8398
and Add.lIRev.1 and Add.2)

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America,

1, The PRESIDENT (tmnslated from Spanish}: I wish to
inform the members of the Security Council that I have
received requests from the representatives of Guyana,
Turkey, Chile, Indonesia, Yugoslavia, Nigeria, the United
Arab Republic and Zambia to participate without vote in
the discussion of the item on our agenda. In accordance
with the usual practice, and with the consent of the
Security Council, I suggest that those representatives be
invited to participate in the discussion without vote.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 391)

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The question of South West Africa:
Letter dated 12 February 196X addressed to the
President of the Security Council by the representatives
of Chile, Colombia, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Nigeria,
Pakistan, Turkey, United Arab Republic, Yugoslavia
and Zambia (S/8397);’
Letter dated 12 February 1968 addressed to the
President of the Security Council by the representatives
of Afghanistan, Algeria, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central
African Republic, Ceylon, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville),
Congo (Democratic Republic of), Cyprus, Dahomey,
Ethiopia, Ghana, Guinea, Iran, Iraq, Ivory Coast,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon,
Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Nepal, Niger, Philippines, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Sudan,
Syria, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania, Upper Volta and Yemen (S/8398
and Add.l/Rev.l and Add.2).

2. As there are not enough seats at the Council table for
all the representatives who have asked to take part in our
deliberations, I would suggest that the Council should
follow the usual practice, namely, that it invite the
representatives of Guyana, Turkey, Chile, Indonesia, Yugoslavia, Nigeria, the United Arab Republic and Zambia to
take the seats reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber, it being understood that when one of them
wishes to address the Council he will be invited to take a
place at the Council table.
3. If I hear no objection I shall consider that the Council
agrees to this procedure.
It was so decided.
At the invitation

of the President, Mr. E. A. Bruithwaite
Mr. J. Pifiera (Chile),
Mr. II. R. Abulgani (Indonesia), Mr. Z. Juzid (Yugoslavia),
Mr. B, A. Clark (Nigeria), Mr. M. A. El Kony (United Arab
Republic) and Mr. I. R. B. Manda (Zambia) took tke places
reserved fir them at the side of the Council &amber.

(Guyana), Mr. 0. .&lap (Turkey),

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The question of South West Africa:
Letter dated 12 February 1968 addressed to the President
of the Security Council by the representatives of Chile,
Colombia, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Nigeria, Pakistan,
Turkey, United Arab Republic, Yugoslavia and Zambia
(S/8397);
Letter dated 12 February 1968 addressed to the President
of the Security Council by the representatives of
Afghanistan, Algeria, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central
African Republic, Ceylon, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville),
Congo (Democratic Republic of), Cyprus, Dahomey,
Ethiopia, Ghana, Guinea, Iran, Iraq, Ivory Coast,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon,
Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Nepal, Niger, Philippines, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Sudan,

4. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): As the
members of the Security Council are aware, this meeting
has been called at the request of eleven Member States
signatories of a letter dated 12 February 1968 [S/8397].
Forty-seven other Member States endorsed that request by
signing a letter dated 12 February 1968 [S/8398 and
Add.IIRev.1

and Add.21.

5. A letter has also been received from the President of the
United Nations Council for South West Africa, dated
9 February 1968 [S/8394/. I should further like to draw
the Council’s attention to the report of the SecretaryGeneral dated 13 February 1968 [S/8399], transmitted in
accordance with Security Council resolution 245 (1968)
which the Council adopted at its 1387th meeting, on 25
January 1968.
1

6. yesterday afternoon I received other COmmul~iC~tiO~S
relating to the item on our agenda for today. I have
received a letter from the Chairman of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples dated I5 February 1968
[S/8410] and a letter from the Chairman of the Commission on Human Rights dated 1.5 Febuary 1968
/s/8411/. In addition, I should like to remind the members
of the Council that the Secretary-General has submit led a
report dated 2.5 January 1968 containing communications
[S/8357 and Add.I-81 from Member States and orgnnizations regarding the measures they have taken to implement
General Assembly resolution 2324 (XXII) and Security
Council resolution 245 (1968).
7. The Security Council will now take up the item 011 its
agenda. The first speaker on my list is the representative of
Pakistan, and I call on him to speak.
8. Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): On 9 February 1968 the United
Nations Council for South West Africa received with
profound shock and indignation the news of the sentences
passed that day on thirty-three of the thirty-four South
West Africans whom the South African authorities had
continued to detain and try illegally on charges under the
South African Terrorism Act of 1967l and the Suppression
of Communism Act, No. 44, of 1950, in defiance of
General Assembly resolution 2324 (XXII) and Security
Council resolution 245 (1968).
9. This resolution of the Security Council gave solemn
expression to the Council’s grave concern over the fact that
the Government of South Africa had ignored world public
opinion as reflected in General Assembly resolution
2324 (XXII) by refusing to discontinue the illegal trial
which was being held under arbitrary laws whose application had been illegally extended to the Territory of South
West Africa in defiance of the General Assembly resolutions. Conscious of the special responsibilities of the United
Nations towards the people and Territory of South West
Africa, the Security Council unanimously adopted resolution 245 (1968) the operative part of which is as follows:
“1. Condemns the refusal of the Government of South
Africa to comply with the provisions of General Assembly resolution 2324 (XXII);
“2. Calls upon the Government of South Africa to
discontinue forthwith this illegal trial and to release and
repatriate the South West Africans concerned;
“3. Invites a!t States to exert their influence in order to
induce the Government of South Africa to comply with
the provisions of the present resolution;
‘“4. Requests the Secretary-General to follow closely
the implementation of the present resolution and to
report thereon to the Security Council at the earliest
possible date;
“5. Decides to remain actively seized of the matter,”

1 Act to Prohibit Terroristic Activities and to Amend the LOW
relating to Criminal Procedure;and to Provide for Ot& Incidenta]
Matters. Act No. 83 of 1967.

10. It is to the situation ClTiktCd
by the violalion alKl
defiance of a!! these injunctions of t!le SCCllritY
C’WIlCi!
by
Sout]l Africa, :l.q reflected by the sentences inflicted 011 t!lC
South West Africans, that the Security Cotmci1 is now
called upon to address itself.
11. 011,t]le ,q:lIlle day that tltc rlcws of the sclltellces WI.IS
received, that is, on 9 February 1968, the hited
Nations
douncil for South West Africa, as the authrity
c!Iargud
by
the General Assembly to administer the’ Tcrrilory until
in&pcndence, expressed its &cp clistrcss 011 iICCOUIlt uI‘ t!‘tC
continued violatiol~ of the fun&tmeIlliII rights of the Sl)utll
West Africans by South Africa. AS Prcsidont rjl’ ~!IC (‘owcil
for South West Africa I addressed :k letter (S/S3Y4/ to you,
Mr. President, commullicutinl: the unanimous view 01‘ t!llc
Qnited Nations Council for Sonth West Al’ricii t!Ial (!II~
outrageous action constilutcd a lh&XIlt
Vil~hti~~I~
by SOUlll
Africa of the General Asscmhly and Sccurily Council
resolutions, as well as of the authority of the United
Nations, of which South Africa is a Member. 1 cxprcsscd
the views of the Council for South WCs1 Africa in the
following words:
“Since the Government of South Africa has disrcgnrdc~tl
the will of the General Assembly and the unanimous
decision of the Security Council, it is the view of the
United Nations Council for Soutll West Afrh tllat th
Security Council, as the highest authority of the IJnitcd
Nations, should consider taking apl)ropriatc action. 1’1.1
this end, the members of the United Nations Council for
South West Africa have reached a unanimous decision to
address a letter to you on behalf of their Governnunts,,
requesting you to convene an urgent meeting of tlic
Security Council.”
12. Three days later, that is, 011 12 February, the clevc~I
members of the United Nations Council for South West
Africa quested the President of the Security Council, on
behalf of their rcspectivc Governments and in view of thcil
common concern as members of this Council, to co~lvc~lc
an urgent meeting of the Security Council, to consider the
situation resulting from the continuation of the illegal trial
of the thirty-four South West Africans and the scntencc!$
handed down on 9 February on thirty-three of them in
violation and defiance of General Assembly resolutiorl
2324 (XXII) and Security Council resolution 245 (1968).
Forty-seven other Member States of the United Nations
have supported the request of the eleven members of the
United Nations Council for South West Africa, to convene
this urgent meeting.
13. At the 1387th meeting of the Security Council on 25;
January
1968 before the adoption
of rcsohltionl
245 (!968), the representative of the United States said:
“Today . . . is indeed a historic occasion, This is so
because it marks the first time in the llistory of this:
(%WizatiOn that the Security Council has been seized of
problems relating directly to South West Africa.”
14. Let me briefly set forth the background of our present
debate.
15. In resolution 2145 (XXI) adopted by the General
Assembly on the question of South West Africa, the

General Assembly, reaffirming the inalienable right of the
people of South West Africa to freedom and independence
and convinced that the administration of the Mandated
Territory of South West Africa by South Africa had been
conducted in a manner contrary to the Mandate, the
Charter of the United Nations and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and considering that all the efforts
of the United Nations for many years to induce the
Government of South Africa to fulfil its obligations in
respect of the administration of the Mandated Territory
and to ensure the well-being and security of the indigenous
inhabitants had been of no avail, decided to terminate the
Mandate of the Government of South Africa and declared
that South Africa had no other right to administer the
Territory and that from that time South Africa had come
under the direct responsibility of the United Nations.
16. In a subsequent resolution, 2325 (XXII), the General
Assembly requested the United Nations Council for South
West Africa, established under its resolution 2248 (S-V) of
19 May 1967, to fulfil, by every available means, the task
af administering the Territory entrusted to it by the
General Assembly. Further, the General Assembly called
upon the Government of South Africa to withdraw from
the Territory of South West Africa, unconditionally and
without delay, all its military and police forces, as well as
its administration, and to release all political prisoners and
to allow all political ‘refugees who are natives of the
rerritory to return to it.
17. In its resolution 2325 (XXII), the General Assembly
requested the Security Council to take effective steps to
:nable the United Nations to fulfil the direct responsibility
:t has assumed with respect to South West Africa and to
lake all appropriate measures to enable the United Nations
Council for South West Africa to discharge fully the
functions and responsibilities entrusted to it by the General
rissembly.
18. I have already set forth the action taken by the
security Council in resolution 245 (1968) which it adopted
unanimously. As mentioned earlier, this was the first time
n the history of the Organization that the Security Council
lecame seized of the problems relating directly to South
Nest Africa.
t9. The Security Council is now faced with a clear
violation and defiance of its resolution 245 (1968), adopted
>n 25 January. This situation calls for nothing less than to
:nsure the full implementation
of this resolution. This
Council must act to put an end to the trial at Pretoria and
:o secure the release and repatriation of the South West
Africans who have been illegally sentenced under laws
lvhich are a disgrace on the statute book, which are
:ontrary to the general principles of law recognized by all
:ivilized nations, and which are abhorrent to the humane
mditions
of law and justice of Western civilization, to
Yhich the Government of South Africa proudly claims to
jelong.

govern us, to make laws for us in which we had no say, to
treat our country as if it were your property and us as if
you were our masters. We have always regarded South
Africa as an intruder in our country. This is how we have
always felt, and this is how we feel now, and it is on this
basis that we have faced this trial.”
21. Other words have been spoken and written all over the
world on this illegal trial and on the legislation, substantive
and procedural, which the Pretoria court has applied.
Retrospective effect has been given to criminal laws enacted
after the alleged offences were committed, the burden of
proof has been shifted from the shoulders of the prosecution to the defendants, and many other norms and rules of
law recognized in the legal systems of the civilized world
have been violated. The opinion of all mankind has
condemned the travesty of law and elementary justice and
the violation of basic human rights perpetuated by the
Government of South Africa by the Terrorism Act and the
Suppression of Communism Act and the conduct of the
so-called trial. The Security Council cannot therefore
remain silent or passive, it must speak and act, and act
promptly and effectively.
22. The Security Council cannot afford to fail-it must
not fail-in the discharge of its responsibility under the
Charter of the United Nations. Equally, it must not fail to
uphold the authority of the General Assembly, which has
established the United Nations Council for South West
Africa and entrusted it with the task of administering thk
Territory of South West Africa until independence.
23. In resolution 245 (1968), the Security Council has
taken note of General Assembly resolutions 2145 (XXI)
and 2324 (XXII) and has also declared itself to be
“conscious of the special responsibilities of the United
Nations towards the people of the Territory of South West
Africa”.
24. This recognition encourages all States Members of the
United Nations to hope that the Security Council will
squarely meet the challenge posed to its authority by the
Government of South Africa.
25. The eleven members of the Council for South West
Africa and the forty-seven other Member States who have
supported .their request for this meeting of the Security
Council, as well as the majority of the Members of this
world Organization, fervently hope that the Security
Council will take early and effective action to deal with the
situation created by the defiance by South Africa of
Security Council resolution 245 (1968). It is also the hope
of these Members States that all Members of the United
Nations, under the obligation that they have assumed under
the provision of the Charter of the United Nations to
respect and give effect to the will of the Security Council,
and in particular those Member States which maintain
relations with the Government of South Africa, will exert
all their influence and strength to make South Africa
comply with the obligations of its membership of the
United Nations.

!O. While the Security Council is considering the grave
ituation following the outrageous conviction of the South
Vest African patriots at Pretoria, it may be pertinent to
quote the poignant words of one of them, Taivo Herman Ja
raivo, who stated at this trial:
“We are Namibians and not South Africans. We do not
now, and will not in the future, recognize your right to

26. In this context, my delegation considers that it is both
right and necessary for us to thank and express our
appreciation to those Members of the United Nations who
3

30. We did not at that time insist on our proposal for the
application of measuresunder Chapter VII in the interest of
a wider agreement. Subsequently, the Council for South
West Africa gave an opportunity to the South African
Government to enter into a dialogue for the handing over
of the administration of South West Africa to the United
Nations. But the Council was rebuffed. The persistellt
defiance shown by the Pretoria regime leaves 110doubt in
our minds that the necessary elements of deterrence and
compulsion will have to be introduced in the near future, in
dealingwith the Government of South Africa.

have exerted’themselves to bring home to the Gorernment
of South Africa its duty to give heed to Security Council
resolution 245 (1968).
27. If I may now speak for my Government, the Security
Council has a clear duty to condemn the South African
Government for its defiance. South Africa should be called
upon to revoke immediately the sentences that it has passed
on the South West Africans, and to release and repatriate
them without delay. Further, the Security Council must
emphasize that continued refusal by South Africa to
implement the resolution of the Security Council cannot be
tolerated and, if persisted in, will oblige the Council to
consider more drastic steps that are envisaged in the Charter
of the United Nations, to secure compliance on the part of
the defiant Member State.

31. The eyes of the world are upon us. This Organization
and this Council represent practically all the great civilizations and humane legal systemsof the world. The peoples
of the world expect the Security Council to uphold and
vindicate the values and the aspirations of humanity
through the ages,of which we are the legatees, in the fi1Ce
of the unspeakable conduct of a so-called civilized State
which time after time seemsdetermined to give proof of its
unworthinessto be a Member of the United Nations.

28. To this end, it is necessary to request the SecretaryGeneral to follow closely the implementation of any action
that the Security Council will take as a result of this debate
and to report thereon to the Security Council by a specified
early date. At the same time, the Security Council must
remain actively seized of the matter.

32. Mr, CISS (Senegal)(translated from French): Scarcely
a month ago, on 25 January 1968, the Security Council
unanimously adopted resolution 245 (1968), under which
the Government of South Africa was called upon to
discontinue forthwith the illegal trial of South West African
nationals. That trial, as we all know, took place in defiance
of General Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI) which, ever
since the historic date of 27 October 1966, has placed
South West Africa under the direct responsibility of .thc
United Nations.

29. 1 must stress that it has been Pakistan’s consistent
viewpoint, basedon a realistic appreciation of the situation
in South West Africa and reinforced by the Uliited Nations
experience for over twenty years in dealingwith the South
African Government, that that Government cannot be
brought to heel, or persuadedto seereason,except by the
adoption of enforcement measuresenvisagedin Chapter VII
of the United Nations Charter. Such measureswere at one
time contemplated in the African-Pakistan proposal,
which was submitted to the fifth special sessionof the
General Assembly when it wasdealing with the questionof
South West Africa. At the 1504th meeting of the General
Assembly, on 25 April 1967, I saidthe following:
“The question may be asked: doesthe African-Pakistan
proposal reflect a realistic approach to the problem of
overcoming the defiance of the Republic of South Africa
towards the attempt of the United Nations to discharge
the sacredtrust of civilization that it has now assumedon
behalf of the people of South West Africa? Is it realism
to expect the Security Council to take measuresunder
Chapter VII of the Charter to rescuethat Territory from
one of the worst forms of misrule and opprission, in
fulfilment of that sacredtrust? r’3
MY delegation had in turn put a counter question to these
questions:
“Is it, then, realistic to expect that South Africa would
enter into contacts and a dialogue with United Nations
organsto reach agreementon the transfer of South West
Africa to the United Nations administration, or even to
permit the establishmentof a nucleus of self-government
within the Territory? There can hardly be any doubt
about the answer.“4
2 Official Recordsof the General
Assembly,
Fifth Special se.+ol~,j
Anlzexes,documentA/6640, paras. 4.5 and 82.
3 Ibid., Fifth Special Session, Plenary Meetings,
1504tll meeting,
para.37.

4 Ibid., para.39.
4

33. Today the Security Council is meeting once again, not
for the purpose of acknowledging the South
African
Government’s desire to comply with these resolutions by
freeing the political detainees who have been illegally
arrested, deported and brought to trial in South Africa, but
in order to discussthe challenge once again hurled at this
international Organization by the Pretoria Government,
whose Supreme Court has just pronounced the severest
sentencesupon the South West African nationals under
discussion.
34. The sentence handed down against the thirty-three
South West African nationals by the Supreme Court of
Pretoria provides ample proof that the racist authorities of
South Africa hold United Nations decisions in contempt
and that the South African Government hasno intention of
honouring the commitments which it freely undertook by
signing the Charter of the world Organization. This illegal
sentencehad rightly aroused the indignation of the international Community, and the Commission on Human
Rights has acted immediately and unanimously by sending
the South African Government a telegram, from which I
quote :
“The Commissionon Human Rights expressesits deep
indignation at the fact that the Republic of South African
has defied the international community by sentencing
these South West Africans after an illegal trial and under
the ‘Terrorism Act’-a law which hasbeen rejected by the
whole international community as contrary to the prin-

ciples of the Charter of the United Nations and the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights.” [S/8411.]
35. I would add that this Terrorism Act, which makes it
possible arbitrarily to condemn South African and South
West African nationals, must be abolished immediately.
36. The Commission on Human Rights has also called
upon the Government of South Africa immediately to
release the South West Africans who have been illegally
sentenced.
37. The Secretary-General was requested to bring the
consensus unanimously approved by the Commission on
‘Human Rights to the attention of the South African
Government, and did so by cable. As far as my delegation is
aware, the Commission has not yet received any reply from
the South African Government to the cable, from which I
have just quoted.
38. It is obvious that the numerous repressive laws of
South Africa which are being illegally applied to South
West Africa are intended to shake the determination of the
great African majority in its just struggle for political and
racial equality.
39. That alone is the aim of the Terrorism Act, which was
adopted in haste in 1967, with retroactive effect, in order
to make possible the trial of South West African nationals.
There is no doubt that the South West Africans will only
swell the ranks of the thousands of their brothers who are
already mouldering in South African prisons in conditions
far below the minimum standards for the treatment of
prisoners.
40. The Ad Hoc Working Group of Experts, set up in
accordance with resolution 2 (XXIII) of the Commission on
Human Rights, concluded in its report, among other things,
that:
“Food, sanitary conditions, clothing, bedding and
accommodation in South African prisons fall short,
lamentably, of all international and civilized standards.“5
4 1. I recommend members of the Security Council to read
this important report by the Ad Hoc Working Group, which
is composed of eminent jurists from all over the world.
42. But let South Africa make no mistake: no power, not
even that of Pretoria, can check the irreversible movement
of decolonization; for the African national liberation
movements, because their cause is just, will undoubtedly
prevail over the European minority-by which we mean
South Africa, Portugal and Southern Rhodesia-which is
seeking to maintain its colonial domination over thousands
of Africans in southern Africa.
43. Nothing is more likely to prolong the sufferings of a
people subjected to an increasingly vicious form of repression than the tergiversations of this international Organization. Since South Africa does not understand the language
of reason, it is essential that the Security Council act
speedily and effectively by giving its decisions the force of
law.
-5 Document E/CN.4/950, para. 1127.

44. We repeat, it is not enough to condemn South Africa
for its defiance of the international community; nor is it a
matter of a simple appeal to the Pretoria Government that
it set the political prisoners free; we must still make that
appeal although we know that it will immediately
be
ignored. The Security Council must go further and demand
that the South African Government respect the decisions of
the United Nations. If the racist Government in Pretoria
ignores the injunctions of the Security Council, the latter
must take enforcement action under Chapter VII of the
Charter.
45. But is it necessary to say that such action can be taken
only with the consent of the great Powers which have
special responsibilities under the United Nations Charter?
46. These Powers, especially those which have trade
relations with South Africa, must co-operate with the other
members of the Security Council in order to preserve the
prestige of this Organization by demanding that its decisions are respected, Then South Africa will weigh the
grave consequences of its defiance of the United Nations
and will understand that the Member States are prepared to
act in unison to enable the international Organization to
administer South West Africa effectively and help the
people of that Territory accede to independence.
47. Mr. BORCH (Denmark): Mr. President, may I use this
opportunity first to welcome you to the Chair and to assure
you of our complete confidence and full co-operation.
48. On 9 February the thirty-three South West Africans
standing trial in Pretoria in their struggle for the freedom of
their country were sentenced to harsh prison terms, Twice
in recent times, first in General Assembly resolution
2324 (XXII)
and then in Security Council resolution
245 (1968), the United Nations has clearly established that
that trial is’illegal. The former resolution condemned it as a
flagrant violation of the international status of South West
Africa and called upon the Government of South Africa to
discontinue the trial, and the latter resolution reiterated
that call and condemned the refusal of the Government of
South Africa to comply with the provisions of the General
Assembly resolution.
49. My country supported both of these resolutions. We
fully subscribed to their terms and we firmIy maintain that
position, We have through appropriate channels urgently
called upon the Government of South Africa to comply
with the resolutions of the United Nations. And today we
protest in the strongest possible terms against the continued
persecution and now even conviction of the South West
Africans in question.
50. General Assembly resolution 2324 (XXII)
was
adopted, practically speaking, unanimously by the General
Assembly. Security Council resolution 245 (1968) was
adopted unanimously, Thus, there can be no doubt that the
overwhelming majority, of world opinion stands firmly
behind the United Nations in this matter and shares our
disgust and indignation at the outcome of this mock trial.
51. On more than one occasion the Government of South
Africa has let it be known that it maintains the legality of
the trial against the South West Africans, and that the trial

has taken place under circumstances which are compatible
with common civilized norms on fair and proper legal
proceedings.
52. I do not believe that anyone around this table can
accept such allegations. Be that as it may, the Government
of South Africa is acting clearly in both an arrogant and
ruthless manner in its continued defiance in word and in
deed of the demands of the world community.
53. We live in a world of interdependence, and no country
can cut itself off from the main streams of political and
humane thinking in the world at large without running the
risk of seriously inflicting damage to itself and to its people.
Quite apart from the issue before us, the Government of
South Africa would do well to give thought to such
considerations,
54.. Our main concern today is the South West African
prisoners, tried and convicted under no laws of their own
and kept in jail and in exile. Taking into consideration
certain basic facts, I think that we have to realize that if
positive and good results are to be derived from our
deliberations today it is of the utmost importance that
whatever steps we take, they be taken in concerted action, I
am afraid that any other approach will be a recipe for
failure.
55. My delegation is ready and eager to enter into what we
sincerely hope will prove to be fruitful consultations, with a
view to obtaining unanimous agreement in the Council
concerning what further constructive move shall be taken
to secure the release and repatriation of the thirty-three
South West Africans now in jail in South Africa.
56. Mr. IGNATIEFF (Canada): Mr. President, may I, in
my turn, offer you our welcome on your accession to the
high office of President of the Council, and at the same
time assure you of the co-operation of the delegation of
Canada. May I also pay a very sincere tribute to your
distinguished predecessor.
57. Once again we are considering the plight of the South
West Africans who have been under trial in Pretoria with
the result, as we know, that nineteen of them have been
sentenced to life imprisonment. There is little that I can
add concerning the trial which has not been said,Tbut I shall
recall the statement I made in the General Assembly6 that
the Act under which the trial wasconducted is retroactive,
that it is vague in describing the offences it covers, that it
places the onus of proving innocence on the accused, and
that the provisions of the Act represent a deplorable denial
of fundamental human rights. I asked then why were these
citizens of South West Africa on trial in Pretoria and what
manner of justice was being dispensed, and I said that the
United Nations had a right to know the answers. Well, we
have an answer of a kind; it has been referred to in previous
statements.
58. The delegation of Canada has also supported the call
of the Council to discontinue the illegal trial and release
and repatriate the South West Africans. As we have recently
informed our Secretary-General, we arranged for the
6 Official Records of rhe General Assembly,
Session, PIenary Meetings, 1624th meeting.

Twenty-second

presence at the trial of a member of the Canadian Embassy
in Pretoria, and our views regarding the status of South
West Africa and the treatment of its inhabitants have been
presented directly to the Government of South Africa. We
have therefore exerted our influence, as requested by the
Security Council and by the General Assembly, in order to
induce the Government of South Africa to comply with the
resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council.
59. The Security Council, as has been said, has already
unanimously expressed its collective view on the arrests and
the trial, My Government has consistently taken the
position that on this question, United Nations action, to be
effective, must be based on the maximum weight of
approval possible among the membership of the United
Nations. In this, I entirely agree with my colleagues who
have spoken before me, particularly the representative of
Denmark. I agree that the Council should act promptly and
effectively; but to be effective, I think it is particularly
important that action taken by the Security Council should
command the support of the whole of its membership. It is
in this light that my delegation will study all proposals that
may be put forward in the further consideration of this
question.
60. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): I associate my delegation, and myself personally, in full measure
with the remarks of my colleagues concerning the very
effective and objective leadership which the representative
of Pakistan, Ambassador Shahi, displayed-during his tenure
as President of the Council, during a period of great
international crisis and one of particular concern to my
Government.
61. I wish also to welcome you, Mr. President, to your
post, the duties of which you have already demonstrated
you are discharging with the great skill and statesmanship
that one who has known you for some time has learned to
expect of you.
62. We meet here today to consider the question of
thirty-three South West Africans convicted, as one of them
accurately said, in a foreign land, in a foreign language, by
the court of a foreign Government, on charges which must
also be described as foreign.
63. The defendants have been brought to trial under laws
effectively denying them elementary human rights. Heavy
sentences have been imposed uppn thirty of them convicted
under the so-called Terrorism Act. This Act is, in a sense,
aptly named; it is designed to terrorize innocent peoples.
They had already, even before trial, suffered thousands of
hours in solitary confinement, without contact with their
families and without access to counsel. These thirty now
face the bleak prospect of imprisonment, ranging up to life,
in South African prisons. Those who pleaded guilty under
the Suppression of Communism Act live under the shadow
of five-year suspended sentences.
64. Nor is that all. Although those already convicted have
escaped the death penalty, the trial judge, Judge Ludorf,
has issued a public warning that ‘$in the future our Courts
will not necessarily hesitate to inflict the death sentence”.
It is obvious that the sentences already imposed, and the

Judge’s warning, all serve the purpose of South Africa to
deter South West Africans from undertaking peaceful
political action in order to participate in the government of
their own affairs. It is also obvious that the South African
authorities are hoping, by police-state measures exemplified
by the Terrorism Act 6f 1967, to neutralize political
opposition from such organizations as the South West
Africa People’s Organization, so *that the South African
Government may proceed unhindered in South West Africa
with its policy of apartheid and with its strategy of “divide
and rule”.

69. A further cause for concern appears in reports in the
South Africa Press of charges, supported by sworn affidavits, that several South West Africans have been subjected
to brutal and inhuman treatment by the South African
police during detention. Among these reported affidavits
are some by the defendants in the recently concluded trial.
70. One would have hoped that these charges, bearing as
they do on the treatment accorded to persons on trial for
their lives, would be fully aired before the conclusion of the
trial. Instead, despite the strenuous objections of defence
counsel, the hearing on these affidavits was postponed until
after the trial and sentencing had been concluded.

65. The United States has made its view clear with respect
to these trials. It is a view we share with the international
community, including outstanding jurists and lawyers of
exemplary repute throughout the world. We believe that
South Africa’s action in applying its own Terrorism Act to
South West Africa-an international Territory over which
South Africa’s Mandate has been terminated by its own
violations-is contrary to the international obligations of
the Government of South Africa, to the international status
of the Territory, to international law, and to the fundamental rights of the inhabitants.

71. In sum, having been tried in a foreign court under an
invalid law, the defendants were in effect sentenced upon
charges other than those for which they had been prosecuted-and without some of the most important safeguards normally available to the defence.
72. Against that background of injustice, my Government
views with serious concern recent reports in the South
African press that other alleged terrorists have been arrested
under this same T$errorism Act and are now being held by
the police. We all recall that the alleged co-conspirators
listed in the proceedings of the recent trial numbered
eighty-one. In view of Judge Ludorf’s reference to future
trials, we cannot with equanimity ignore this possibility.

66. Obviously, the most recent developments give us no
grounds to change this view or to diminish our concern; in
fact, our concern is heightened by what has occured. We
still maintain our stated position that the defendants, and
any other South West Africans held under the Terrorism
Act, should be released and repatriated without delay,

73. I come now to the question of what further action can
and should be taken. This Council, in resolution
245 (1968) has already unanimously condemned South
Africa’s actions in this matter. We now face the difficult
problem of how best to bring practical relief to those South
West Africans who have been sentenced, and to others who
may be detained and charged.

67. Through its actions and statements South Africa has
cloaked itself in a mantle of seeming legality. But is this
mantle really one of legality-and, to go one step further, of
international responsibility ? It is not. The legal justifications for its actions are spurious. Not only do these actions
run contrary to actions by the political organs of the
United Nations, but, in addition, the International Court of
Justice has also made clear the international responsibility
of South Africa with respect to the Territory. This
responsibility is such that even when South Africa administered South West Africa under the Mandate, its authority
was conditioned by certain plain obligations-including the
obligation to look to the welfare of the inhabitants. Surely,
by applying its apartheid laws in the Territory it did not
honour but rather breached that obligation. Now that its
Mandate is at an end, it cannot invoke even such a
conditional authority.

74. My Government has given careful thought to this
matter, and today we should like to make some suggestions
for the consideration of the Security Council, We have no
doubt that suggestions will likewise be made by other
members in the course of this debate, and they will receive
the earnest attention of my delegation. Our suggestions are
these.
75. First, the United Nations through its appropriate
organs, including the Secretary-General, and individual
Members of the Organization should continue and inqrease
their efforts to persuade the South African Government of
the wrongness of its actions and to secure the release and
repatriation of those South West Africans who are illegally
detained in South Africa. I should like to advise members
of the Council that my own Government, pursuant to
General Assembly resolution 2324 (XXII) and Security
Council resolution 245 (1968), has made clear its position
directly to the Government of South Africa and will
continue to do so.

68. Another plain legal flaw appears in the ex postfacto
provision of the Terrorism Act, a provision which was
invoked in the recent trial against the defendants. This
provision troubled the court itself, to the point where the
judge specifically cited the retroactive effect of the law as
reason for not imposing the death penalty. However, having
shown judicial concern on this point, the judge then sought
to justify severe prison sentences by taking into account
cbmmon law crimes which he considered might have been
committed. And this was done despite the fact that the
defendants had neither been charged nor prosecuted for
common law crimes and hence had no opportunity to
defend themselves on such charges or to avail themselves of
the important ordinary legal safeguards appropriate to such
a defence.

76. Second, it is important to divest the South African
Government of the cloak of legality which it has put on to
cover up its invalid actions. Several representatives, including those of Finland, Sweden and Yugoslavia, have suggested recourse in this matter to the International Court of
Justice. In my delegation’s view, that suggestion is worthy
of exploration by the members of the.Council.
7

77. Third, earlier this week it was suggested in the
Commission on Human Rights that a special representative
of the Secretary-General might be dispatched to South
Africa to undertake all possible humanitarian measures to
alleviate the unfortunate conditions now prevailing in the
area. This suggestion was well received. Encouraged by the
response of several members of the Commission, my
delegation would like to offer the suggestion for the
consideration of the Security Council. Such a special
representative could perform a most useful service in regard
to the grave issue we now face.

Charter I offer you the Hungarian delegation’s unreser
co-operation.
84. The Security Council is again called upon to deal w
the situation arising out of the refusal of the Governm
of the Republic of Scuth Africa to comply with Secu
Council resolution 2ri5 (1968) that was adopted on
January 1968. In that resolution which the COUI
adopted unanimously the Security Council conderm
“the refusal of the Government of South Africa to corn
with the provisions of General Assembly resolut
2324 (XXII)” and called “upon the Government of So
Africa to discontinue forthwith this illegal trial” of thii
five South African patriots and to release and repatr
them,

78. Fourth, every additional effort should be made to
ensure humane treatment of those South West Africans
detained by South Africa. All Governments, including the
Government of South Africa, which is a party to the
Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949,’ should recognize
the special impartial and humanitarian role of the Red
Cross, Indeed, South Africa has recently availed itself of
Red Cross assistance in connexion with its prisons. I suggest
that it wduld be wholly appropriate for this Council to
request that the International Committee of the Red Cross
be invited by the South African Government to have full,
continuing and unimpeded access to each South West
African who has at any time been detained under the
Terrorism Act of 1967. We beIieve this step should be taken
concurrently with the efforts to obtain the release and
repatriation of those South West Africans who are wrong
fully detained .

85. The first answer of the Government of South Afl
consisted of a letter from the Permanent Representative
that country dated 30 January 1968, circulated in do
ment S/8370. That letter in essence reiterates the minor
rkgime’s earlier statements according to which South Afl
was “fundamentally opposed to each of the draft rest
tions” that the General Assembly earlier adopted w
regard to the termination of the Mandate of South Afi
over South West Africa.
86. The second answer came to us directly from Pretc
when in complete disregard of the unanimous decision
the Council, sentences of utmost severity were passed
thirty-three of the thirty-four South West African patric

79. Fifth, this Council should reaffirm the action it took
when it adopted its recent resolution.

87. This is the situation in which we find ourselves. To
frank, we have no reason to be surprised over the lat
steps of the South African Government. For the last t
decades that Government has consistently followed a pol
of openly challenging the most elementary principles UK
which our Organization is built, principles expressed in 1
Preamble of the Charter: “to reaffirm faith in fundamer
human rights, in the dignity and worth of the hun
person, in the equal rights . . . of nations large and srn,
and to establish conditions under which justice and resp’
for the obligations arising from treaties and other sources
international law can be maintained, and to promote so(
progress , . .” to quote only a few. Although a Member
the United Nations, the Republic of South Africa 1
violated all its obligations which it had undertaken up
becoming a Member of the United Nations and a signatc
of the same Charter. The record of that Government is c
of systematic violation of provisions of the Charter solen
ly expressed by the Universal Declaration of Human Rig1
and embodied in the International Covenants on Hum
Rights. We all know that literally dozens of Gene
Assembly and Security Council resolutions have be
ignored by South Africa. The latest of these concerned
illegal rule over South West Africa following the termi
tion of its Mandate by the General Assembly of the Unit
Nations.

80. I recently read with interest in an official publication
of the Government of South Africa, South Afvicalz Pulzoranza, an article about the Appellate Division of the
Supreme Court entitled “Symbol of Legal Majesty”. This
article says: “South Africa’s legal system is designed to
ensure justice for all”. History will judge whether that claim
can be sustained. But we have a legal aphorism in my
country which I think is pertinent now: “Justice delayed is
justice denied”.
81. It is time for all who believe in the rule of law to call
upon South Africa, once again, to secure justice for those
who have been detained under this invalid law-and without
further delay.
82. Mr. CSATORDAY (Hungary): Mr. President, may I
join you in congratulating our President for the month of
January, the Permanent Representative of Pakistan,
Mr. Shahi, who discharged his difficult task in an admirable
manner, displaying high-level statesmanship by his tact,
patience, understanding and perseverance not only at our
open meetings but during those long consultations as well.
It greatly enhanced the efforts leading to the lessening of
tension on some very important international problems.
83. At the same time it is a great pleasure to see you,
Mr. President, an experienced colleague, assuming the heavy
duty of presiding over our meetings in February. We are
convinced that your wisdom and tenacity will greatly
contribute to the successful conclusion of the important
tasks facing the Security Council. In the spirit of the

88. A question that naturally comes to our mind is th
how is it possible that more than two decades after 1
victory over the inhuman and barbarous system of nazi
and fascism we should witness a regime openly professi
and basing its ruthless tyranny on the doctrine of rat
superiority and that such a regime should be tolerated as
integral part of the international community‘! Was the fig

7 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75 (19501, Nos. 970-973.

8
/

against the most brutal manifestations of racial disc&ination for some only a passing event rather than a resolute
action to wipe out even the roots of such a disgrace?
Listening to the spokesmen of South Africa proudly
pointing to the solid evidence of existing discrimination
based on race in other countries, one must admit that this
evil is not confined to South Africa alone, The encouragement which South Africa receives from these facts should
not be underrated. Consequently these other countries
share the responsibility for the sinister actions of South
Africa.

92. It is here that the clue for the continued refusal of
that Government to the appeals, to the condemnation of
world public opinion, lies. South Africa is fully aware of
this situation, of the tremendous gap that exists between
words spoken here and practical actions taken elsewhere.
My delegation is convinced that were the expressions of
condemnation or tactfully worded disapprovals that we
hear from several members of this Council to be followed
up by corresponding deeds, the South African Government
would have long ago been forced to change its policies.

89. Another aspect of the policy of South Africa is the
refusal to allow the overwhelming majority of the population, the indigenous nation of South Africa and more
particularly that of South West Africa to enjoy their right
to self-determination. The inhuman treatment meted out to
the overwhelming majority of South Africa’s population
keeps that country in a situation of backwardness in spite
of all boasting of its rulers to the contrary. At a time when
hundreds of millions of former colon’lal subjects have
liberated themselves, from the yoke of colonialism and
reached independence, one would wonder about this
anachronism as demonstrated by South Africa. But again, is
South Africa alone in resisting the rightful demands for
self-determination for oppressed peoples? The most elementary knowledge of contemporary international life
forbids us from giving an affirmative reply to this question.

93, My country is a member of the Special Committee on
the Policies of Apartheid of the Government of the
Republic of South Africa and as such has been actively
concerned over the situation in that unhappy country. We
had the opportunity to point out that only a resolute
action by all, and I emphasize by all, leading members of
our Organization can make the Pretoria regime realize that
its policies inside South Africa and as the subject of our
present discussion indicates, outside it, cannot receive
continued assistance and support from those who in spite
of everything maintain close relations with it. The outr?geous defiance demonstrated by South Africa in the case of
the trial of the South West African patriots is but one of
the latest signs that shows to us that in the absence of any
clear declaration by the major trading partners and weapons
suppliers of South Africa it would be vain to expect any
change in the attitude of the Pretoria Government.

90. But all that can be said of situations resembling those
prevailing in South Africa would not in themselves provide
an answer to the question why South Africa can do all that
it does and still succeed in arrogantly defying world public
opinion. The answer to this question lies deeper. The South
African Government knows that whatever the words
spoken in this chamber by several important members of
our Council, they will do nothing in practice that could
make South Africa realize that the carefully formulated
verbal condemnation by these countries will be supported
by deeds. South Africa knows that foreign investments and
thereby the interests of the investors from the United
Kingdom, the United States, the Federal Republic of
Germany and other States in the actual set-up in South
Africa is constantly growing. The leaders of the minority
rBgime know full well that $5 billion of foreign investments
and their ensuing rich profits speak louder than any
condemnation.

94. And here 1 wish to state that in our view the trial in
itself is illegal since it is directed against persons who do not
come under the jurisdiction of South Africa and their
heroic actions for the very ideals of the United Nations
Charter cannot constitute crime. They are citizens of South
West Africa temporarily under United Nations Mandate.
For this reason the trial is an international problem and
clearly concerns us. As to the question of the retroactive
character of the Terrorism Act, we feel that this question,
although indicative of the legal concepts now in use in
South Africa, does not arise here, since no law, retroactive
or not, enacted in South Africa can be held applicable in
South West Africa after the Mandate has been terminated
by the General Assembly. Thus, in a sense of international
justice, it is the Pretoria regime that should stand trial,
being guilty on many counts for violating generally recognized and mandatory basic principles of international
law, as I have just outlined.

91. What effect can the declarations of abhorrence and the
like have on South Africa when many of the same countries
continue to sell arms to the oppressors of the peoples of
South Africa and South West Africa? In this connexion we
are bound to ask: against whom does South Africa need all
these arms? The only logical explanation is that the arms
are intended to keep down any move by the ruthlessly
oppressed millions in South Africa and South West Africa.
Has it ever occurred to the countries concerned what a
responsibility they are taking? Do they think of the
possible use of these arms in a country where all legal ways
of abolishing the inhuman system of apartheid are now
barred? And last but not least, how can one condemn the
inhuman policies of the Government of Pretoria and follow
at the same time a policy of military arrangements, such as
sharing naval bases with them?

95. As for our attitude, we have made it absolutely clear
on many occasions, the last of which was the 1387th
meeting of the Security Council on 25 January 1968. We
wish to reiterate here our support for all measures
recommended by the United Nations for the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples with regard to South
West Africa because we are convinced that the implementation of this Declaration serves the best interests of the
people in the Territory. We firmly support the appeal of the
United Nations to give moral and material assistance to the
nation of South West Africa in its struggle for freedom and
independence.
96. In line with these principles, we are ready to endorse
all strong and effective measures that the Security Council
may take to ensure the earliest possible release of the South
9

West African patriots who have been illegally
sentenced in South Africa.

happen when the Security Council and other organs of the
United Nations are confronted With
questions
affecting
South Africa. It knows.
103. 1 would not in any way attempt to impugn the
integrity of any State, but I feel that I am at liberty to
question the conduct of States which, sometimes by failing
to act, are contributing to the presence of that incubu:s
which has declared itself our enemy. ~‘erhapS
there
are
those who will recognize that I am a novice in this business.
My only claim in speaking to the Council is that I *too
represent a sovereign State, Therefore, if our only contribution in this august body is that occasionally WC address
ourselves to essential principles, I think that is enough.

tried and

97. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Guyana, one of
the States which has asked to take part in this debate
without the right to vote. In accordance with the decision
taken by the Council, I invite the representative of Guyana
to take a place at the Council table.
gg. Mr. BRAITHWAITE
(Guyana): Mr. President, I am
grateful to you for offering me this opportunity to address
this august body, and I would also take the opportunity of
presenting to you my congratulations and felicitations on
your appointment to your office.

104. This whole matter is concerned with the trial and
condemnation of certain human beings. The whole
world
has recognized that trial and condemnation as Completely
without legal foundation or justification. We have the most
interesting and unusual phenomenon of the Association of
the Bar of the City of New York going on record a!;
registering its complete attitude toward that trial and to the
subsequent imprisonment of the individuals. What is hap
pening here today is not merely that minds are occupying
themselves with this matter in order to wind up with a
resolution. What is happening is not merely the conduct of
South Africa on trial. What we face here today is the fact
that States-all States, powerful States, small States-are
subject to the attention of the entire world.

99. I speak primarily in the name of Guyana. Guyana is a
very small country of 83,000 square miles, populated by
about 700,000 souls, representing in their entirety a united
nation of people. I use the term “united” with some
question, since we are still discovering how to live as a
united people because of recent historical events, part of
which concern our difficulties in discovering our common
identity. At home, we have learnt from bitter experience a
real appreciation of that liberty without which life is but a
futile exercise and the pursuit of happiness is but a hopeless
dream.
100. I was not quite sure whether I should avail myself of
this opportunity to address this assembly. I told myself that
I would wait and observe the nature and the scope of this
debate. I have been a little bit troubled by the very tone of
the debate, perhaps because I am an impatient man. I have
noticed the very measured tones with which this debate has
proceeded, and I have asked myself whether this is
primarily evidence of those excellent juridical minds which
are applying themselves to the consideration of the matter
at hand, or whether it is evidence of another occasion of an
academic exercise, I merely asked myself these questions.
My country is concerned because we feel an immediate
identity with all those people who are concerned with
liberty. We have learned the meaning of liberty. We have
only
recently become independent, and, even then, more
recently we have been trying to rid ourselves of the fetters
of internal strife.

10.5. It is not enough for them to make noises that will go
down in history as speeches on this resolution, It must be:
expected that any noise they make must be substantiated
with action, action of a kind that will make South Africa
recognize finally that it cannot with impunity challenge and
disregard and the United Nations, that it has reached the
point where it will be brought to book. The time has come.
South Africa must be made to recognize that it cannot
depend on the support of States even by accident, even by
their silence. It must not be allowed to assume that it can
casually and in this completely cavalier manner disregard
the integrity of other sovereign States.

101. We have represented around this table some very
mighty nations, nations which at a moment’s notice can
summon to their bidding fantastic armament, can exercise
extraordinary influence politically and can command fantastic economic power. Yet, in response to Security Council
resolution 245 (1968), in which all States are invited to
exert their influence in order to induce the Government of
South Africa to comply with the provisions of that
resolution, we see nothing. We see an amazing impotence
where this simple matter of a firm adherence to principle is
concerned. We find great nations irresolute, indecisive.

106. I do not know whether any kind of grapevine will
allow our deliberations here to infiltrate the prisons in
which those unhappy men are incarcerated. I do not know
whether they will ever discover what we have been doing
here. I do not know whether they are aware at this moment
that we are discussing their unhappy state. I do not know
whether, had they known this, they would feel any sense of
hope. Perhaps they, like so many others, will fee1 as South
Africa feels: that this is merely another exercise in
sophistry. I say-and I say it as a representative of a very
smati
nation
Which,
1 reiterate,
has very little to offer but a
preoccupation with these essential principles-that
if this
matter
truly
concerns
the Security Council it will ensure
that positive action results from our deliberations here.

102. I for one am grateful that the tone and nature of this
debate has been so measured, so precise, so quiet-because
if We ali listen
very
CarefU~y,
none of us can fail to hear the
laughter of South Africa ringing through this room, The
Government of South Africa knows, and is assured in that
knowledge, that we will be indecisive. The Government of
South Africa has had plenty of experience in what will

107. There have been times when I myself have felt my
frustration, my weakness, pressing heavily upon me, be.
cause I wondered what it would be if I stood in the position
of a mk$tY
nation,
whether I would permit the conduct of
South Africa, whether I would permit this kind of incubus
to feed upon this kind of institution. We speak of ourselves
as an inStitLltiOn
of sovereign States. To what degree are we
10

able to stand up and be counted as sovereign States when
we are willing to accommodate this kind of behaviour in
our midst, the kind of behaviour that would not be
permitted in far lesser institutions, institutions which are
not peopled by sovereign States.

recognized rules of law and justice, bearing in mind the
international character of South West Africa.
113. My delegation deeply regrets that the Pretoria
Government has apparently paid no attention to the
appeals addressed to it. We deplore that Government’s
deafness to the urgent appeals of the General Assembly and
the Security Council. The policy consistently followed by
the South African Government in the Territory of South
West Africa, the retrogressive nature of which is illustrated
by the present case, incurs our censure.

108. I have not come here to preach or to dictate to my
elders, to my seniors in so many of the disciplines of life. I
have merely come here, on behalf of my Government, to
make a simple and direct appeal to your interests, to your
acumen, to your strength, to the power and influence you
exercise, to say that in the final analysis these resolutions
will not be worth the paper on which they are printed
unless South Africa knows that when the Council gets
together it gets together for business. If that business is to
bring South Africa to a reckoning, to an understanding,
that is the Council’s business. There is no nation among you
that can afford to opt out.

114. My delegation notes with relief that none of the
accused, who were liable to the death sentence under the
South African legislation to which I have referred, in fact
received such a sentence, and that consequently no irreparable act was committed. We still fervently hope that a
further appeal to reason and justice will be heeded. My
delegation is.ready, consistently with the position we have
always taken and which we have repeatedly had Jccasion to
state, to endorse such a pressing and solemn appeal.

109. Sometimes, from my humble position, I observe the
tightrope walking that seems to be a primary preoccupation
here, in which it is not enough to walk the rope but it is
important that the walking is observed. I ask myself
whether in your unhappy positions I would feel as you do,
and I pray to God that that may never come to pass.

115. Mr. MOROZOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): Mr. President, may I
welcome you to the Chair and take this opportunity to
express our great appreciation of the activities of your
predecessor, the representative of Pakistan, Ambassador
Shahi, who so ably guided the work of the Council in the
previous month.

110. Mr. BERARD (France) (translated from French):
Mr. President, I should like to join with you in congratulating our colleague from Pakistan, Ambassador Shahi, and
thanking him for the outstanding manner in which he
presided over the Council. We have no doubt that you
yourself will demonstrate equal abilities. You have already
shown us an example this morning.

116. The Security Council has begun discussion of an
extremely serious situation, which has arisen out .of the
Pretoria authorities’ disregard of the Security Council
decision adopted on 25 January last.

111. Less than a month ago, the Security Council unanimously adopted a resolution calling for the release of the
thirty-five accused South West African nationals on trial in
Pretoria. Today the Council has to turn its attention to the
verdict pronounced on thirty of the prisoners, nineteen of
whom have been sentenced to prison for life and nine to
prison for twenty years. Everything has already been said
regarding the conditions under which that trial took place.
Sentence was passed under laws abhorrent to human
conscience. This is why my delegation gladly complied with
the request submitted by eleven delegations for an emergency meeting of the Council. We did so because the fate of
nationals of a Territory with international status was at
stake and because the circumstances surrounding the
prosecution, the trial and the sentences were of a highly
dubious nature. The French Government wishes once again,
here in this Council, to express its concern at the attitude
of the South African Government in this affair, as we have
already done directly in Pretoria through our Ambassador
there.

117. We agree with the representative of Guyana who
pointed to the excessively quiet and academic nature, as he
put it, of the debate on the question which is again being
studied at the request of some ten Afro-Asian delegations
who initiated the formal submission of the matter to the
Council.
118. It is only with a deep sense of indignation and
abhorrence that one can comment on what has happened to
the South West African patriots fighting for their country’s
freedom and independence after the Council had adopted a
unanimous decision to put an end to the illegal and
arbitrary acts committed against those patriots before the
indignant gaze of the whole civilized world.
119. I should like to draw the Council’s attention to some
documents directly related to this matter and expressing
the views of the widest circles of world public opinion,
120, The Soviet Committee
for Solidarity for the
Countries of Asia and Africa addressed a special message on
15 February of this year to the United Nations SecretaryGeneral, in which it states:

112. Both during the debates at the twenty-second session
of the General Assembly,s and during the meetings of the
Council, the French delegation vigorously protested against
a procedure which seemed to us to represent a clear denial
of justice. We expressed the fervent hope that the Government of South Africa would listen to the voice of reason
and the voice of humanity and act in accordance with the

“Soviet citizens are indignant at the illegal and arbitrary
actions prevalent in the Republic ofSouth Africa. Despite
the demands of world public opinion, and in defiance of
resolutions of the General Assembly and Security
Council, the fascist executioners in Pretoria are continuing their illegal persecution of South West African
citizens.

8 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-second
Session, Plenary Meetings, 1636th meeting.

11

“Only a day or two ago a shameful sentence was passed
On thirty-three members of the South West African
people’s organization, whose only guilt wasthat they had
spoken up in favour of freedom and independence for
their homeland.”
The statements rightly emphasize that:
‘6a . . world public opinion brands as shameful the
arbitrary acts of the racist authorities, The juridical farce
enacted in Pretoria, despite the demands of progressive
world public opinion, spurns international law and
order.”
It goes on to state:
“ . * I the Soviet Committee of Solidarity with the
Countries of Asia and Africa expressesthe will of millions
of Soviet citizens when it angrily protests against the
shameful trial of the South West African patriots and calls
for their immediate release and repatriation.”
121. Here is another document, also addressed to the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, It is a telegram
dated 9 February last, from the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the German Democratic Republic, setting forth the views
of that country’s Government in connexion with the
arbitrary actions taken by the racist authorities in Pretoria
against the population of South West Africa, In its
statement, the Government of the German Democratic
Republic goes on to say:
“This trial is a grossviolation of the South West African
people’s right to self-determination, a violation of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the violation
of numerous resolutions adopted recently by the United
Nations on the question of South West Africa.
“The Government of the German Democratic Republic
strongly denounces the continued efforts of the South
African Republic to disseminate the policy of apartheid
in South West Africa, a policy which has repeatedly been
condemned in the United Nations as a crime against
humanity.”

124. A number of members of the Security Council have
already pointed to the utter worthlessness of attempts to
give some semblance of legality to this juridical farce by
invoking the racist Terrorism Act, adopted after the United
Nations had deprived the racist regime of South Africa of
its Mandate over South West Africa, that is to say, had
deprived it of any grounds for administering that country,
125. In carrying out reprisals against the South West
African patriots, the Pretoria racist authorities have again
shown their utter disregard of United Nations decisions by
defying the latest decision taken by the Security Council on
25 January last.
126. The forces of racism in the Union of South Africa,
relying on the support and protection of the principal
imperialist Western Powers, are endeavouring to perpetuate
colonial and racist forms of government in that part of the
African continent and, in particular, to preserve the cruel
regime of colonial oppression in South West Africa. We
have said many times-and we associate ourselves with what
has been said today in the Council on this matter-that the
tragedy of the people of South West Africa is a direct
consequence of the unrelenting attempts on the part of the
colonialists and racists, supported by the forces of international imperialism and reaction, to thwart by any means,
including the most criminal, the implementation
of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples in the case of South West Africa.
127. The question arose when this matter was discussed in
the General Assembly and in the Security Council on 25
January, and the same legitimate question arises now: Why
is it that, despite the numerous decisions of the Security
Council and the demands of progressive world opinion, the
racist authorities of South Africa are continuing their
policy of repression and unlawful treatment of the South
West African patriots, and, in particular, have dealt in such
a cruel and criminal way with the thirty-three fighters for
the liberation of South West Africa from colonialist and
racist aggression? It will not be possible to evade answering
these questions by silence or by pious preaching advocating
a number of measures which would merely treat some
individual slight symptoms of an ailment instead ofending
the disease once and for ail.

122. Here are two further statements which we have
received in counexion with this topic from two important
bodies active at this moment in the United Nations. Deep
indignation at the arbitrary acts committed by the racists
against the South West African patriots was expressed by
members of the Commission on I-Iuma11 Rights and of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples. The
decisions of these bodies demand an end to the racists’
illegal acts against the people of South West Africa.

128, Repeated discussions of the question of South West
Africa in United Nations bodies leave no room for doubt
that the racists of the Republic of South Africa would
never have been able to show such insolent defiance of the
entire United Nations organization and of its principal
body, the Security Council, and that they would not be
able to flout the demands made by an overwhelming
majority of the United Nations Member States, if they did
not receive the aid and support of their military and
political allies. Among these military and political allies,
which continue to be prudishly called the “main trading
partners” of the South African rBgime, are the United
States of America, the United Kingdom, the Federal
Republic of Germany and a number of other Wcsterll
Powers.

123. As convincingly demonstrated in statements made at
meeting by representatives of the African and Asian
countries, the judicial reprisals in Pretoria were, from
beginning to end, prepared by the racist authorities, WhOSe
aim was to use cruel repression by the courts in order to
frjgllten
the people of South West Africa and to crush the
ilational liberation movement which has advanced lawful
claims to freedom and independence.
today’s

129. There is no need for us to repeat the numerous facts
which have been presented in the United Nations bodies
and which prove quite irrefutably that the ruling circles of
12
2’

several Western Powers are endeavouring, because of their
military,
political, economic and strategic interests, to
maintain the present colonialist and racist rule in the
southern African continent. They do so because of their
economic, military and political’ interests. They do so
because they are interested in maintaining southern Africa
as a military and strategic stronghold fey the forces of
imperialism and colonialism, a bulwark against the national
liberation movement of African peoples not only of South
West Africa but of the whole African continent.

136. The Soviet Union, as we have already said, will
continue to support the just struggle of the South West
African people for its liberation from the colonial yoke and
for its freedom and independence.
137. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): The
next speaker on my list is the representative of Chile, one
of the States which have asked to participate in this debate
without the right to vote. In accordance with the resolution
adopted by the Council, I invite the representative of Chile
to take a place at the Council table.

130. These are circumstances to which we cannot remain
blind if we are to strive to maintain the dignity of the
Security Council as the main body of the United Nations,
bearing the high responsibility conferred on it by the
United Nations Charter.

138. Mr. PIl?JERA (Chile) (translated from Spanish):
Mr. President, I should like, through you, to thank the
Security Council for kindly affording my delegation, along
with the ten others which have asked to take part in this
debate the opportunity to present its views.

13 1. In the present circumstances, the key question in the
attainment of freedom by the peoples of South West Africa
continues to be that of ending the political, economic,
financial .and other support given to the racist rCgime of the
South African Republic by its major allies, the Western
Powers. That is what the Security Council and the United
Nations should consider first and ,foremost. The attention
of all the world’s peace-loving and progressive forces must
be drawn to that question, since only thus will it be
possible to end the racist rkgime’s defiance of the will of
the States Members of the United Nations reflected in the
decisions of this Organization.

139. In the view of my delegation, the problem we are
considering today is two-sided: it is very simple to
formulate and to all appearances difficult to solve.
140. What is the problem? As it is already quite late, I do
not wish to repeat this afternoon what the representative of
Pakistan, Mr. Shahi, expressed so well on behalf of the
eleven Members who requested this emergency meeting. He
presented a complete analysis of the background of the
South West African question, a major issue which has
become particularly important in the last year and a half.
During this time the Assembly and the Security Council
have had to deal with the problem of South Africa’s illegal
trial of South West African citizens. We have already heard
several speakers this afternoon; my delegation will therefore
try to be very brief, but at the same time to keep to the
point.

132. The General Assembly wasfully justified, although in
our opinion it did not express itself strongly enough, when,
in resolution 2325 (XXII), it addressed a special appeal to
the States known as the “main trading partners” of South
Africa and having economic and other interests there, to
take effective economic and other measures and to bring
their influence to bear in order to bring about compliance
with the General Assembly’s decisions to end the repression
of the people of South West Africa and to grant them
freedom and independence.

141. What is the problem? In the view of my delegation,
we are faced with a double challenge. All the speakers
today have stated clearly that the Republic of South Africa
has defied the resolution adopted by the Security Council a
mere three weeks ago-on 25 January-and the nearly
unanimous will of the General Assembly, as expressed a few
months ago in resolution 2324 (XXII).

133. Unfortunately, that appeal by the General Assembly,
the political meaning of which is quite obvious, has evoked
no response from the Western Powers.

142. My delegation is firmly convinced that this defiance
is a breach of the fundamental principles of the United
Nations Charter. To make matters worse, although it may
be purely coincidental, the fact that the International
Conference on Human Rights will convene in a few weeks
at Teheran makes the South African Government’s attitude
even more grossly outrageous.

134. It must be noted that many Western Powers, foremost among which are the United States of America, the
United Kingdom, and the Federal Republic of Germany,
continue to maintain numerous close ties with the South
African racists and to give them all manner of economic,
political and other support. That is why, when we take
appropriate decisions in these difficult circumstances, in
which we note total non-compliance with the Council’s
resolution of 25 January last, this fundamental political
factor must not be lost sight of for one moment.

143. But there is another challenge, in the broad sense of
the word, that I wish to point out today, although I know
that almost all the delegations have already done so: the
challenge to the United Nations itself, a challenge that will
face the General Assembly when it meets a few months
from now; and, moreover, mainly because of the very
special authority invested in this Council, a challenge to the
Security Council itself in the light of resolution 245 (1968)
adopted unanimously on 25 January.

135. The position of the Soviet Union on this matter has
often beeri stated by us in the Security Council and other
United Nations bodies. We should like to stress once again
that the Soviet Union has consistently opposed the use of
terror and repression against those struggling for the
national liberation of South West Africa. We decisively
condemn the judicial reprisals against these true patriots,
the leaders of the national liberation movement in South
West Africa.

144. What happened on 25 January? Here in the Council
chamber we adopted a clear-cut resolution: the South
African Government was called upon to act in accordance
13

with the Council’s wishes, in other words, to abandon the
trial and return the prisoners to their country of origin,
which is South West Africa, not South Africa.

what inspires all the activities of the United Nations,
whether it be of peace-keeping, economic and social
development, or decolonization.

145. Thus, to put it very simply, it seems to me that it is
the fifteen-member Security Council, in which the Charter
has vested the highest authority, that is being challenged by
the refusal to comply with this unanimous resolution.

151. My delegation is ready to co-operate with the eleven
members that requested this meeting in making a Valiant
effort ‘to find a solution likely to achieve unanimity or a
very large majority in this Council. I say this in all humility,
for it is not our own direct responsibility, but that of the
Security Council. However, my country, as a member of
the United Nations Council for South West Africa, also
believes that if the Security Council feels it is necessary or
useful to call for our co-operation, it is our duty to work
witI; it.

146. How is the resolution to be implemented? My
delegation does not feel that it is fitting at this point in our
debate to make any specific suggestion. We know that it is
for the Security Council, in the light of its own resolution,
to decide on measures for the implementation
of that
resolution.

152. We have several specific points to off’er, which I shall
try to summarize.

147. We believe that the Charter contains the necessary
means of implementing the resolution. I have followed the
debate carefully, and I repeat that all the speakers this
afternoon have agreed that South Africa has violated the
principles of the Charter; and although I recognize that this
problem falls within the context of the general question of
South West Africa, it is nevertheless of a special nature,
inasmuch as this illegal trial, as perhaps few other issues in
the United Nations, has elicited near unanimity in the
General Assembly, and unanimity in the Security Council.

153. First, we must frankly, categorically and forcefully
condemn the violation of the decisions reached by the
Security Council.
154. Second, there are effective and appropriate steps to
be taken to ensure compliance with that resolution. I want
to make myself clear on this point. Needless to say, in view
of what I have called “effective and appropriate steps”, it is
obvious that the Security Council must take the decisions.
We also feel that all the resources envisaged in the Charter
must be considered and that none should be eliminated a
priori. For in my delegation’s view, it is precisely the
instrumen.ts provided by the Charter that should be used
for implementing an agreement which, I repeat, has the
peculiarity of having been adopted unanimously in the
Council, almost unanimously approved by the General
Assembly and repeatedly reaffirmed by other organs such
as the Commission on Human Rights.

148. The fact that this challenge was met with a great
feeling of urgency not only by the Council for South West
Africa and by all the members of the Commission on
Human Rights, but also by the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation
of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples, and within a very few hours by all
the organs now operating within the United Nations, seems
to us the clearest indication that this is a problem of
concern to the entire international community. My delegation, which pursuant to the mandate expressly entrusted
to me by the President, Mr. Shahi of Pakistan, is also
speaking on behalf of the United Nations Council for South
West Africa, has therefore been in contact with all the
members of the Security Council from the very first day,

1.55. I know that the application of the principles, in the
broad sense of the word, may possibIy entail a sacrifice for
many delegations. However, the international community
has seldom had a more clear-cut opportunity to apply the
principles and bring them down to earth than it has today,
156. In conclusion, to illustrate a paradox, I should like to
recall the words of that freedom-loving Frenchman Lamennais, who reached a conclusion which may appear shocking.
Speaking of the weak-and who could be weaker today
than the South West African prisoners being tried illegally
in Pretoria? -he said: “Freedom oppresses and only the law
liberates.” The paradox is the so-called law of the South
African Government, which instead of protecting the
weak-for the citizens of South West Africa are weakoppresses them; for them there is no freedom, and the law
is turned into the instrument of their own destruction.

149. Thus it would seem that, leaving aside the substance
of the problem, namely, the violation of principles to which
we all subscribe, it is the implementation of those principles
that, as I said at the outset, will be a hard task. It will of
course be difficult because it is always hard to proceed
from the formulation of principles to their application.
However, its very complexity makes the task even more
mandatory.
150. In the light of this problem, which is of concern to
the entire community, my delegation would like first to
reaffirm its condemnation of the attitude of the South
African Government which, as the representative of France
very clearly put it, is an outrage to reason and justice. I
endorse his statement, to which I listened most attentively.
If anything can outrage justice and reason, it is the attitude
of the South African Government. I would say that’the
problem transcends the issue of South West Africa and its
citizens, as well as the illegal, illegitimate and outrageous
attitude of the South African Government, This problem
challenges the very concept of human rights; and for my
delegation, the defence of the principles of human rights is

157. The representative of France observed that at least
the irreparable step had not been taken-they had not been
put to death; they had not been condemned to death. But
what I say is that it is not the severity of the sentence,
whether it is death, or twenty, ten or five years in prison,
that concerns us; it is this utter, categorical, final, and
abhorrent disregard and violation of the principles which all
of us-not only the Security Council, but the entire
international community-have
promised to abide by and
so apply.
I4
1/’ _/

158. My delegation offers its modest co-operation, a
willingness to work with the members of the Security
Council, should they so desire, to seek a solution on the
fouildation which I lrave just set forth on behalf of Chile,
159. The PRESIDENT
(translated from Spanish): There
are no more speakers on my list for this afternoon’s
meeting. If no other member wishes to speak, I propose to
clc~~2 the meeting.

160. Meanwhile, I have held informal consultations with
the members of the Security Council and it appears that
there is general agreement to continue our discussion on
Monday afternoon, If there is no objection, the next
meeting will be held at 4 p.m. on Monday, 19 February
1968.
It was so agreed.
The meeting rose at 7 p.m

15
