S/PV.7758

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7758

th meeting
Tuesday, 23 August 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Hamidi/Mr. Aman/Mrs. Adnin. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Malaysia)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Moustafa
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Odawa
Mr. Taula
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Seck
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison
Mr. Bermúdez
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
Challenges in addressing proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, their
means of delivery, and related materials
Letter dated 15 August 2016 from the Permanent Representative of Malaysia to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2016/712)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-26652 (E)
*1626652*

S/PV.7758

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
Challenges in addressing proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction, their means of
delivery, and related materials
Letter dated 15 August 2016 from the
Permanent Representative of Malaysia
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2016/712)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Algeria, Argentina, Australia,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Botswana, Brazil,
Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Cuba, Ecuador, Germany,
Guatemala, India, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of
Iran, Iraq, Israel, Italy, Kazakhstan, Mexico, Morocco,
the Netherlands, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Pakistan,
Panama, Peru, the Philippines, Poland, the Republic of
Korea, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, the Syrian Arab Republic, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkey and Viet Nam to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Emmanuel
Roux, Special Representative of INTERPOL to the
United Nations; Mr. Gregory Koblentz, Associate
Professor and Director of the Biodefence Graduate
Programme of George Mason University; and
Mr. Kim Won-soo, Under-Secretary-General and High
Representative for Disarmament Affairs.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following to
participate in this meeting: His Excellency Mr. Ioannis
Vrailas, Chargé d’affaires ad interim of the Delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations; His
Excellency Mr. Ahmed Fathalla, Permanent Observer
for the League of Arab States to the United Nations;
and His Excellency Mr. Gonzalo Koncke, Permanent
Observer of the Organization of American States to the
United Nations.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
2/76

23/08/2016

the United Nations to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/712, which contains the text of
a letter dated 15 August 2016 from the Permanent
Representative of Malaysia to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept note on the item under consideration.
I wish to warmly the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki Moon, and give him the floor.
The Secretary-General: I thank you, Sir, for
hosting this debate today. The elimination of all
weapons of mass destruction (WMDs) is one of
the most important obligations entrusted to the
international community. We can take some comfort
from our success in preventing the spread of weapons
of mass destruction. The multilateral infrastructure,
including the load-bearing pillars of the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT),
the Chemical Weapons Convention, the Biological
Weapons Convention (BWC) and instruments including
resolution 1540 (2004), is robust and tested.
However, at a time when we face greater dangers
than ever, the disarmament agenda has stalled in several
areas. I call on all States to focus on one overriding
truth — the only sure way to prevent the human,
environmental and existential destruction that these
weapons can cause is by eradicating them once and for
all. To attain that shared dream, we, the international
community, must ensure that the disarmament and
non-proliferation framework is universally and
completed implemented, and is resilient and versatile
enough to grapple with a changing environment.
The elimanation of weapons of mass destruction is
one of the founding principles of the United Nations. It
was the subject of the first General Assembly resolution.
It has been a top priority for me. In 2008, just one year
into my tenure as Secretary-General, I released my
five-point proposal to achieve a world free of nuclear
weapons in the hope that it would spur further action by
the international community. Eight years have passed,
but the need for urgent action has not diminished.
The Council has also played its part. In 2009,
it convened a historic summit on non-proliferation
16-26652

23/08/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

(see S/PV.6191). In adopting resolution 1887 (2009),
Council members emphasized the Council’s primary
responsibility to address nuclear threats and its
willingness to take action.
But we are all aware that challenges to the
disarmament and non-proliferation architectures are
growing. The global strategic context is more fluid and
dangerous than ever. Technological advances have made
the means of production and methods of delivery of
chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear materials
cheaper, easier and more accessible. Vicious non-State
actors that target civilians for carnage are actively
seeking chemical, biological and nuclear weapons. It
is therefore particularly disappointing that progress
on eliminating nuclear weapons has descended into
fractious deadlock. We see the reappearance of some
of the discredited arguments that were used to justify
nuclear weapons during the Cold War. Those arguments
were morally, politically and practically wrong 30 years
ago, and they are wrong now.
In this environment, the global community expects
the Council to demonstrate the same leadership as it
did in 2009. To build on resolution 1887 (2009) and to
develop further initiatives to bring about a world free
of weapons of mass destruction. It is time to refocus
seriously on nuclear disarmament. The outcome of
the Open-ended Working Group on Taking Forward
Multilateral Nuclear Disarmament Negotiations
demonstrated that there are many possible approaches
to this task.
While more needs to be done to bridge the divide
within the international community, I am encouraged
that all States agree that our collective efforts must
complement and strengthen the nuclear disarmament
and non-proliferation regime, including the NPT. The
next review cycle of the NPT — the only treaty-based
commitment to nuclear disarmament — will begin
in May 2017. For nearly five decades, the Treaty has
been a bulwark against nuclear proliferation. I call
on all to address the issues that plagued the 2015
Review Conference in a spirit of compromise, with
full respect for agreed objectives, common values and
core principles.
Moving on to biological weapons, in the wake of
the very serious outbreaks of Ebola, MERS and yellow
fever, I am extremely concerned that the international
community is not adequately prepared to prevent
or respond to a biological attack. The impact and

S/PV.7758

consequences of a biological attack on a civilian target
could far exceed those of a chemical or radiological
attack, but investment in the international architecture
dealing with these different types of WMDs is not
commensurate with their possible effects. For example,
there is no multilateral prevention and verification
agency for biological weapons, as there is for nuclear
and chemical threats and risks. States parties to the
Biological Weapons Convention have an opportunity
to discuss how to enhance preparedness at the BWC
Review Conference in November.
I also call on the Council to consider how to
strengthen resolution 1540 (2004) to ensure that
non-State actors cannot acquire these horrific weapons.
For 12 years, the resolution has tried to provide a barrier
to the threat and risk of WMDs being use by non-State
actors, which is a very real threat. The comprehensive
review mandated by resolution 1977 (2011) provides
an opportunity to fine-tune resolution 1540 (2004). I
urge the Council to use today’s meeting to be proactive
in ensuring that the resolution continues to be fit
for purpose.
I will now say a few words about new global threats
emerging from the misuse of science and technology,
and the power of globalization. Information and
communication technologies, artificial intelligence,
3-D printing and synthetic biology will bring profound
changes to our everyday lives and benefits to millions of
people. However, their potential for misuse could also
bring destruction. The nexus between these emerging
technologies and WMDs needs close examination and
action. As a starting point, the international community
must step up to expand common ground for the peaceful
use of cyberspace, and particularly the intersection
between cyberspace and critical infrastructure. People
now live a significant portion of their lives online.
They must be protected from online attacks, just as
effectively as they are protected from physical attacks.
Disarmament and non-proliferation instruments
are only as successful as Member States’ capacity to
implement them. I encourage Council members to
use this debate to devise effective solutions so that
all States can fully implement their disarmament and
non-proliferation commitments.
Throughout my tenure as Secretary-General,
the elimination of weapons of mass destruction has
been an urgent priority. I urge all Member States to
recommit themselves to taking action. The stakes are

16-266523/76

S/PV.7758

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

23/08/2016

simply too high too ignore. I wish the Security Council
a fruitful debate.

security and would launch a dirty bomb to follow the
Brussels airport bombing.

The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.

Secondly, the accessibility of CBRN materials
and technology is increasing as actors develop new
combinations of materials and constantly discover
new technological and scientific advances. Technology
that was once perceived as sensitive military-grade
expertise is now becoming available to a broader
audience. It is a matter of fact that, in the past few years,
researchers have recreated a number of viruses in the
laboratory, including SARS-like viruses, prompting
fears that terrorist organizations might exploit the same
technique to synthesize more deadly viral agents as
biological weapons.

I now give the floor to Mr. Roux.
Mr. Roux: On behalf of INTERPOL, I would
like to commend Malaysia for convening this timely
high-level debate on the challenges in addressing the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. I would
also like to thank the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004), with Spain as its Chair, and
its Group of Experts for their continued efforts to tackle
this important issue and for cooperating so closely
with INTERPOL.
The possible use of chemical, biological,
radiological and nuclear (CBRN) materials by terrorist
groups, criminals and other non-State actors has become
one of the most significant challenges for national
Governments in ensuring the safety of their citizens,
as well as their national security. Organizations such as
Al-Qaida, Aum Shinrikyo and other extremist groups
have in the past expressly announced their intention,
backed by real attempts, to develop, acquire and
deploy weapons of mass destruction against civilian
populations. Several emerging dynamics have made the
threat more imminent than ever. I shall cite three.
First, the complex architecture of today’s terrorist
organizations and their methods of operation in a
globalized world have a direct impact on the CBRN
threat. The increasing cross-border movement of foreign
terrorist fighters is allowing terrorist organizations
to reach out to a wider range of recruits in a targeted
fashion, giving them access to advanced CBRN
expertise. We received a concrete indicator of this when
a Da’esh laptop, owned by a Tunisian chemistry and
physics student, was seized in Syria in August 2014.
It contained a 19-page document on how to develop
biological weapons, including bubonic plague, and
also included instructions on how to test the weapons
on mice.
More recently, the Brussels attacks of March 2016
raised concerns when Belgian officials discovered that
Da’esh operatives had been secretly videotaping one of
the country’s senior nuclear scientists. The incident led
to the evacuation of two nuclear power stations and the
reinforcement of security at all others. Officials feared
that Da’esh was working to breach Belgium’s nuclear
4/76

Also to blame in making CBRN materials more
accessible is the complexity of controlling the transfer
and use of dual-use CBRN materials. For example,
chlorine, a basic chemical freely available in legitimate
markets and most commonly used in water treatment
facilities, is currently a common additive that terrorist
actors mix with classic explosives in the Middle East
and South-East Asia. A recent home search of the
suicide attacker who detonated a bomb outside a bar in
Ansbach, Germany, on 24 July revealed sophisticated
bomb-making materials and chemicals, possibly meant
for another deadly attack.
Thirdly, CBRN attacks have cross-border impacts
with global implications. These broad impacts make the
prevention and containment of CBRN attacks almost
impossible for one agency, one ministry or one country
to manage alone. The lack of coordination among
relevant stakeholders creates loopholes that could be
exploited by terrorists to carry out successful attacks
and maximize the number of casualties.
In 2010, in response to the growing concern over
the illicit trafficking of CBRN materials, INTERPOL
launched a comprehensive CBRN terrorism prevention
and response effort to support its 190 member countries.
This decision was unanimously endorsed by the
INTERPOL General Assembly in Hanoi, leading to the
establishment of a specialized unit on CBRN threats
within INTERPOL’s Counter-Terrorism Directorate.
In accordance with INTERPOL’s mandate and
Constitution, we focus exclusively on threats from
non-State actors. This encompasses not only terrorist
groups, lone wolves and other criminals, but also
includes those individuals that traffic in CBRN
materials across borders. Suppliers, middlemen,
16-26652

23/08/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

buyers and smuggling networks all fall within this
spectrum. Our CBRN activities are fully integrated
within INTERPOL’s newly released counter-terrorism
strategy covering the years 2016 to 2020.
INTERPOL’s activities range from data analysis,
multi-agency capacity-building and training workshops
to regional cross-border field operations. One specific
example of these analysis activities is Project Geiger.
Project Geiger collects information on cases of the
illicit use of radiological and nuclear materials and
analyses trends and risks of such attacks. As part of
this effort, INTERPOL maintains a database of over
3,500 incidents collected through its secured channels.
Since 2010, details on 44 suspects involved in nuclear
trafficking have been shared through INTERPOL,
including those convicted of trafficking in highly
enriched uranium.
Another example of our CBRN data analysisrelated activities is Project Watchmaker, which focuses
on chemical threats and targets individuals involved
in their manufacture. It coordinates the exchange of
technical data and the forensic signatures of bombmakers. This information is then included in a specific
database that currently contains over 1,000 bombmaker profiles. Project Watchmaker has resulted in 749
INTERPOL Notices being issued, including 176 Red
Notices, which are international arrest warrants, and 67
INTERPOL-United Nations Security Council Special
Notices, issued for individuals targeted by Security
Council sanction committees.
However, just sharing this information makes no
difference if it is not accessible to authorities on the
ground. Providing access to information to front-line
law enforcement officers is the one of the key added
values of INTERPOL. INTERPOL assists international
law enforcement in tracking cross-border movements
of individuals involved in the illicit trafficking of
CBRN materials. It does so by giving national police
agencies, including those at border points, direct access
to INTERPOL’s databases and notices and designing
and coordinating multi-agency cross-border operations.
Let me offer only two brief examples of projects
that encompass our multi-agency capacity-building,
training and cross-border field operations.
The first, INTERPOL’s Chemical Anti-Smuggling
Enforcement (CHASE) Operation, is a model of global
efforts to counter international smuggling of chemicals
used to manufacture chemical and explosive devices.

S/PV.7758

It increases the capacity of police, customs, border,
immigration and security agencies to work together. In a
practical application of the skills developed through the
CHASE training initiatives, INTERPOL coordinates
cross-border multi-agency operations in the field.
The second is Project Stop Trafficking of Nuclear
Elements. It provides operational and technical
resources to Member Countries in two ways: a capacitybuilding phase, to train law enforcement officers in
the necessary skills, including evidence collection,
investigation, and prevention; and an operational
phase to help put those skills into practice in the field.
This includes an international operation conducted
at border points in which officers run checks against
INTERPOL’s criminal databases.
In the past few years, INTERPOL has become a
key international partner in the implementation of
the global strategy to counter the illicit trafficking of
CBRN materials. INTERPOL has established close ties
with its relevant international stakeholders — such as
the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs,
EUROPOL and the European Union CBRN Risk
Mitigation Centres of Excellence Initiative, which
includes the United Nations Interregional Crime and
Justice Research Institute — as part of an inter-agency
approach. We believe that consolidating partnerships
through the establishment of legal frameworks and
the implementation mechanisms is crucial to the
sustainability of these integrated efforts.
That is why resolution 1540 (2004) should continue
to provide the umbrella under which initiatives are
launched harmoniously and through which countries’
needs can be met by matching them to assistance
providers. Given the global impacts of CBRN attacks,
it is especially important that we ensure the proper
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) on both the
national and regional levels.
The global, multi-agency architecture to combat
the threat of CBRN terrorism requires stronger
shared political will. That is why I would like to
especially thank Malaysia for convening this important
meeting, which provides an excellent opportunity to
foster political goodwill. This global response also
requires intensified coordination among the relevant
international stakeholders and increased financial
support to initiate and implement projects with tangible
and sustainable results.

16-266525/76

S/PV.7758

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

INTERPOL’s policing capabilities have proved to
greatly benefit member countries, especially on the
ground. Frameworks such as resolution 1540 (2004) play
a crucial role in promoting better sharing of information
regarding CBRN incidents through INTERPOL’s
secure communications. Systematic and effective use
of INTERPOL’s analytical and operational capabilities
will certainly help intercept trafficked CBRN materials
and prevent their use by criminals, terrorists and other
non-State actors.
The President: I thank Mr. Roux for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Koblentz.
Mr. Koblentz: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to provide a briefing on how advances
in science, technology and international commerce
are increasing the risk posed by the proliferation of
chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear (CBRN)
weapons to non-State actors.
Since resolution 1540 (2004) was adopted, in
2004, it has emerged as one of the most important
tools the international community has to prevent the
proliferation of CBRN weapons to non-State actors.
Since 2004, however, there have been amazing advances
in science and technology, including technological
breakthroughs in artificial intelligence, robotics, 3D
printing, autonomous vehicles, nanotechnology, gene
editing and synthetic biology. Those advances have
created unparalleled opportunities and capabilities
to manipulate objects in the physical world and in
cyberspace, and even our DNA.
The combination of these emerging technologies led
the World Economic Forum in 2015 to declare that we
were at the beginning of a fourth industrial revolution.
This new industrial revolution is characterized by its
global scope, an exponential rate of innovation and the
convergence of the chemical, biological, physical and
digital worlds. This new industrial revolution has the
potential to create huge benefits for productivity and for
prosperity and to transform our systems of economics
and governance.
But the fourth industrial revolution has a dark
side. The same scientific discoveries and technologies
fuelling this new industrial revolution have the potential
to be misused by non-State actors to cause harm. Klaus
Schwab, Executive Chair of the World Economic
Forum, warned:
6/76

23/08/2016

“As this process takes place and new technologies
such as autonomous or biological weapons become
easier to use, individuals and small groups will
increasingly join States in being capable of causing
mass harm. This new vulnerability will lead to new
fears.” (The Fourth Industrial Revolution,” Foreign
Affairs, December 2015)
It would be far more preferable to predict how these
emerging technologies could be misused and take steps
ahead of time to mitigate these risks than to wait to
respond after these new technologies are used to cause
harm on a large scale.
I submitted a paper that describes five advances in
science and technology that increase the risk of CBRNmaterial weapons proliferating to non-State actors. I
have time to discuss these developments only briefly
this morning, so I will refer the Council to the full
paper for more details.
The first area of concern is unmanned aerial
vehicles (UAVs). UAVs are no longer so expensive or
sophisticated that they are restricted to a handful of
States. Indeed, several terrorist groups, such as Hamas,
Hizbullah and the Islamic State, already fly their own
UAVs. The ability of UAVs to collect intelligence over
highly secure facilities has proliferation risks. For
example, in 2014, unidentified UAVs flew over reactors
in France and Belgium for unknown purposes. Earlier
this year, an unidentified UAV was seen flying over a
United States Navy base that hosts several strategicmissile submarines. Future versions of UAVs could be
turned into flying improvised explosive devices. These
drone bombs could fly over ground-based defences
and precisely target critical areas of nuclear facilities
or sites that store toxic industrial chemicals. Finally,
UAVs could one day be used to deliver weapons of
mass destruction directly. While these commercially
available UAVs are unlikely to be capable of carrying
nuclear weapons, the low-speed, low-altitude, lowpayload capacity of UAVs is well suited for delivering
chemical and biological agents against civilian targets.
Another emerging technology of concern is 3D
printing, because 3D printers are machines that print
physical objects layer by layer, using special inks made
out of plastic or metal. Because 3D printing is highly
automated, it takes much of the skill out of fabrication.
The versatility of 3D printing has led to predictions that
the market for this technology will reach $30 billion
by 2022. As technology advances, more-capable
16-26652

23/08/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

machines are becoming more widely available to more
people. Already, amateurs have used 3D printers to
create plastic handguns that can be smuggled through
X-ray detectors and into buildings and secure facilities.
Scientists have used 3D printers to print micro-reactors
that can synthesize chemicals on a small scale. 3D
printers create new opportunities for non-State actors
to engage in do-it-yourself proliferation. If they are
unable to buy controlled items on their own, they may
be able to print them themselves one day.
Non-State actors such as terrorists or criminals
interested in acquiring CBRN materials are
increasingly turning to a special part of the Internet
called the Dark Web. The Dark Web can be accessed
only by using special encryption software that hides the
location and identity of its user. The Dark Web hosts
numerous markets that offer a range of illegal goods
for sale, such as guns, drugs and even chemical and
biological weapons. In 2014, the United States arrested
two individuals who sold the toxins ricin and abrin to
customers in North America, Europe and Asia. Ricin
is a Schedule 1 chemical weapon under the Chemical
Weapons Convention.
The global reach and anonymity of the Dark Web
provides non-State actors with new means of doing
business to acquire dual-use equipment and materials.
Most of these markets avoid traditional financial
systems, and instead rely on digital currencies like
bitcoin to conduct transactions. Such transactions are
encrypted, which provides anonymity to both the buyer
and seller. This poses special challenges to anti-moneylaundering and counter-terrorism financing regulations.
There is also a growing risk that non-State actors
could use malicious software, or malware, to conduct
cyberattacks on facilities that produce or store nuclear,
biological or chemical materials. These non-State actors
could be disgruntled insiders, hacktivists, criminals or
terrorists. The widespread use of digital and automated
industrial control systems in such facilities and their
connection to the Internet create special and growing
vulnerabilities. This year, the non-governmental
organization Nuclear Threat Initiative (NTI) started
including cybersecurity as one of the measures in its
Nuclear Security Index, and the results were sobering.
It found that 20 countries that possessed weapon-usable
nuclear material or that had nuclear power plants did not
meet even the most basic requirements of cybersecurity.
We should not just be one click away from a cyberChernobyl.

S/PV.7758

Finally, the last area of scientific knowledge
I want to discuss is that of gene editing, a relatively
new development in the field of the life sciences. In
2013, scientists created a powerful new tool for genetic
engineering called CRISPR, for clustered regularly
interspaced short palindromic repeats. CRISPR allows
scientists to modify the genome for practically any
organism more precisely, more cheaply and more reliably
than ever before. The versatility and ease of use of this
tool has given rise to the term “gene editing”. Gene
editing is poised to make great contributions to human
health. But at the same time, the United States Director
of National Intelligence has warned that the deliberate
or unintentional misuse of this technology could have
grave economic or national security implications.
Although these technologies differ greatly in many
respects, they share seven key characteristics that
pose a special challenge to the implementation of the
objectives of resolution 1540 (2004).
First, these technologies have dual uses; they can
be used either for peaceful or for harmful purposes.
Secondly, these technologies are disruptive. They
are powerful enough to be able to transform entire
industries, economies and fields of science.
Due to those two characteristics, these technologies
are highly sought after by non-governmental
organizations, corporations and Governments for their
scientific, commercial and humanitarian applications.
The third feature of these technologies is that
of diffusion. Thanks to advances in international
commerce, new technologies can now be diffused
faster and farther afield than ever before.
The fourth feature is that all these technologies
rely to some degree on a digital component that makes
controlling them even more difficult. For example, 3D
printers use a digital blueprint called a “build file” to
programme the machine on what to produce. Such files
take up less space on a computer than a typical television
episode, which means they are easily transferable via
the Internet, email and other means of communication.
The fifth feature is that of decentralization.
Decentralization means there has been a shift in
the global distribution of scientific innovation and
industrial capacity. No longer is that concentrated in
the West; it is now more widely distributed to a more
diverse group of nations around the world.

16-266527/76

S/PV.7758

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

The sixth feature is deskilling. The level of
expertise needed to utilize these technologies has been
reduced, making them more widely available and more
accessible to a larger group than ever before.
The seventh characteristic is the rise of the doit-yourself (DIY) movement. These are amateur
innovators who use open-source platforms to build
virtual communities dedicated to create an application of
those new technologies. There are vibrant transnational
DIY movements devoted to UAVs, 3D printing and
synthetic biology.
The combination of those seven characteristics is
what makes it such a challenge to prevent these emerging
technologies from being misused by non-State actors.
Despite the potential for these advances in science and
technology to increase the risks of the proliferation to
non-State actors, we should also keep in mind that they
also provide opportunities for mitigating those risks and
preventing them from occurring. Unmanned aerial and
ground vehicles can be used to detect CBRN weapons,
for border security and for bomb disposal. Biometrics
and radio-frequency ID chips can be used to improve
physical security and inventory control. Big Data can
be harnessed to improve export controls, and improved
sensors can detect the production, transportation and
use of CBRN weapons.
The international community faces a continuing
challenge of encouraging innovation and maximizing
the benefits of these new technologies, while
simultaneously mitigating the risks that they pose to
international security. I hope the Security Council
will take advantage of the comprehensive review of
resolution 1540 (2004), of which this open debate is an
important contribution, to update the resolution and to
take into account the impact of scientific discoveries,
technological breakthroughs and the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction to non-State actors.
The President: I thank Mr. Koblentz for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Under-Secretary-General
Kim Won-soo.
Mr. Kim Won-soo: At the outset, I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to
address the Security Council today and to congratulate
Malaysia for hosting this timely debate. SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon just provided us with a strategic
overview of the global challenges posed by weapons
of mass destruction (WMD). I would like to add a
8/76

23/08/2016

few words about the challenges posed by chemical,
biological, radiological and nuclear (CBRN) materials
and on Security Council resolution 1540 (2004).
The international community has made sound
progress in trying to prevent, investigate and respond
to CBRN threats and risks. Resolution 1540 (2004) has
enabled the international community to make advances
in addressing the proliferation of WMDs to non-State
actors. That includes through better reporting, adding
or reinforcing legislation, assistance benefits, regional
cooperation and national action plans.
Similarly, the Secretary-General’s mechanism for
investigation of alleged use of chemical and biological
weapons has demonstrated its utility in responding to
allegations of chemical-weapon use. I hope that when
the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons Joint Investigative Mechanism submits its
report to the Council tomorrow it will fulfil its mandate
to identify the perpetrators of such horrific acts. The
Nuclear Security Summit process has contributed to
raising awareness of, and preparedness against. the
dangers posed by nuclear and radiological terrorism.
But much more still needs to be done. This is a long
journey. In this journey, today’s debate and the ongoing
comprehensive review of resolution 1540 (2014) are
important landmarks. If we ask ourselves whether the
international community is prepared to address the full
scope of CBRN threats and risks, unfortunately the
answer is not yet. We have significant gaps in a number
of areas. The Joint Investigative Mechanism is one
example of a body that needs to fill the gap in identifying
the perpetrators of chemical-weapon attacks. I want to
highlight two points that the international community
must examine in the international architecture.
The first point relates to biological threats and
risks. With the increasing reports of terrorist groups
seeking to acquire biological materials, we need to
ensure that the investment in preventing biological
incidents is commensurate to the threat and risk. Both
the comprehensive review of resolution 1540 (2004) and
the Review Conference of the Parties to the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Development, Production
and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and
Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction to be held
in November are opportunities to consider how those
instruments can be strengthened and enhanced to
provide crucial prevention and preparedness.
16-26652

23/08/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

The second issue is how the international
community should respond if prevention fails. Despite
our concerted prevention efforts, a CBRN attack may
happen — with repercussions that are likely to go
beyond the remit of a concerned international agency.
or the capacity of the attacked country. As Mr. Koblentz
indicated, the repercussions of such an attack would be
multiplied by exploiting new technological advances,
such as genetic engineering and unmanned aerial
vehicles, just to name two. Subsequently, it would
almost certainly become a complex international health
and humanitarian emergency, disrupting law and order.
It would require the coordination and deployment of
a wide array of agencies at the national, regional and
multilateral levels. In such an event, the international
community would likely turn to the United Nations, as
was the case in the recent response to the Ebola virus.
We have made some progress in developing investigative
mechanisms, but any international response will go
beyond an investigation. The international community
needs to think hard about what to do in advance of such
an eventuality.
In conclusion, I want to reiterate the SecretaryGeneral’s key point, namely, the need for accelerated
action in disarmament and non-proliferation of all
weapons of mass destruction. The ultimate way to
reduce the risk of a non-State actor using a WMD is
through their complete and irreversible elimination.
Achieving a world free of weapons of mass destruction
is the collective responsibility of all States. Overcoming
divisions in approaches requires inclusive dialogue,
commitment, flexibility and creativity by all States.
Today’s debate is a demonstration of Security
Council members’ commitment to pursuing the crucial
challenge of preventing WMD proliferation. We hope
that Council members will continue to show such
leadership until we have achieved our shared goal
of a world free of weapons of mass destruction. The
United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs is at
the disposal of Council members to provide whatever
assistance is required.
The President: I thank Mr. Kim Won-soo for
his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Home Affairs
of Malaysia.
At the outset, I wish to thank the Secretary-General
for his participation today and for his remarks.

S/PV.7758

Malaysia highly values the Secretariat’s role in
facilitating synergies and in coordinating and supporting
cooperation among the various United Nations entities,
Member States and intergovernmental institutions
in preventing the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction (WMDs) to non-State actors. The Security
Council, consistent with its primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security
and in accordance with the purposes and principles of
the United Nations, has a key role to play in this regard.
I wish to also thank Mr. Roux, Mr. Koblenz and
Mr. Kim Won-soo for their respective briefings, which
have shed much light on the different aspects of the
topic under discussion.
We are honoured by the large number of delegations
participating today, attesting to the importance of
concerted international action to preventing WMD
proliferation to non-State actors. It is my hope that our
deliberations today will contribute towards that end.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement of
the Non- Aligned Movement to be delivered by the
representative of Iran.
Resolution 1540 (2004) is admittedly a historic
contribution of the Security Council in the field of
non-proliferation of WMD. We commend Spain,
as Chair of the Committee established pursuent to
resolution 1540 (2004), for its effective stewardship of
the comprehensive review process. My delegation is
of the view that, in so doing and while acknowledging
the threats posed by terrorist groups, the thrust of the
resolution in preventing WMD proliferation by States
and non-State actors should be maintained.
We should acknowledge the equally significant
contributions of several international and regional
arrangements or initiatives in addressing WMD
proliferation, especially by non-State actors.
Collectively and through various national, regional and
international approaches, we have certainly made great
strides and achieved significant progress in responding
to this multifaceted, complex issue. We should move
forward by further strengthening global efforts in
the light of the emerging threats and challenges
in this regard, in particular in the field of science
and technology, information and communication
technologies and international commerce. As such,
we call on the 1540 Committee to regularly review the
scientific, technological and international commerce
advancements on related controls under resolution

16-266529/76

S/PV.7758

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

1540 (2004). That would ensure synergy in merging
the implementation of States’ obligations, taking
into account the exponential risk of the misuse of
these advancements.
I do not wish to repeat here the elements concerning
the purpose, context and challenges that the presidency
has elaborated in our concept note for this debate
(S/2016/712, annex), nor either should I recapitulate
the points that my delegation and other delegations
made at the Council’s open consultations concerning
resolution 1540 (2004) in June. Instead and in line with
the action-oriented nature of today’s debate, I wish to
offer my observations and proposals.
My delegation believes that States, in accordance
with their international obligations, should strengthen
their respective law enforcement and national
legislation, in particular by enacting effective export
and transshipment controls, which should include
proliferation financing. Due to the fact that many States
have different national priorities and capacities, not
all States have been able to enact such laws, resulting
in a lack of universal control concerning WMD
proliferation to non-State actors. In addition, some
States remain constrained by a severe lack of technical
expertise and resources in ensuring the effective
fulfilment of their obligations. Therefore, the United
Nations, in accordance with Chapter VIII of its Charter
and other relevant regional and international initiatives,
should avoid duplication and instead work in synergy
in rendering the required assistance in all aspects
to States. I believe that such an expedient approach
would optimize the limited resources of the States and
institutions concerned.
The international community has long designated
non-State actors, in particular terrorist groups, as our
number one enemy. However, it is unfortunate that
a central, universal coordination mechanism that is
inclusive of parliamentarians, industry, academics and
the civil society in addressing the challenges they pose
is currently non-existent. This has resulted in numerous
regional and international institutions and initiatives,
with similar or competing interests, pursuing the same
objectives but with different approaches or agendas. That
perplexing situation should be redressed immediately.
Pending the formation of a central, universal
coordination mechanism, States will have to continue
addressing the increasingly complex challenges posed
by non-State actors through various measures peculiar
10/76

23/08/2016

to their national or regional interests and imperatives.
In that regard, my delegation supports the proposal
for the United Nations to develop a structured track
of dialogue at all levels, including parliamentarians,
industry, academics and civil society, aimed at raising
greater awareness, with a view to generating the
necessary impetus for a solid global movement against
WMD proliferation to non-State actors.
The global security landscape has changed
dramatically. It is evolving rapidly beyond
comprehension, presenting us with a multitude of
new challenges. Today, no nation can claim immunity
to WMD proliferation or attacks by terrorist groups.
Recent incidents concerning the use of chemicals
as weapons against civilian populations by certain
parties in Syria, as well as the acquisition of chemical
stockpiles by terrorists in Libya, which was eventually
addressed through the adoption of resolution 2298
(2016), highlight the real danger and threat posed
by non-State actors to peace and security. These
developments reqire us to respond to the questions of,
not if, but when and where such incidents will recur,
with irreversible consequences, and of what should we
do and how we should do it.
It is indeed unfortunate that geopolitical
considerations at play in certain regions are
compounding the preventive or remedial efforts of
the United Nations and the international community
at large in addressing the challenges posed by WMD
proliferation and their use by non-State actors. There
have been instances where States were allegedly
complicit in this respect, in blatant disregard to the
sacrosanct purposes and principles of the United
Nations. States are duty-bound to avoid complicity in
the commission of such heinous acts.
The first and second preambular paragraphs of the
Charter of the United Nations state, in part,
“[w]e the peoples of the United Nations
determined to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war ... [and] to establish conditions under
which justice and respect for the obligations arising
from treaties and other sources of international
law can be maintained ... and for these ends ... to
unite our strength to maintain international peace
and security”.
I am convinced that we remain resolutely cognizant
of our cardinal collective obligations as truly a United
Nations, and therefore are prepared to jointly summon
16-26652

23/08/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

the courage to ultimately bring forth enduring peace
and security. It is worth recalling that, 20 years ago, the
International Court of Justice, in its Advisory Opinion
on the Legality of the threat or use of nuclear weapons,
handed down on 8 July 1996, unanimously concluded
that
“[t]here exists an obligation to pursue in
good faith and bring to a conclusion negotiations
leading to nuclear disarmament in all its aspects
under strict and effective international control.”
(A/51/218, annex, p. 267)
In conclusion, we have to admit that the existence of
WMDs, in particular nuclear weapons, is a threat to our
peace and security and to the survival of humankind.
Ultimately, my delegation looks forward to a WMDfree world.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Security Council.
I give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Kiyoshi
Odawara, Parliamentary Vice-Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Japan.
Mr. Odawara (Japan): I would like to welcome
Malaysia’s timely initiative to convene this open debate
on the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs), amid the comprehensive review of the status
of implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
Before turning to the issue of non-proliferation with
regard to non-State actors, I would first like to refer
to North Korea’s nuclear test in January and its series
of ballistic missile launches, including the most recent
launch, which fell into Japan’s exclusive economic
zone on 3 August. Those blatant violations of Security
Council resolutions pose clear challenges to the global
non-proliferation regime and cannot be condoned for
any reason. Japan strongly urges North Korea to refrain
from further provocations and to comply faithfully and
fully with the relevant Security Council resolutions,
including resolution 2270 (2016), as well as other
commitments, and calls upon all Member States to
redouble their efforts to fully implement and enforce the
relevant Security Council resolutions. Those efforts are
crucial, and their significance and impact must not be
underestimated. We must strongly support the work of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant

S/PV.7758

to resolution 1718 (2006) and ensure that the Committee
and its Panel of Experts can function effectively.
Let me now move to the issue of preventing
WMD proliferation with regard to non-State actors.
Resolution 1540 (2004) is a cornerstone of the global
non-proliferation regime because it requires States
to prevent proliferation and establish domestic laws,
regulations and effective measures for that purpose.
However, we should also recognize that the global
situation has dramatically changed since that resolution
was adopted, in 2004. Increased globalization has
greatly increased the risk of the proliferation of WMDs.
Indeed, we have witnessed cases where non-State
actors have used WMDs to advance their goals. The
ongoing comprehensive review presents a golden
opportunity to identify the challenges facing the current
non-proliferation regime and discuss how we address
them. In that regard, Japan would like to propose two
specific points.
First, export and border controls are essential
for the prevention and detection of proliferation
activities. The review process has pointed out that
the implementation of paragraph 3 of the resolution,
which calls for establishing domestic controls such
as export and border controls, has fallen far behind
the implementation of paragraph 2, which calls for
prohibiting the proliferation activities undertaken by
non-State actors. We underscore that clear definitions
of the restricted items and activities are the key to
facilitating the implementation of the obligations under
resolution 1540 (2004). Japan is therefore of the view that
requiring the establishment of national control lists in
accordance with a Security Council resolution is a good
step towards enhancing the non-proliferation regime.
Secondly, another observation from the review
process pointed out that the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) is currently unable to effectively match offers
and requests for technical assistance. One of the prime
reasons is that requesting States do not necessarily
recognize their own needs. In order to address that
situation, Japan would like to strongly suggest that
the 1540 Committee and its Group of Experts be
given a mandate to propose and initiate dialogue with
requesting States in a more proactive manner. That
would enable the Committee and the Group of Experts
to serve as consultants mediating between donors and
recipient countries by identifying actual needs based on

16-2665211/76

S/PV.7758

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

clear information acquired through direct interaction
with the requesting State.
The security environment today requires us to
take effective measures to tackle the threat of the illicit
use of WMDs by non-State actors. Once again, Japan
would like to emphasize that the strengthening of the
global non-proliferation regime, with resolution 1540
(2004) as its cornerstone, provides the foundation for
international peace and security.
Mr. González de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in
Spanish): The full text of my statement is in electronic
format and is also available at the documentation
counter next to the Conference Officer. I will be reading
from a summarized version of my statement.
I would like first to highlight the relevance of
this debate, as the risk of the use of weapons of mass
destruction (WMDs) challenges global security and
human existence itself. Regrettably, the proliferation of
such weapons has not abated, as has been shown by the
actions of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
and the use of chemical weapons in Syria and Iraq.
In 2004, the report of the High-level Panel on
Threats, Challenges and Change, entitled “A more
secure world: our shared responsibility” (see A/59/565),
noted that the United Nations was created to prevent
war but acknowledged that the greatest threats would
result from, among other factors, the proliferation and
possible use of nuclear, radiological, chemical and
biological weapons and from terrorism. It stated that
the threats would come from both State and non-State
actors. It also stressed that the technological revolution
offered unprecedented opportunities for cooperation,
and an unprecedented potential for destruction.
That visionary analysis made possible the adoption
of resolution 1540 (2004), which marked a turning
point in the non-proliferation architecture. The analysis
was subsequently backed by facts, such as the existence
of a smuggling network of nuclear-weapon technology
and evidence of the intentions of terrorist organizations
to acquire weapons of mass destruction. Twelve years
later, that analysis remains valid, while scientific and
technological advances have developed more rapidly
than the response capacity of States. The globalization
of commercial, logistic and economic transactions
makes it harder to control proliferation activities,
and makes it easier for terrorists to take advantage of
transnational criminal networks to access weapons of
mass destruction.
12/76

23/08/2016

We are not exaggerating when we say that the
main threat is the link between terrorism and weapons
of mass destruction. We must therefore act swiftly,
and the Security Council has a key role to play.
International conventions and the adoption of standards
by the relevant institutions are also important tools.
The statements made today have highlighted some of
the risks we face. I echo the views expressed and will
not repeat them.
Moreover, the specialized reports show a
sustained increase in nuclear and chemical incidents,
whereas biological incidents have been more sporadic.
Nonetheless, the variety of agents used and the rapid
scientific and technological developments in this field
are very worrisome. The biological sector is the area
needing more attention, particularly in the absence of a
relevant organization.
One additional challenge is the lack of a unified
incident database. To prevent, we know that we must
know what it is that we are trying to prevent. To that
end, my delegation proposes that the Security Council
consider the development of such a database.
On the other hand, terrorism has intensified.
Terrorists are more determined than ever to acquire
weapons of mass destruction. Chemical weapons have
been used in Syria and Iraq, and there are reports
warning about the real risk of attacks employing
weapons of mass destruction.
Furthermore, internal instability in countries
and situations of conflict are breeding grounds
for proliferation by terrorist groups, as has been
recognized by the Libyan and the Iraqi authorities,
among others. In that regard, I would highlight the
Council’s swift response, through resolution 2298
(2016), to Libya’s request to have its chemical weapons
arsenal destroyed, as well as the active role of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) in assisting Iraqi authorities
in the implementation that resolution, which is a key
instrument in preventing the proliferation of weapons
of that nature.
The magnitude of the challenges we face is
enormous, but it is not too late. Now is the time to act.
Initiatives such as the Nuclear Security Summits and
the eighth Review Conference of the States Parties to
the Biological Weapons Convention are contributing to
bolstering the international non-proliferation regime.
The Security Council plays a primary role in that
16-26652

23/08/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

process as the main guarantor of international peace
and security.
I would now like to mention two areas.
First, the conclusions reached by the Joint
Investigative Mechanism (JIM) should inform our
thinking on how to reinforce the non-proliferation
system. I believe the work of JIM has demonstrated
the deterrent power of a system of accountability for
the use of weapons of mass destruction, the need for
States to have reliable inventories and means to protect
their chemical and biological stocks, and the need for
the Security Council to be proactive in crises where
sensitive materials could be improperly used.
We believe it is necessary to reflect on how to
incorporate the capacities to investigate WMD incidents
into current efforts to strengthen the non-proliferation
architecture. We believe we should consider greater
interaction between the preventive role of resolution
1540 (2004), on the one hand, and investigation and
accountability as a both a preventive and deterrent
mechanism, on the other.
Finally, the process of the comprehensive review of
resolution 1540 (2004) should facilitate an update of the
framework set up by the resolution, with the ultimate
aim of preventing non-State actors from using weapons
of mass destruction, as it is apparent that threats have
not decreased.
Ultimately, this process should allow us, at the very
least, to take five positive steps. First is to reinforce
the capacity of the United Nations to prevent the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, while
achieving greater coordination among the components
of the non-proliferation system. Secondly, we should
develop a more focused approach, for example, by
attending more carefully to the biological and chemical
sectors. Thirdly, a more proactive approach to avoid
major crises should be promoted. Fourthly, assistance
to States should be improved. And, finally, we must
achieve greater transparency in the fight against
proliferation, while actively involving civil society.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the Deputy Prime Minister of
Malaysia, Mr. Ahmad Zahid Hamidi, as President of
the Security Council. We are grateful for his convening
of this meeting on the issue of non-proliferation and
Security Council resolution 1540 (2004).

S/PV.7758

We listened very carefully to today’s briefings,
and we thank the Spanish chairmanship of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) for its active and focused leadership of that
subsidiary body of the Council.
The global non-proliferation architecture is
based on three components: the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the Chemical
Weapons Convention and, of course, the Biological and
Toxin Weapons Convention. The Russian Federation
participates very actively in all of them.
Resolution 1540 (2004) is yet another pedestal
of non-proliferation. It is a reliable bulwark against
weapons of mass destruction falling into the hands
of non-State actors. Achieving its full-fledged and
universal implementation is a pressing objective for
the international community. Our discussions here
today will serve as a significant contribution to the
current comprehensive review of the implementation of
the resolution.
We note the positive momentum in the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) during
the period covered. We understand that not all steps
have been taken and that a great deal of work lies
before us, but it is important to continue in this spirit
without artificial pressure, mindful of the capacities of
individual States. It is clear that there continues to be
broad scope for improvements within the framework of
the current mandate, which requires no radical changes.
The resolution enshrines the concept of cooperation,
not coercion. That notion should be safeguarded.
We understand the need to find new responses to
new challenges. We support the strengthening of the
counter-terrorism component of non-proliferation.
In the light of the continuing terrorist activity by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and other
terrorist groups in Iraq and Syria, the significance of
resolution 1540 (2004) only grows. Reports regarding
non-State actors gaining access to chemical weapons
require detailed investigation and a response by the
Security Council. It is unacceptable that non-State
actors should be provided assistance in accessing
weapons of mass destruction.
We concur with the view that there is a need to
more actively use national and regional components
in the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). Best
practices must be studied and educational seminars
for focal points must be organized. Their value added

16-2665213/76

S/PV.7758

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

is obvious. At the end of June, Russia organized just
such an event in Kaliningrad, under the aegis of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs.
The response of the participants was most positive.
The capacities of regional and international
organizations must be enlisted, and their plans of
work should be tailored to States’ requests. We also
advocate the involvement of academia and the business
community. Of course, all such actions should be under
the leadership and control of State structures. Russia
is interested in strengthening the non-proliferation
regime and will spare no effort to that end.
We have repeatedly heard of the use by fighters of
ISIL and other groups of industrial chemicals and even
military toxins. There are reports regarding terrorist
access to the technologies and infrastructure necessary
for the manufacture of chemical weapons. The threat
of chemical and biological terrorism is growing and is
increasingly transcending borders. The pressing need
to bolster the fight against acts of terrorism is so high
that the toolkit of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004), despite its important role, is
simply insufficient.
That is precisely why Russia, at the Conference
on Disarmament, took the initiative of proposing the
elaboration of an international convention against
chemical and biological terrorist attacks. Such a new
convention could combine the elements agreed upon by
the international community during the past few years.
In particular, it should include provisions regarding
the criminalization of acts falling within its scope,
determine jurisdictions, define the appropriate level
of judicial response and implement the principle of
extradite-or-prosecute, and so on.
It is clear that the conventional concepts of arms
control, disarmament and non-proliferation are
gradually diluting. In essence, this field is taking on
a new shape and acquiring new dimensions, namely,
counter-terrorist ones. The emergence of ISIL’s
industrial capacities for manufacturing chemical
weapons and the threat of their proliferation across
the whole of the Middle East attest to the timeliness of
Russia’s initiative to elaborate just such an international
convention on combating acts of biological and
chemical terrorism.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): We thank the delegation
of Malaysia for convening today’s open debate and
14/76

23/08/2016

welcome you, Mr. Ahmad Zahid Hamidi, Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Home Affairs of Malaysia, for
presiding over this important meeting. We also thank
the briefers for their important insights on this critical
issue, and the Secretary-General for his remarks and
contribution to the discussion on the threat posed by
weapons of mass destruction (WMDs) falling into the
hands of non-State actors, armed groups and terrorists;
on the measures aimed at tackling these threats and
the responsibilities of States to reinforce operational
control mechanisms of weapons and equipment
related to WMDs; in adopting appropriate legislative
frameworks for preventing the proliferation of WMDs
to non-State actors, armed groups and terrorists; on
States’ response to international cooperation and the
provisions of resolution 1540 (2004) with respect to
reporting on national and regional measures taken
for the resolution’s implementation; and on the
review under way of resolution 1540 (2004) towards
strengthening international commitments in preventing
and confronting such threats. In that regard, we
commend Spain as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) for its stewardship
of the comprehensive review process of the resolution.
The Government of Angola is deeply concerned
about ongoing challenges and conflicts on the
African continent and elsewhere. We avail ourselves
of this opportunity for an incursion into a subject
correlated to the matter under discussion since, more
than this somewhat virtual exercise, the real issue in
contemporary conflicts is that weapons are easily
obtainable, cheaply purchased through criminal
networks and largely supplied by States to non-State
actors, armed groups and terrorists in a dangerous
game of influence and power, spreading destruction,
anarchy and chaos.
Small arms and light weapons are the real weapons
of mass destruction in the conflicts in Africa, in the
Middle East and elsewhere. Furthermore, they are at the
root of developments conducive to the use of weapons
of mass destruction by non-State actors. Given the
massive destructive character of these weapons, we are
of the view that the regime impeding the traffic and
supply of small arms and light weapons to non-State
actors should be strengthened, and identical restrictive
measures should be applied, pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004). We furthermore think that the definition
of non-State actors in resolution 1540 (2004) should be
16-26652

23/08/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

broadened and applied to a larger scope of non-State
actors than those defined in the resolution.
Angola is a State party to major international
instruments relating to weapons of mass destruction,
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty,
the Chemical Weapons Convention and the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and
Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin
Weapons and on Their Destruction. We are devising and
implementing the relevant legislation and institutions
that would allow for more effective implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), domestically and regionally, in
order to enhance cooperation and collective efforts to
ensure that all chemical, biological, radiological and
nuclear materials, equipment and technologies on the
African continent are used exclusively within the tenets
of the law and for peaceful purposes.
As a means of fulfilling its commitment to the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and to the
non-proliferation regime, and in response to increasingly
frequent reports of attempts by terrorist groups to
produce or obtain biological agents and pathogens, as
well as the use of chemical agents in certain conflicts, the
Angolan Government has redoubled its efforts to create
an effective, institutionalized national mechanism to
address such threats. Currently, Angola is working on
drafting legislation to establish a national authority for
weapons of mass destruction — a body to be coordinated
by the Ministry of National Defence and whose main
purpose will be to assist in formulating national action
plans and in preparing national implementation reports
on the country’s capacity relating to the control of
WMDs. Greater interaction with neighbouring States
is key for facing a most pressing challenge to the
countries of Africa, specifically on questions related to
cross-border movements, controlling illicit trafficking
and the need to reinforce national and regional security
and increase technical assistance from the 1540 (2004)
Committee and other subsidiary organs of the Security
Council dealing with counter-terrorism.
Finally, we are of the view that the effective
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) has to be
coupled with significant progress in the prevention
of conflicts and the resolution of protracted ones,
not outright interference and inflaming of conflicts
through the supply of weapons to non-State actors
and oppressive unreliable regimes. The root causes of
terrorism have to be addressed as well as the serious

S/PV.7758

socioeconomic and political difficulties faced by the
countries of the region. If the growth of terrorism and
its recruitment appeal are to be curtailed, the issues of
unemployment among young people and corruption
must be duly addressed, while development and good
governance must be top priorities in countries affected
by conflict and terrorism.
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): Ukraine wishes to express
its gratitude to the Malaysian presidency for organizing
today’s useful debate. We also wish to thank today’s
briefers for their valuable insights.
While fully aligning myself with the statement to
be delivered later today by the Chargé d’affaires of the
Delegation of the European Union, I would like to make
some comments in my national capacity.
For 12 years now, resolution 1540 (2004) has
been playing a crucial role in strengthening global
and regional non-proliferation efforts. Its objective of
prevention makes the resolution a unique and valuable
tool. Ukraine has always been actively engaged in the
global process of weapons of mass destruction (WMD)
non-proliferation and disarmament, making historic
contributions in this endeavour. We have consistently
supported effective multilateral efforts aimed at
preventing and combating the proliferation of weapons
and materials of mass destruction. As a State with past
possession of nuclear-weapons and a full-fledged party to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
the Chemical Weapons Convention and the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and
Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin
Weapons and on Their Destruction, Ukraine is strongly
committed to the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) and exerts every effort to prevent non-State
actors from acquiring materials and technologies that
could be used as weapons of mass destruction.
With a view to tackling the growing threat of the
proliferation of WMDs globally, we support initiatives
aimed at further strengthening the role and potential
of resolution 1540 (2004) for the long term, such as
the recent establishment of the Group of Friends of
resolution 1540 (2004). Reaffirming its commitment
to the resolution in the framework of the 2016 Nuclear
Security Summit in Washington, D.C., Ukraine joined
the initiative named “Promoting full and universal
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004)”. It is
also worth mentioning that during the 2014 Nuclear
Security Summit, held in The Hague, Ukraine joined a

16-2665215/76

S/PV.7758

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

similar effort and made its valuable contribution to its
implementation.
Together with the United Nations and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), we organized a workshop on the assessment
of implementation and the role of Security Council
resolution 1540 (2004) in achieving the aims of
non-proliferation and disarmament, which took place
in Kyiv in November 2013. A year later, the OSCE, the
United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs, the
Ukrainian Chemists Union and the International Centre
for Chemical Safety and Security in Poland, with the
support of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine,
initiated a national round table on capabilities in field
of chemical safety and security and the development of
an integrated chemical safety and security programme
in Ukraine, including promotion of the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). That effort resulted in the
comprehensive review and an integrated programme of
chemical safety and security in Ukraine.
We also fully support the work of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004), in particular in coordinating international
efforts aimed at ensuring the proper implementation
of that resolution. Ukraine consistently provides the
Committee reports on its national legislation, including
updates on our export and border controls and the
physical protection of the relevant sensitive facilities.
We work continuously to improve our technical
capabilities aimed at monitoring, detecting and
preventing illegal trafficking in chemical, biological
and nuclear materials. In particular, relevant work
is being systematically carried out with a view to
enhancing the efficiency of the relevant monitoring
systems at the State border checkpoints. The use of
mobile radiation-monitoring systems that provide
monitoring of green control is also being expanded.
Let me also mention that a State plan on the
interaction between the central and local authorities
in cases of sabotage committed on nuclear facilities,
nuclear materials and other sources of ionizing
radiation during their use, storage or transportation
and on nuclear waste has already been approved in
Ukraine. I think that it is quite natural that, against
such a backdrop, Ukraine cannot and will not tolerate
any breaches of the principle of the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction.
16/76

23/08/2016

We would echo the statement of the delegation of
Japan with regard to its deep concern about the gradual,
persistent, irresponsible and highly provocative actions
on the part of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, which pose a threat and continue to undermine
the security situation on the Korean peninsula, as
well as undermining regional peace and stability.
Ultimately, it is the responsibility of the Council and
the broader international community to restore respect
for its norms, to ensure fulfilment of respect for the
international commitment and obligations, as well as to
prevent further violations.
The issue of the full and universal implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) is one of the priorities of Ukraine
as an elected member of the Council. We welcome the
constructive and results-oriented approach taken by
the Spanish chairmanship during the comprehensive
review of the resolution’s implementation, which is to
be completed by the end of 2016. It is important that
that endeavour also focus on ways to ensure that the
relevant international legal norms are fully respected
and implemented by all States.
Today, however, the full implementation of the
resolution is being undermined by one of the members
of the 1540 Committee. The Russian Federation
committed not only an act of military aggression
against a sovereign State Member of the United
Nations — Ukraine — but also, having violated all the
relevant international rules and norms, invaded certain
nuclear sites in Ukrainian territory, namely, in Crimea.
The occupation of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea
and the ongoing Russian aggression in the east of
Ukraine have left the low-enriched uranium research
reactor in Sevastopol without due control on the part of
the Ukrainian national regulators, as well as two nuclear
repositories and more than 1,200 radionuclide sources.
It is worth recalling that resolution 1540 (2004)
established an obligation, under Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations, for all Member States
to develop and enforce appropriate legal and regulatory
measures against the proliferation of chemical,
biological, radiological and nuclear weapons and their
means of delivery, in particular to prevent the spread of
weapons of mass destruction to non-State actors, and to
abstain from providing of any financial help to them.
By carrying out military aggression against
Ukraine and providing illegal armed groups with
modern weapons and financing them, Russia has
16-26652

23/08/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

brutally violated that obligation, which it assumed
voluntarily under resolution 1540 (2004). In particular,
it has destroyed the security system of the industrial
sites and plants situated in the territories of the Luhansk
and Donetsk regions of Ukraine that contain chemical,
biological and radioactive materials. To be precise,
according to the data of the State Nuclear Regulatory
Inspectorate of Ukraine, in the temporarily occupied
territories of eastern Ukraine alone, the Russian
aggression has left 65 enterprises that use sources of
ionizing radiation without proper controls.
Furthermore, because of external aggression,
Ukraine has lost its State border control over some
areas of the Luhansk and Donetsk regions bordering
Russia. As a result, some parts of the Ukrainian border
can be used by smugglers to illegally transfer into, or
through, the territory of Ukraine chemical, biological
and radioactive materials from Russia. That overall
situation poses a real threat to the non-proliferation
regime and, without a doubt, violates the key principles
of resolution 1540 (2004). In that regard, we have time
and again urged all States to seek to influence the
Russian Federation in all possible ways in order to stop
its aggressive and hostile actions against Ukraine and
finally to abide by its obligations in accordance with
resolution 1540 (2004).
In conclusion, let me reiterate Ukraine’s unwavering
commitment to universal respect for and integrity of
the global non-proliferation regime.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank His Excellency Mr. Ahmad Zahid Hamidi,
Deputy Prime Minister of Malaysia, for presiding over
today’s meeting of the Security Council. I also thank
the Secretary-General and all the speakers for their
valuable briefings.
At the outset, I wish to thank the Malaysian
presidency for its initiative to convene this open
debate on the non-proliferation of weapons of massive
destruction, which is of particular importance for the
Council’s work and constitutes a key forum for the
ongoing exchange of ideas and viewpoints with regard
to the global review process of resolution 1540 (2004)
as we seek to address that threat, which faces all of us.
Uruguay, as a non-nuclear-weapon State, as a
member country of the first nuclear-weapon-free zone,
which was established by the Treaty of Tlatelolco, and
as a State party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons, is committed to strengthening

S/PV.7758

of the disarmament and non-proliferation regime.
Uruguay’s accession to the normative multilateral
framework is greatly complemented by its foreign
policy, which promotes and favours the need to
continue to make progress in universal and transparent
negotiations with a view to achieving comprehensive
and complete disarmament under a strict international
regime. Faithful to our commitment to disarmament
and non-proliferation, Uruguay has signed and ratified
the majority of the existing international and regional
treaties on that subject and has fulfilled its reporting
obligations to the relevant Security Council committees
as they pertain to non-proliferation. In addition, we
provide information on an ad hoc basis to the United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Committee.
Uruguay has promoted the establishment of nuclearweapon-free zones as an effective way to achieve
the goal of the full elimination of nuclear weapons.
The nuclear-weapon-free zone in Latin America
and the Caribbean is an example of the promotion
of international peace and security. In addition to
being a country that, throughout its history, has never
received material to fabricate nuclear weapons nor has
it acquired such arms to ensure its survival as a State,
we share the legitimate concern of the vast majority
of the international community that we should ensure
the existence of genuine measures to protect us when
threatened by the possible use, or the threat of use, of
these weapons, whether by States or by non-State actors.
That is why we encourage the international community
to undertake all feasible efforts to make it possible to
achieve the goal of nuclear non-proliferation. Uruguay
understands that, until such a time as nuclear weapons
are completely eliminated, the greatest political priority
should be assigned to negotiations that will lead to
the approval of a universal, unconditional and legally
binding instrument on negative security assurances,
so that we can faithfully meet our obligations and
ensure that there is no distinction between nuclear and
non-nuclear States.
It is also important to bring about the effective
implementation of multilateral treaties that have as
their goal to eliminate or prevent the proliferation
of nuclear, chemical or biological weapons and the
importance for all States parties to those treaties to
fully implement them in order to promote international
stability. In that regard, we would encourage all
Member States to fully comply with their obligations
and to respect their commitments with regard to arms

16-2665217/76

S/PV.7758

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

control, disarmament and non-proliferation in all their
aspects with regard to all weapons of mass destruction
and their delivery systems.
Uruguay expresses its firm condemnation of
the launches and continuing provocations by North
Korea, which further escalate tensions on the Korean
peninsula and constitute a clear violation of Security
Council resolutions and a threat to international peace
and security. Likewise, we reiterate the need for,
and appropriateness of, continuing to work towards
a peaceful, diplomatic and political solution for the
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.
The proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons and their delivery systems constitutes a threat
to international peace and security. The best preventive
tool that we have today is resolution 1540 (2004). That
is why we believe that today’s discussion will contribute
in great part to the process of the comprehensive review
of the resolution, which is being conducted under the
leadership of Spain by the Security Council Committee
established in accordance with resolution 1540 (2004).
Uruguay is extremely concerned about the growing
threat of terrorism and the risk that non-State actors
could acquire, develop or use nuclear, chemical or
biological weapons and their delivery systems or
traffick those weapons, which could have unpredictable
and devastating consequences for humankind. The
existence of those groups and their close relationship
with weapons of mass destruction, the rapid advances
in science and technology and the current bloody
conflicts serve to further alert us to the danger of their
use by non-State actors. The use of chemical weapons
in Middle Eastern countries shows just how dangerous
that threat is.
That is why we need to take urgent measures, in
conformity with the Charter of the United Nations
and international law, leading to effective responses
to threats to international peace and security caused
by non-State actors. Cooperation and the exchange
of best practices among States in the fight against
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction are
essential to counter the illicit trafficking by non-State
actors in nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and
their delivery systems and related materials, as well
as intensifying the coordination of efforts at national,
regional, subregional and international levels, as
appropriate, in order to strengthen the response to this
serious global threat.
18/76

23/08/2016

Transparency in the work of the 1540 Committee
is very important. The high visibility of the open
consultations during the Committee’s work in June
is proof of that, and that is why we urge the ongoing
promotion of measures and activities that involve
the participation of all Member States in pursuit of
strengthening and improving the implementation of
that resolution. Likewise, the need to bolster assistance
and collaboration among States, between the 1540
Committee and States and between 1540 Committee
and the relevant international, regional and subregional
organizations to help States implement resolution 1540
(2004) is essential.
Resolution 1887 (2009) is another pillar of the
non-proliferation regime. In paragraph 23 it refers to
the need for the full implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). In the same way, States should take all the
appropriate measures, in accordance with their national
legislation and national authorities and consistent with
international law, to strengthen export controls, to
control access to intangible transfers of technology and
to information that could be used to develop weapons of
mass destruction and their delivery systems, to prevent
the financing of proliferation and the transport of such
materials and to protect sensitive materials.
Uruguay will be part of all initiatives that will lead
to the successful comprehensive review of resolution
1540 (2004) and the strengthening of the functions of
the 1540 Committee.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than four minutes.
Mr. Taula (New Zealand): We thank Malaysia for
organizing this important open debate.
The past two years have been troubling ones for
efforts to prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction (WMDs). The threat of the acquisition
and use of such weapons by non-State actors is no
longer a hypothetical question. We have seen credible
allegations of the use of toxic chemicals as weapons
against civilians in Syria, by both non-State actors and
by a State party to the Chemical Weapons Convention.
Terrorist groups, such as the Islamic State of Iraq and
the Levant, have demonstrated that they are capable
and willing to use such weapons. Insecure stockpiles
in countries experiencing conflict have heightened
the risk of dangerous weapons or precursors falling
into the wrong hands. The increasing accessibility
of information and rapid advances in science and
16-26652

23/08/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

technology have brought WMD capabilities within
reach of many dangerous non-State actors.
It was precisely to prevent such outcomes that
resolution 1540 (2004) was adopted. That resolution was
the Security Council’s first attempt at a comprehensive
response to the risks relating to non-State actors. It
imposed obligations on all Member States regarding
implementation, monitoring and reporting. The
comprehensive review of resolution 1540 (2004)
currently under way is therefore very timely. It provides
an opportunity to consider whether the existing
regime is adequate and effective, and how it can be
strengthened. New Zealand agrees that consideration
should be given to a new draft resolution later this year
to update the resolution 1540 (2004) framework in the
light of the review.
New Zealand will continue to focus on three
main objectives.
First, we want to ensure that the resolution 1540
92004) framework is fit for purpose and capable of
meeting emerging threats and challenges.
Secondly, we support a sharpened strategic focus
by prioritizing the work of the Group of Experts of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) towards issues and regions of
identified risk, vulnerability and need. In that regard,
New Zealand supports empowering the Group of
Experts to proactively identify and approach States
to propose in-country visits. That would better ensure
resources are targeted to activities and regions where
they can have the greatest impact. Such visits would
of course still require the consent of the host country.
New Zealand also supports a more flexible approach
to engaging States with low risk profiles. While we
recognize the importance of universal implementation
of the regime established by resolution 1540 (2004),
we caution against an approach that measures
success simply by counting the laws enacted or the
reports submitted.
Thirdly, we need to ensure that the compliance
burdens are both necessary and realistic, especially
for small States. That requires restraint in imposing
new obligations, as well as a willingness to consider
flexible approaches. There is little sense in taking a
rigid, one-size-fits all approach to States that do not
produce, store or act as transit points for sensitive
materials. Similarly, we see little value in imposing
additional reporting requirements and new universal

S/PV.7758

legal obligations that are not realistic or justified for
small States with limited capacities. Exploring flexible,
pragmatic approaches for such States, such as reducing
reporting for low-risk States and affording a greater
role for regional organizations, could help smaller
States improve their implementation while reducing
compliance burdens. Focusing outreach and support in
complementary areas such as counter-terrorism, border
security, non-proliferation and export controls can also
help small States.
That is the approach New Zealand has taken in
supporting the implementation efforts of our partners
in our region, most recently in a workshop we hosted
for Pacific Island countries with the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, the Pacific Islands Forum
secretariat, the Financial Action Task Force, the AsiaPacific Group on Money Laundering and the 1540
Committee Group of Experts.
Reform of the current assistance mechanism is also
important for small States. The input of the Group of
Experts is critical in helping to develop clear requests
for support. We would support a review of whether
the current composition of the Group is adequate for
that purpose.
The recent actions of non-State actors in Syria
and Iraq in making and using chemicals as weapons
has raised questions regarding the adequacy of current
international frameworks. For example, while the
Chemical Weapons Convention clearly prohibits the use
of chemical weapons by anyone, including non-State
actors, there is currently no explicit requirement for
States parties to the Convention to report chemical
weapons-related activities by non-State actors in their
territory to the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW). Nor is there a duty on
States parties to investigate such activities. We welcome
the ongoing discussions in the OPCW on options for
addressing this issue. We also welcome the OPCW
establishment of a rapid response assistance team for
dealing with alleged incidents.
There may also be scope for the Council to
complement these efforts. For example, we would see
merit in considering steps the Council might take to
encourage and support States to monitor, investigate
and report possible chemical weapons activities by
non-State actors within their jurisdiction, as well as
to reaffirm the various investigative tools available to
the international community. We could also consider

16-2665219/76

S/PV.7758

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

ways to ensure regular reporting to keep the Council
fully apprised of incidents of chemical weapons use by
non-State actors so that it can respond appropriately.
In addition, consistent with its recent decision
with respect to Libya, the Council could signal its
commitment to considering authorizing the transfer
of chemical weapons or precursors to other States for
destruction in situations where they have been seized
from non-State actors or are at risk of falling into their
hands. That would, of course, have to be done in close
cooperation with the OPCW.
Finally, we echo the comments made by the
Secretary-General and High Representative Won-soo
that we must restart progress on the disarmament and
non-proliferation agenda. It is only through complete
and verifiable nuclear disarmament that we can be sure
to eradicate nuclear-related weapons of mass destruction
and to eliminate their chances of being used.
Mr. Moustafa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): We
welcome your presence here today, Sir, to preside
over this open debate. We welcome all the efforts of
the Malaysian presidency to organize this meeting and
thank you for the concept debate for this discussion
(S/2016/712, annex).
This meeting is taking place at a time of very
difficult international circumstances with respect to
the spread of terrorist groups and non-State actors,
especially in the Middle East, and the ensuing risk of
their obtaining chemical, biological, radiological and
nuclear weapons of mass destruction. We must work to
prevent such a disaster at all costs. Over the past 12
months, the world has become even more complex and
dangerous than in the past. Security challenges have
emerged at the international level in a horrifying way.
Terrorist groups have expanded their scope of action.
Chemical weapons have been used by Da’esh and
other terrorist groups in the Middle East, causing
widespread destruction and suffering in Iraq and
possibly in Syria. There is a danger of this threat
spreading to Libya, given the ease with which terrorists
seem to move and travel from Syria and Iraq. We may
one day see Da’esh and other terrorist groups move
from Libya to the Horn of Africa. We note that last
month the Security Council adopted resolution 2298
(2016), concerning the destruction of Libya’s chemical
weapons, so as to minimize the danger of such materials
falling into the hands of terrorist groups, especially
Da’esh. However, the mere fact that terrorists possess
20/76

23/08/2016

the necessary knowledge and are able to travel to Libya
poses a threat to the region and the world at large.
The merging security threats facing the
international community require sustained attention
if we are to prevent terrorist entities from acquiring
and using such materials. We all know that modern
technologies — such as 3-D printing, the dark net,
genetic modification, drones and many other scientific
technologies and developments — are all dual-use in
nature and pose a potential deadly threat to humankind
as a whole. The main concern now is to determine how
to address the danger posed by these materials were
they to fall into the hands of terrorists.
In that respect, 2016 is a pivotal year for the
efforts of the United Nations and, more specifically,
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004). The Security Council is currently reviewing
all measures adopted since 2004 to assess our current
position and to attempt to create a comprehensive and
effective model for a future free of weapons of mass
destruction, where such weapons would have no chance
of falling into the hands of terrorists. That is why we
believe that the comprehensive review of resolution
1540 (2004), superbly led by Spain, should be based on
two tracks.
First, we need a strategy to strengthen cooperation
with
international,
regional
and
subregional
organizations, including in the framework of
technical assistance, the exchange of information and
experiences, and capacity-building. We must of course
remain mindful of the specificities of the mandates of
multiple organizations. Council members know that
one of the most significant obstacles to the effective
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) is the lack
of an implementation mechanism. In that regard,
we call for the establishment of focal points in every
organization to build a global interactive network
in which all actors would play a full role in unifying
content, methods and objectives at all levels.
Secondly, we must cooperate and coordinate at the
national level between Governments and national public
and private organizations. That is of critical importance,
especially with respect to exporting States. There is a
need to enhance awareness-raising programmes in
the technical and legal fields and to disseminate best
practices so as to ensure that dangerous materials do
not fall into the hands of terrorists.
16-26652

23/08/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

In conclusion, I should like to reiterate that
Egypt has spared no effort at the national, Arab,
African and international levels in participating in
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and
the follow-up resolution 1997 (2011), especially in its
role as coordinator of the Working Group established
pursuant to resolution 1566 (2004). We also recall that
the best way to guarantee that terrorists will not acquire
such weapons is to eliminate them from the world. We
therefore call upon the international community to
establish a zone free of weapons of mass destruction in
the Middle East so as to strengthen international peace
and security for the good of all humankind.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Venezuela) (spoke in
Spanish): We wish to congratulate you, Sir, the Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Home Affairs of
Malaysia, for having convened this important debate,
and we also thank your delegation. We also very
much appreciate the concept note (S/2016/712, annex)
that was submitted to guide delegations with regard
to addressing this issue. We also want to welcome
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and thank him for his
relevant contributions to discussions on this matter. We
would like to thank Mr. Emmanuel Roux of INTERPOL,
Mr. Gregory Koblentz of George Mason University
and Mr. Kim Won-soo, High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, for their important contributions
in addressing this issue, which is particularly important
to my country.
Weapons of mass destruction pose a serious threat
to international peace and security, and are therefore
among today’s greatest and most urgent challenges. The
actions perpetrated by terrorist groups and non-State
actors show their intentions to use weapons of mass
destruction as a means to achieve their criminal goals.
The use of such weapons is no longer a hypothetical
construct, but a reality, as evidenced by the recent
allegations concerning the use of improvised chemical
weapons in the Middle East. In that regard, terrorists
groups, such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham,
participate in illegal commercial activities that ensure
them a wide range of resources, and they have shown
the ability to recruit individuals with the skills to
develop a programme for the development of weapons
of mass destruction.
The need to contain the risk of the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction to non-State actors
has increased considerably with the evolving nature
of terrorism — and has become even more acute with

S/PV.7758

the advances in science, technology and international
trade. Those advances have altered the traditional
patterns of proliferation. Over the past 12 years,
scientists have made discoveries in the fields of
artificial intelligence, robotics, the Internet, selfdriving vehicles, 3D printing, meta-data, virtual reality,
virtual currency, nanotechnology, genetic engineering
and biotechnology. All of those technologies have a
dual use: they can be used for peaceful purposes but
also can be used as agents of destabilization.
The Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) was set up to address the illegal markets
for the exchange of goods and knowledge that could be
used by non-State actors to develop weapons of mass
destruction, and as such, it has a very relevant role to
play in preventing the use of new technologies that run
contrary to the purposes of peace and development.
However, the Committee’s resources, capacities and
engagements are limited. Because of that, it must find
an area of concrete
​​
and realistic action. Otherwise, it
risks seeing its effective functioning compromised.
In the nuclear and chemical areas, the work of the
Committee is redundant, given the mechanisms of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW). In the area of customs
​​
control, the World
Customs Organization (WCO) is better suited to offer
assistance. The work of United Nations agencies such as
the Office on Drugs and Crime and non-governmental
organizations such as the Verification Research,
Training and Information Centre sometimes exceed
the potential contributions of the Committee. The
limited availability of resources, which are allocated
by donors, also seriously hampers its ability to provide
international assistance efficiently that takes into
account the needs and priorities of the receiving State.
Through its qualified Group of Experts, the
Committee can play an important role in helping States
develop a comprehensive national plan to prevent
non-State actors from gaining access to weapons
of mass destruction. Each agency and organization
provides assistance only in its respective area of
expertise: the IAEA in the nuclear area, the OPCW in
the chemical area and the WCO in the area of customs.
​​
But States do not have the necessary assistance at the
international level to design and implement a coherent
strategy to prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction to non-State actors.

16-2665221/76

S/PV.7758

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

The 1540 Committee has been active for some
years. It is therefore time for it to make that task its main
function. The Committee could also make significant
contributions in the biological area and in providing
advice on the implementation of export controls, where
there are no organizations or agencies responsible for
that function or where those that do exist are very
weak. But we need to assess whether or not it has the
capacities necessary to carry out that role efficiently,
or if it needs to be reinforced. Similarly, in order to
maximize its effectiveness, the Committee must take
into account the context in which the resolution is
implemented. For example, a significant number of
countries throughout the world do not produce or export
materials that could be used to create a weapon of mass
destruction. Accordingly, the work of the Committee
should focus on the implementation of those aspects of
the resolution that are related more specifically to each
individual country.
The development, production, stockpiling and use
of chemical and biological weapons have been banned,
as manifested by the existence of the conventions that
regulate such materials. However, to date we do not have
a similar convention in the nuclear area. Therefore, if
we want to prevent such weapons from being acquired
by non-State actors, it is imperative that we have the
commitment of the nuclear and the non-nuclear-weapon
States and those that have not acceded to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)
to fulfil basic nuclear-weapons-control and nuclear
disarmament agreements.
Above all, we believe that a road map for
nuclear disarmament should be developed and that it
should be verifiable and irreversible, according to
a pre-established timetable. We are concerned that
almost 50 years after the signing of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and thirty years
after the end of the Cold War, there are more than
20,000 nuclear warheads that are at risk of being used.
It is regrettable that the two measures that are perceived
as the steps essential for nuclear disarmament and have
been the focus of the attention of the international
community for years, namely, the entry into force of
the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and the
negotiation of an internationally verifiable treaty
banning the production of fissile material for use in
nuclear weapons, are stalled.
In July 1996, the International Court of Justice
unanimously declared in an advisory opinion the
22/76

23/08/2016

obligation of States possessing nuclear weapons,
under Article VI of the NPT, to conduct negotiations
on nuclear disarmament in good faith. However, the
security doctrines of the major nuclear-weapon States
continue to give such weapons top priority, not by
advocating their elimination but by arranging for their
modernization. Making progress in the full elimination
of nuclear weapons requires the commitment of
everyone, including those countries that are not parties
to the NPT.
Just as we were able to make progress in areas
of particular interest to the international community
for the purposes of peace, security, development and
human rights, we must also be able to achieve nuclear
disarmament. Only then will we be able to genuinely
confront the use of weapons of mass destruction by
non-State actors.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes seeing you, Sir, the Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Home Affairs of Malaysia,
preside in person over the 7758th meeting of the Security
Council, which your country has judiciously chosen
to dedicate to the crucial issue of non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. I would therefore like to
thank and congratulate the delegation of Malaysia for
having taken this initiative, which will undoubtedly
allow us to further deepen our reflection on the issue
and intensify our already steadfast mobilization within
the framework of the full review of resolution 1540
(2004), whose eponymous Committee Spain is chairing
so effectively.
I would also like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his briefing, as well as Mr. Emmanuel
Roux, Special Representative of INTERPOL to the
United Nations, and Mr. Gregory Koblentz of George
Mason University, who in their outstanding briefings
laid out fully the scale of the multidimensional
challenges we face in the area of the non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction, their means of delivery
and associated materials.
The delegation of Senegal aligns itself with the
statement to be delivered shortly by the representative of
the Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries.
This debate could not be more topical, given the
risk of nuclear, biological, chemical proliferation. It is
aggravated by several factors, among them the crisis
in the global nuclear non-proliferation regime, the
16-26652

23/08/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

resumption of a frenetic arms race with weapons that are
increasingly advanced and miniaturized, vulnerabilities
made possible by scientific and technological progress
and by information and communication technologies,
and industrial and trade globalization.
We must face those challenges in the global context
of terrorism and violent extremism, including in the vast
Sahelo-Saharan region. Those challenges underpinned
the adoption of resolution 1977 (2011), which tasked the
Committee established pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1540 (2004) with conducting an in-depth
review of the state of progress of the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). The resulting process has
included a number of cycles of consultation with all
Member States, international, regional and subregional
organizations, as well as civil society.
The Senegalese delegation is of the view that
the culmination of the process took place during the
official public consultations on 20 and 22 June here in
New York, during which the essential recommendation
was to redirect actions and strategies towards a more
comprehensive, coordinated, cohesive and sustainable
approach aimed at ensuring international peace and
security in the face of the multiple challenges posed by
proliferation. Senegal hopes that the concrete, practical
and appropriate measures proposed by Member States
will be effectively put in place with a view to facilitating
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
An analysis of the data regarding Africa shows
some ongoing progress in the implementation of those
measures, particularly in the drafting of appropriate
legislation and the submission of implementation
reports. Congratulations are in order, but we must
recall that those measures must be improved,
specifically through the implementation of national
legal frameworks on biological weapons.
Such measures are still missing in several African
countries, and they must be accompanied by effective
internal control mechanisms dealing with sensitive
materials and technologies. My delegation notes the
political commitment of the African Union to ensuring
that its member States implement the resolution, which
is best reflected through the Review and Assistance
Conference on the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004), held in Addis Ababa in April. That is why
the delegation of Senegal calls for the strengthening
of the proposed cooperative operations between the
Committee and African States, most of which have

S/PV.7758

enjoyed its support in the effective implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004).
In that spirit, we will be able to make strides,
particularly in the context of improving assistance
procedures for identifying and analysing needs
for material assistance as well as the maintenance
of
continued
dialogue
on
assistance
with
interested subregional, regional, international and
non-governmental organizations. Such an effort
obviously requires building the capacity of the
Committee and its experts. In a similar vein, Senegal
supports the establishment of national focal points
and calls upon Member States that have the necessary
resources to contribute to that effort. Senegal believes
that the establishment of a permanent mechanism to
improve the interaction and coordination between those
who provide and those who benefit from assistance is
crucial so as to avoid duplicating work and identify best
practices in that regard. An approach of that nature will
clearly require ongoing commitment and considerable
long-term financing.
Senegal, for its part, is not only a party to nearly all
international counter-terrorism conventions, but in 2006
it also ratified the Pelindaba Treaty for the establishment
of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Africa. Domestically,
Senegal adopted, among other legislation, Act 200636 on 16 October 2006, banning the development,
production, stockpiling and use of chemical weapons
and providing for their destruction, which is entirely
consistent with the Convention on the Prohibition of
the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of
Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction.
Three years later, my country adopted a law
on nuclear security and radiation health. In the
area of biological weapons, draft legislation is
being drawn up that will incorporate the relevant
provisions of the 1972 Convention on the Prohibition
of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of
Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on
Their Destruction, as well as those set out in resolution
1540 (2004). At the institutional level, Senegal has
in place a national commission on nuclear, biological
and chemical weapons, a radiation health and nuclear
safety authority and a nuclear, radiological, biological,
chemical group attached to the national firefighters
brigade. Senegal recently adopted a voluntary five-year
plan of action for the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004).

16-2665223/76

S/PV.7758

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Relevant international organizations and other
interested sectors within international civil society,
including the industrial and commercial sectors, have an
important role to play in the fight against proliferation.
Their contribution in the form of organizing workshops
on the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and
providing assistance is significant, especially in
African countries. That role was highlighted at the
meeting held in Abidjan in February at the behest of
the Inter-Parliamentary Union. That meeting afforded
an opportunity for legislators from various African
countries to note the challenges relating to the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction in
Africa and to reflect on how to bolster national legal
frameworks set up in order to implement resolution
1540 (2004).
As the briefers this morning amply demonstrated,
the rapid progress in science and technology, the
march of globalization and an ever-changing business
environment are new elements that could be exploited
by ill-intentioned non-State actors in order to acquire
weapons of mass destruction. It is imperative to
tailor existing measures or to adopt new ones so as to
definitively prevent them from doing so.
Therefore, in connection with the fight against the
proliferation of chemical weapons in Syria, Senegal
welcomes the implementation of the Joint Mission
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons and the United Nations for the elimination
of the chemical weapons programme of the Syrian
Arab Republic, charged with identifying people,
entities, groups and Governments guilty of using
chemical weapons, including chlorine gas. The success
of its mandate is a good example of cooperation and
assistance in that field.
The delegation of Senegal hopes that 1540
Committee will continue to focus its efforts on
facilitating the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004), on assistance, cooperation and awarenessraising regarding the specific obligations stemming
from the resolution.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the firm
commitment and unflagging willingness of Senegal to
spare no effort in contributing in its national, subregional
and international capacities to the global fight against
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Malaysian presidency for organizing
24/76

23/08/2016

this open debate on a topic as important as that of the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
I also thank the Secretary-General as well as the
various speakers — Mr. Emmanuel Roux, Mr. Gregory
Koblentz and Mr. Kim Won-soo — for their briefings.
The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and their means of delivery poses a serious threat to
international peace and security. North Korea is ardently
pursuing its forced march along the path of nuclear- and
ballistic-missile programmes. Pyongyang conducted
its fourth nuclear test on 6 January and launched an
unprecedented number of ballistic missile over the past
few months, each time improving the technologies it
needs to acquire deliverable nuclear weapons. As the
Parliamentary Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Japan just pointed out, those destabilizing actions in
violation of Security Council resolutions are a clear
challenge to the non-proliferation regime, which is the
cornerstone of our collective security.
In Syria, allegations of the use of chemical weapons
by the regime have continued since the beginning of
the conflict, despite the Security Council’s resolutions
and its unanimous condemnations. The recent chemical
attacks on 1 August in Saraqeb and 10 August in
Aleppo, airdropped from helicopters, have again killed
a woman and two children. The conclusions of the
report of the Joint Investigation Mechanism expected
this week are therefore eagerly anticipated. The Council
will then have to shoulder its responsibilities and take
the necessary measures, as it committed to doing in
resolution 2118 (2013). The perpetrators of these attacks
will be held to account. The ban imposed on the use of
these inhumane weapons must be restored.
Allegations of their use are compounded by
remaining uncertainties regarding the Syrian
Government’s declaration on its chemical programme
to the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons: the possible existence of residual capabilities
on Syrian territory only increases the risk of the
proliferation of such weapons and their falling into
the hands of terrorist groups. The comprehensive
implementation of resolution 2118 (2013) requires us to
remain vigilant on this issue. The lack of transparency
shown by a State party to the Convention on the
Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling
and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction
weakens the global non-proliferation regime.
16-26652

23/08/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

In the context I just described, the risk of the
proliferation of nuclear, radiological, biological and
chemical materials and their falling into the hands
of terrorists groups is unfortunately no longer some
distant potential risk, but rather an imminent threat.
Reports reaching us from Iraq and Syria on the use of
chemical weapons by Da’esh underscore the reality of
the threat. The security of radioactive sources in the
territories controlled by this terrorist group is also of
grave concern.
Twelve years ago, the international community and
the Security Council responded to this risk by adopting
resolution 1540 (2004). The resolution, together
with the Committee responsible for monitoring its
implementation, marked a decisive step in preventing
the risk of weapons of mass destruction falling into the
hands of non-State actors. Resolution 1540 (2004) now
constitutes one of the essential tools available to Member
States in the fight against this threat, and undeniable
progress in its implementation has been achieved.
Today, the majority of States throughout the world has
adopted measures aimed at transcribing the provisions
of the resolution into their national legislation. Whether
this concerns the physical protection of sensitive
materials, the strengthening of border controls or
the setting up of export-control mechanisms, the
international community is vigilant in preventing
nuclear, radiological, biological and chemical materials
from falling into the hands of terrorists. Furthermore,
the main international, regional and subregional
organizations have adopted strategies to implement and
promote the measures set out in the resolution.
France, too, is shouldering its responsibilities.
Within the framework of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), we coordinate the
working group on assistance, which constitutes an
essential component of the Committee’s work aimed
at developing countries. France actively supports its
partner States, including through substantial financing,
in order to help them repatriate to France sources that
might otherwise become orphaned.
Today, independent assessments by the 1540 (2004)
Group of Experts show that the implementation of the
resolution has progressed throughout the world and
in all areas. But, as Mr. Koblentz stated, the threats
are evolving as well, and new challenges await us.
The comprehensive review of the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004), which is currently under
way under the leadership of Spain, should provide

S/PV.7758

an opportunity for us all to tailor and strengthen our
tools to better combat the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction and the risk of their falling into the
hands of terrorists. France supports strengthening the
operational role of the 1540 (2004) Committee, as well
as of its expertise and the matching of requests for and
offers of assistance.
Furthermore, France believes that the security of
radioactive sources should be strengthened throughout
the world, particularly with regard to highly active
sealed sources. That is the aim of the joint declaration
proposed by France at the Nuclear Safety Summit in
Washington, D.C., this year, which was supported by
28 States. It is also the goal of the draft resolution
to be submitted to the First Committee of General
Assembly. Indeed, the theft of such materials, although
infrequent, is highly troubling, and there could be
serious consequences if such materials are acquired
by terrorists.
I would like to conclude on a hopeful note: the
comprehensive review of the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) affords us a unique opportunity
to strengthen our collective security, to better prevent
the risks of proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and their means of delivery, and to strengthen the
protection of sensitive materials and goods. We hope
by the end of this year to achieve more rigorous and
effective implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
I would once again assure the Security Council of
France’s commitment in this area.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I would like
to thank Malaysia for organizing today’s meeting, as
well as to especially thank you, Mr. Hamidi, for being
with us here today. Your presence, Sir, underscores the
significance of the issue.
It is important to recall the achievements
that the Security Council has made in the area of
non-proliferation, including through the framework
of resolution 1540 (2004), which focuses on non-State
actors. But we must also focus on what the Council
must do to confront the proliferation threats that certain
States, including Syria and the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, pose to the international community.
Since 2004, resolution 1540 (2004) has become
the foundation of our global non-State-actor counterproliferation architecture. It has helped prevent the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs)
and the abuse of legitimate trade and scientific

16-2665225/76

S/PV.7758

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

cooperation for such purposes. Nonetheless, the
threat posed by the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery remains real
and continues to evolve, as one of our briefers today,
Mr. Gregory Koblentz, detailed this morning in a very
interesting, but also very sobering, statement.
State and non-State actors continue to use
chemical weapons in the Middle East, and nuclear
and radioactive material has been stolen or appeared
for sale on the black market. Meanwhile, the bright
promise of synthetic biology also comes with attendant
perils, and the increasing availability of drones expands
the potential for their being used to deliver biological,
chemical and radiological materials.
While most countries have taken many steps to
implement their obligations under the resolution,
persistent and important gaps remain. The United States
has strongly supported a robust second comprehensive
review of resolution 1540 (2004), due for completion
at the end of this year. We greatly appreciate Spain’s
leadership throughout the review. We believe that
resolution 1540 (2004) is of fundamental importance
to international security. In fact, the United States has
taken the lead and is looking for ways to revitalize the
resolution framework. In our view, it is important for
all countries to engage in that effort.
We have been an active participant throughout the
comprehensive review, submitting 25 proposals during
the open consultations on resolution 1540 (2004)
in June. We believe those proposals will strengthen
resolution 1540 (2004) in the areas of implementation,
assistance, cooperation and outreach. For example, we
have urged the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) to share more
openly the information that Member States provide
about non-proliferation efforts. We also want to see the
Committee improve its communication plan to make the
information more accessible to Governments and to the
public. That is especially relevant in today’s discussion,
because we hope that, with our combined efforts, we
can work to make resolution 1540 (2004) an even better
vehicle for clamping down on evolving non-State actors
and WMD threats. The WMD proliferation threat
remains ever-present.
The situation in Syria, for example, only underscores
that we need to pay attention to both non-State actors
and States that are operating in defiance of global
non-proliferation norms. In fact, recent events in Syria
26/76

23/08/2016

highlight that the use of chemical weapons by both
State and non-State actors threatens our collective
security. As we have stated before, the United States
condemns in the strongest terms any use of chemical
weapons. Yesterday in the Council (see S/PV.7757), I
noted that 21 August marked the three-year anniversary
of the gruesome chemical weapons attack in Ghouta,
Syria. The United States remains determined to pursue
accountability for that attack. Syria is a State party to
the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC), and the use
of chemical weapons by the Al-Assad regime violates
the Convention, as well as resolution 2118 (2013). We
have made clear our assessment that the Al-Assad
regime has repeatedly used chlorine as a chemical
weapon against the Syrian people. We remain deeply
concerned that such attacks appear to be continuing,
including some this past month that media reporting
indicated involved the use of chlorine dropped from
helicopters. Against that backdrop, we look to the
final report of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism later this month. Those responsible for
the use of chemical weapons in Syria must be held
accountable for their actions.
But Syria is not the only place where we face
non-proliferation challenges with respect to State
actors. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
which has conducted four nuclear tests in this decade
and is the only State to test a nuclear weapon this
century, continues to ignore the Council’s repeated
calls to stop such actions — which are without
question a threat to international peace and security.
Just in the past week, a Japanese newspaper reported a
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea statement that
they had reprocessed nuclear fuel into plutonium and
were producing the highly enriched uranium necessary
for nuclear weapons.
The Security Council has adopted five resolutions,
most recently resolution 2270 (2016) in March, imposing
sanctions on the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. The full implementation of the resolution
will disrupt the illicit activities of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, including disrupting the
repatriation of currency from prohibited arms sales that
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea uses to fund
its nuclear and ballistic missile programmes.
Despite those challenges, when Member States
have been unified and determined in their efforts, we
have been able to make important progress towards
16-26652

23/08/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

addressing non-proliferation, including with respect to
non-State actors. More generally, the Nuclear Security
Summits have been key venues for dialogue, where the
United States has led international efforts to improve
nuclear security. From the first summit, in Washington,
D.C., in 2010, to the fourth Summit, concluded this
year, more than 50 world leaders and four international
organizations have worked together to prevent nuclear
terrorism and to counter nuclear-material smuggling,
thereby catalysing efforts to secure and eliminate
nuclear and other radioactive material.
We share the concern voiced today about the use
of chemical weapons by Da’esh/ Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant. To combat that threat, the United States
believes we need to apply the multifaceted tools we have
within the existing international framework to include
the Chemical Weapons Convention, the Biological
Weapons Convention, the International Convention for
the Suppression of Terrorist Bombings and resolution
1540 (2004), which, among other things, obligates
States to secure chemical weapon-related materials.
In addition, we should utilize, and where necessary
bolster, the existing capacities of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons to address the
threat from non-State actors’ use of chemical weapons.
The universal implementation of, and adherence to, the
CWC, the Biological Weapons Convention, the Terrorist
Bombing Convention and resolution 1540 (2004) is the
best defence against the development of chemical and
biological weapons and their acquisition and use by
non-State actors.
Finally, we fully understand the desire to do
everything we can to combat the spread of chemical
and biological weapons, but we believe that proposals
that call for the establishment of a new convention on
the suppression of chemical and biological terrorism
are misleading and are founded on the false premise
that there are legal gaps in the existing international
framework to combat the use of chemical and biological
weapons by non-State actors.
In conclusion, we look forward to working with
everyone in the coming months to thoroughly evaluate
what more can be done to address the range of the
WMD proliferation challenges we all face, including
proliferation by non-State actors.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates Malaysia’s initiative in convening today’s
open debate. We welcome the presence here today of

S/PV.7758

Mr. Hamidi, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Home Affairs of Malaysia, to preside over this meeting,
and we would like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his briefing.
Preventing the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction (WMDs) and their means of delivery is of
critical importance to international peace and security.
Thanks to the persistent efforts of the international
community, there is a growing international consensus
on non-proliferation, with non-proliferation mechanisms
improving by the day and cooperation in that respect
steadily moving forward. However, grave challenges
remain on the non-proliferation front. Certain hotspot
issues related to non-proliferation drag on and defy an
easy solution. The universality of international norms
on non-proliferation is yet to be achieved. Advances
in science and technology have lowered the bar for
proliferation. There is an increased risk of non-State
actors, terrorists in particular, acquiring WMDs and
related materials. The unstable security environment
makes some countries feel more threatened, which in
turn increases the risk of proliferation. How to properly
respond to the non-proliferation challenges and the
non-proliferation process is an important task facing
the international community. To that end, China wishes
to put forth the following points
First, with regard to establishing an enabling
international and regional environment, the issue
of non-proliferation is highly complex. Historical
grievances, regional conflicts, security concerns and
terrorism, among other factors, have made it more
difficult to find a solution. The fundamental way out
is to discard the Cold War mentality and to build a fair
and just security landscape, based on joint contributions
and shared benefits; to adopt a new concept of common,
integrated, cooperative and sustainable security; and
to strengthen international and regional cooperation,
thereby eliminating the factors that drive proliferation.
Secondly, with regard to developing and
strengthening the international non-proliferation
regime, thanks to tireless efforts over the years, the
international community has set up an international
non-proliferation regime that is guided by the Charter
of the United Nations and legally anchored in the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
the Chemical Weapons Convention, the Biological
Weapons Convention and the Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban Treaty, and complemented by other relevant
non-proliferation mechanisms. That regime constitutes

16-2665227/76

S/PV.7758

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

an important pillar for the maintenance of international
peace, security and stability. We should adhere
to multilateralism and the principle of consensus
through consultation in working together to properly
maintain and develop the existing international
non-proliferation regime.
Thirdly, with regard to properly addressing
regional non-proliferation hotspot issues, all parties
should stay consistently engaged in the process towards
the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula, remain
committed to the maintenance of peace and stability
of the peninsula, continue to seek solutions through
dialogue and consultation and avoid any provocative
action that could escalate tensions. Non-proliferation
cannot be used as a pretext to beef up military
deployment, step up a military presence and scale up
military exercises.
The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA)
on the Iranian nuclear issue was achieved through
hard work. The relevant parties should intensify
mutual political trust and faithfully fulfil the relevant
obligations to ensure the steadfast implementation of
the JCPOA for far-reaching results.
Fourthly, the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons is the cornerstone of the international
non-proliferation regime. Its universality, authority and
effectiveness should be enhanced on a continuous basis.
The goals related to the Treaty’s three main pillars,
namely, nuclear disarmament, nuclear non-proliferation
and the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, should be
promoted in a comprehensive and balanced manner.
The nuclear-weapon States should fulfil their nuclear
non-proliferation obligations in earnest and reduce
the role of nuclear weapons. While honouring their
obligations in non-proliferation, all countries are
entitled to peacefully partake of the fruits of the
development of the related technologies. We need to
establish and refine the relevant international norms on
non-proliferation in the light of the evolving dynamics
of counter-terrorism and take substantive measures to
prevent WMDs and related materials and technologies
from falling into the hands of terrorists.
Fifthly, with regard to giving fresh impetus to
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), the
resolution, which was the first of its kind devoted
to non-proliferation to be adopted by the Security
Council, reflects the consensus among States on
the issue of non-proliferation. In the context of the
28/76

23/08/2016

new challenges facing the non-proliferation effort,
the international community should adhere to the
mandate of the resolution to the letter and conduct a
comprehensive review of its implementation. That
comprehensive review should focus on the issue of
preventing proliferation by non-State actors and
should be conducive to maintaining State leadership
in the prevention of proliferation, to making the
assistance provided by the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) more productive
and to strengthening capacity-building in developing
countries for the implementation of the resolution.
As a participating builder of, and a contributor
to, the existing international system, China is firmly
opposed to the proliferation of WMDs and their means
of delivery, fulfils its international non-proliferation
obligations with rigorous discipline and is an active
player in both international and regional cooperation.
China supports efforts to build nuclear -weapon-free
zones. We have ratified the Protocol to the Treaty on
a Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone in Central Asia and have
resolved all outstanding issues related to the Protocol to
the Treaty on a Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone in Southeast
Asia, which we look forward to signing as early as
possible. China is supportive of the early convening of
an international conference for a WMD-free zone in the
Middle East.
The implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) is
high on China’s agenda. We have been actively involved
in the comprehensive review process and the work
of the 1540 Committee and its Group of Experts. In
September 2015, China hosted an event in cooperation
within the 1540 Committee, namely, training for the
focal points in the Asia-Pacific region, which is an
important contribution to enhancing capacity-building
in the countries of the region for the implementation of
thae resolution.
In the current circumstances, countries around the
world are evolving into a community with a shared future
and converging interests, but facing a common peril and
safety issues. An effective response to non-proliferation
challenges requires unreserved cooperation across the
international community. China will continue to work
with the international community and do its part to help
improve and develop the international non-proliferation
regime for the maintenance of international peace
and security.
16-26652

23/08/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I join others in
thanking the Malaysian presidency for this opportunity
to exchange views on resolution 1540 (2004). I also
thank the Secretary-General and all the briefers for
their fascinating insights.
The threat of toxic, poisonous or nuclear materials
falling into the hands of non-State actors, particularly
terrorists, is a top priority. It requires the closest
cooperation among all Member States, as well as civil
society and industry. And yet, let us be honest, this is
a complex and technical subject, and we struggle at
times to bring to it the attention it deserves. Resolution
1540 (2004) is not exactly a household name, but it does
have a far-reaching impact, and the briefers did a very
good job today at explaining how far-reaching the new
technologies could be, both as a positive for most people
in the world and as a negative when used by terrorists or
others intent on utilizing those technologies to develop
or to deliver weapons of mass destruction. Therefore,
let us be clear about why we are focusing so much on
the resolution.
Resolution 1540 (2004) boosts the peace and
security of all States. Its full implementation means
action, namely, adopting laws, securing of borders
and safeguarding sensitive materials. We must never
forget those tangible, real world impacts of our work.
I have no doubt that, without resolution 1540 (2004),
the world would be an even more dangerous place. That
is why this year’s comprehensive review matters. The
review process has already given us some powerful
food for thought about the progress and challenges of
implementation for States. We now know that since
2010 there has been a 17 per cent increase across all
non-proliferation measures of the resolution undertaken
by States worldwide.
But we also know that we are only halfway in our
efforts. We must work towards full, universal fulfilment
of those obligations. We know that all regions have
increased implementation, with the fastest growth rates
occurring in Africa and Eastern Europe. And yet there
are also marked differences between regions, with some
much further from full implementation than others.
We also know that all sectors — nuclear, chemical and
biological — have seen enhanced controls since 2010.
However, the biological sector lags behind globally,
with about 10 per cent fewer recorded measures than the
nuclear sector. Those are all important non-proliferation
facts. They should shape the next steps that we take.

S/PV.7758

Working through the 1540 Committee, so ably chaired
by Spain, the Council must now decide how to act.
The United Kingdom looks forward to examining
four areas for concrete progress by the end of this
year. The first is ensuring meaningful analysis of
how resolution 1540 (2004) is being implemented as a
component of the global non-proliferation architecture,
including by assessing each region and sector. The
second is exploring how resolution 1540 (2004) can be
more effectively implemented in the light of the new
and emerging challenges that we heard about, including
both evolving terrorist threats and technological
developments such as 3D printing and drones. The
third is strengthening the 1540 Committee’s process
for matching requests with offers of assistance. And
the fourth is revisiting the structure and mandate of
the 1540 Committee and its Group of Experts to ensure
that they have the technical, human and financial
resources they need, including considering a longerterm mandate. We look forward to discussing all those
issues with all States.
Resolution 1540 (2004) offers tools for States to
prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
Tragically, the situation in Syria shows what happens
when prevention fails. The world today continues to
witness horrifying attacks in Syria involving chemical
weapons, including numerous credible allegations of
their use both by State actors and by non-State actors. If
proved, the Al-Assad regime’s use of chemical weapons
will be in direct contravention of international law, and
must be universally condemned. As Mr. Kim Won-soo
told us, in the coming days the Council will review a
historic and vital report by the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint
Mission into allegations of chemical weapons use in
Syria. The United Kingdom is determined to hold those
responsible for those crimes to account. We will review
the report very carefully. It will be a first step towards
international justice. We owe it to the victims to
examine unflinchingly the hard evidence before us and
follow up until there is full accountability for all those
responsible for all uses of weapons of mass destruction.
Finally, allow me to echo the grave concerns
expressed by the representative of Japan and others
about the unacceptable nuclear and missile technology
tests conducted by the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea. The United Kingdom unconditionally
condemns those activities and expresses firm solidarity

16-2665229/76

S/PV.7758

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

with Japan and all those in the region that face those
dangerous provocations.
The President: The representative of the Russian
Federation has asked for the floor to make a further
statement.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I apologize to all of those present in the
Chamber, Minister Lajčák and Ambassador Lodhi, for
requesting the floor again. I will be very brief.
Today’s meeting was supposed to be a serious,
substantive discussion on strengthening international
efforts to prevent weapons of mass destruction from
falling into the hands of terrorists. In his statement,
the representative of Ukraine made a deliberate
attempt to devalue today’s discussion by bringing up
baseless accusations against Russia. I believe they
came, understandably, as a complete surprise to most
of those present in the Chamber. There is no room
for such conduct in the Security Council. Theirs was
a classic attempt to justify their own actions and to
shift responsibility for the problem onto others. The
Ukrainian party has deliberately moved away from
conscientiously implementing the Minsk agreement
and is counting on a military solution to an internal
Ukrainian conflict.
The President: The representative of Ukraine has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): I also apologize for taking
the floor again. I will be very brief. Out of respect for
the presidency, colleagues around the table and the
broader United Nations membership, I will confine
myself just to a few brief points.
First, we do not intend to engage in a debate at this
table about obvious facts that are clear to everyone but
the culprit State. Instead of reacting to the multiple
allegations of various types on the part of the aggressor
State, let me just say that the Ukrainian delegation and
State fully stand by the statement that we delivered.
Secondly, the threats to the regime established by
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
that we mentioned in our statement originate from the
Russian aggression against Ukraine, which started
with the attempted illegal annexation of Crimea and
continued with Russia’s intervention and fuelling of
conflict in the eastern part of Ukraine. In our view, that
of course has a direct bearing on the subject of today’s
debate, as well as on the Security Council’s mandate.
30/76

23/08/2016

The President: I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statement to no more than four minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements
are kindly requested to circulate their texts in writing
and to deliver a condensed version when speaking in
the Chamber.
I would also like to appeal to speakers to deliver
their statements at a reasonable speed in order that
interpretation may be provided accurately.
I wish to inform all concerned that, given the long
list of speakers, we will be carrying on the open debate
right through the lunch hour.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Miroslav
Lajčák, Minister for Foreign and European Affairs
of Slovakia.
Mr. Lajčák (Slovakia): Let me express my gratitude
to you, Mr. President, and to your country, Malaysia,
for convening today’s open debate. It provides a great
opportunity for all of us to discuss and share our
views, particularly on the comprehensive review of
resolution 1540 (2004). Allow me also to express my
great appreciation for Spain’s initiative, as Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1540 (2004), in organizing the formal open
consultations in June that addressed the comprehensive
review of the status of implementation of the
resolution. We found that meeting to be very timely and
beneficial and conducted in the spirit of cooperation
and transparency.
The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
is one of the major threats to international peace and
security. It has been further aggravated by an increased
risk of such weapons falling into the hands of terrorist
groups and other non-State actors. It should therefore
be our highest priority to avoid and prevent such
dangerous events from happening.
In that regard, I wish to highlight the centrality and
contribution of resolution 1540 (2004). Together with the
Biological Weapons Convention, the Chemical Weapons
Convention, the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons and their implementing mechanisms
and agencies, resolution 1540 (2004) has become a
significant component of the robust global security
architecture. It is also an efficient tool for tackling
the non-proliferation challenges connected with
various militant and terrorist groups. Its ongoing
16-26652

23/08/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

comprehensive review process provides an opportunity
to work together towards its enhanced functioning.
But how can that goal be achieved? Preventing
non-State actors from acquiring weapons of mass
destruction cannot be accomplished by a single country
alone. Collective efforts and international cooperation
are therefore required. Security for of all of us is
interdependent. We are only as strong as our weakest
link. We are therefore convinced that we should adjust
and improve the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) to the fullest extent possible.
Countries that have difficulties with their national
implementation and reporting mechanisms should
have access to adequate assistance. We should foster
and utilize regional expertise and capacities and
ensure their availability to the countries that need it.
Assistance should be cooperative and goal-oriented
and respect the countries’ needs and the interests of the
international community.
Furthermore, the 1540 Committee and its Panel of
Experts should have all the necessary resources at their
disposal. That is a prerequisite for the effective and
efficient fulfilment of their tasks.
It is crucial to take advantage of the rapid
developments and breakthroughs in science, technology,
finance and commerce. Non-State actors exploit new
technologies to pursue their illicit activities and often
have enough financial and human resources to avoid
existing export-control mechanisms. We must therefore
keep our national export-control mechanisms up-todate and dedicate sufficient financial and personnel
capacities to them. We should also reach out to industry
and civil society to raise awareness and create a true
partnership in our efforts to prevent the proliferation of
sensitive items to non-State actors.

S/PV.7758

executive and enforcement measures before and after
April 2004. We have developed an effective national
export-control system. As an integral part of the strong
European Union export-control regime, it is regularly
updated to reflect contemporary non-proliferation
developments and requirements.
Let me assure Council members that Slovakia
remains fully committed to its disarmament and
non-proliferation obligations. We stand ready to
continue to help and assist the international community
in combating proliferation threats and challenges.
Finally, allow me to reiterate my appreciation
for the convening of this open debate and to wish
Malaysia a successful conclusion of its Security
Council presidency.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): I thank you, Sir, for
convening today’s open debate, which is timely, as it
coincides with the ongoing process of a comprehensive
review of the mechanism under resolution 1540 (2004).
That process should benefit from the views of the
broader membership. We hope that the diverse views
expressed by Member States during the formal open
consultations held by Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) will be taken on board.

Slovakia’s strong commitment to resolution 1540
(2004) was underlined by our chairmanship of the 1540
Committee during our non-permanent membership of
the Security Council in 2006 and 2007. As a former
Chair, we know at first hand how challenging that
work is. We therefore fully support Spain in its efforts,
including the establishment of the Group of Friends of
resolution 1540 (2004). Slovakia is proud to be one of
the founding members.

The global disarmament landscape presents a
gloomy picture. The principal reason for that is the
lack of progress made by the nuclear-weapon States
in the fulfilment of their legal nuclear disarmament
obligations. That has negatively impacted on
the non-proliferation regime. Disarmament and
non-proliferation are inextricably linked. It is unrealistic
to expect progress on one without movement on the
other. A key challenge to long-held non-proliferation
norms and rules is the granting of discriminatory
waivers to some and the making of exceptions out of
power or profit considerations. Granting such waivers
carries obvious proliferation risks. Those special
arrangements are not only discriminatory and denote
nuclear double standards but also open up possibilities
for the diversion of material intended for peaceful uses
to military purposes. They contravene non-proliferation
rules and also undermine regional strategic stability.

Slovakia has also been active in promoting domestic
legislation on the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). We introduced a wide range of legislative,

We should not forget that the fulfilment of
non-proliferation objectives is a shared responsibility,
and we are only as strong as the weakest link in the

16-2665231/76

S/PV.7758

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

chain. Improved matchmaking by the Committee,
thereby making it more responsive to requests for
assistance from States, is therefore imperative.
Resolution 1540 (2004) has made useful contributions
to the advancement of non-proliferation goals. The
success of the resolution owes less to its use of Chapter
VII provisions of the Charter of the United Nations
than to the cooperative approach that it has engendered
to promote its implementation.
We are cognizant of the fact that the challenges
in addressing the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction (WMDs), their means of delivery and related
materials are imposing. Differences in State capacities,
such as gaps in legal and regulatory frameworks, the
lack of effective export-control mechanisms, border
management capacities and the lack of human and
technological resources for effective implementation,
all compound the difficulties. We also recognize the
importance of staying one step ahead of non-State
actors that seek access to WMDs. Some of the suggested
solutions, such as making radical changes in the regime
established by resolution 1540 (2004), could, however,
take us farther away rather than closer to our shared
objective of addressing proliferation challenges.
Let us take the example of the submission of national
reports. As of April, 17 States had not yet submitted
even one report. Then there are others, including my
own country, that have submitted several. Rather than
casting aspersions on the intentions of States that could
not report, we need to understand their shortcomings
and assist them. Creating additional reporting
obligations would only add to reporting fatigue, without
any real impact on achieving universal reporting. It is
of paramount importance that the voluntary nature of
visits to States and national action plans, as envisaged
in resolution 1977 (2011), be preserved.
In order to ensure that the comprehensive review
helps Members States better manage challenges
with regard to the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004), its final product needs to be realistic, generally
acceptable and practical. It should take into account the
existing provisions of resolution 1540 (2004). To change
the focus of the resolution from a preventive mechanism,
aimed at thwarting access by non-State actors to
WMDs, to an instrument with a mandate for which it is
ill-equipped would be an error. Also, obligations under
the resolution should not be interpreted in a manner that
impinges upon the responsibilities of the International
32/76

23/08/2016

Atomic Energy Agency or of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.
Let me turn briefly to what my country has done
to implement resolution 1540 (2004) and to fulfil its
non-proliferation obligations in general. Pakistan has
elaborated and implemented a comprehensive exportcontrol regime, fully harmonized with those of the
Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG), the Missile Technology
Control Regime and the Australia Group. Exemplary
measures have been taken to strengthen nuclear safety
and security. We have also actively participated in the
Nuclear Security Summit process. Our ratification of
the 2005 amendment to the Convention on Physical
Protection of Nuclear Material and our declared
adherence to NSG guidelines are among the recent
steps that we have taken. Under resolution 1540 (2004),
we have submitted four national implementation
reports. We have also declared a unilateral moratorium
on further nuclear testing and have reiterated our
willingness to translate that unilateral moratorium into
a bilateral arrangement on non-testing with India.
Those credentials, among others, clearly establish
my country’s eligibility to become a member of
the Nuclear Suppliers Group. We expect that a
non-discriminatory, criteria-based approach will be
followed in the extension of NSG membership.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the States members of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries (NAM).
I express my appreciation to the Malaysian
presidency of the Security Council for convening this
open debate.
I will deliver a shortened version of my statement
on behalf of NAM. The full version will be submitted
for the record.
NAM member States express grave concern over
the threat posed to humankind by existing weapons of
mass destruction, particularly nuclear weapons, and
underline the need for their total elimination. NAM
further calls upon all States to support international
efforts to prevent terrorists from acquiring weapons of
mass destruction. Noting the adoption of the relevant
resolutions by the Security Council, NAM underlines
the need to ensure that any action by the Council does
not undermine the Charter of the United Nations,
16-26652

23/08/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

existing multilateral treaties on weapons of mass
destruction, international organizations established
for that purpose, and the role of the General Assembly.
NAM further cautions against the continuing practice
of the Security Council to utilize its authority to
define the legislative requirements for Member States
in implementing Security Council decisions. In that
regard, the Movement stresses the importance of
having the issue of non-State actors acquiring weapons
of mass destruction addressed in an inclusive manner
by the General Assembly, taking into account the views
of all Member States.
Reaffirming that nuclear disarmament remains
its highest priority, the Movement stresses the
importance of ensuring that efforts aimed at nuclear
non-proliferation are carried out in parallel with
simultaneous efforts aimed at nuclear disarmament,
which, as a multilateral legal obligation, should also not
be made conditional on confidence-building measures
or other disarmament efforts.
NAM expresses deep concern about the slow pace
of progress towards nuclear disarmament and the lack
of progress shown by the nuclear-weapon States in
accomplishing the total elimination of their nuclear
arsenals in accordance with their relevant multilateral
legal obligations. Accordingly, the Movement
calls upon the nuclear-weapon States to fulfil their
multilateral legal obligations on nuclear disarmament
and to implement the unequivocal undertaking that they
provided in 2000 and further reiterated in 2010, so as
to accomplish the total elimination of nuclear weapons.
Concerned at the improvements made in existing
nuclear weapons and the development of new types of
nuclear weapons under the military doctrines of some
nuclear-weapon States and at the strategic defence
doctrines of the nuclear-weapon States, including the
NATO Alliance Strategic Concept, which has not only
set out rationales for the use or threat of use of nuclear
weapons, but also maintains unjustifiable concepts
on international security based on promoting and
developing military alliances and nuclear-deterrence
policies, NAM strongly calls upon them to exclude
completely the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons
from their military and security doctrines. In that
context, NAM also stresses the need for effective
measures to prevent the emergence of new types of
weapons of mass destruction, as reaffirmed by General
Assembly resolution 69/27, on the prohibition of the

S/PV.7758

development and manufacture of new types of weapons
of mass destruction and new systems of such weapons.
Reaffirming the absolute validity of multilateral
diplomacy in the field of disarmament and
non-proliferation, NAM reiterates its determination
to promote multilateralism as the core principle
of negotiations in the area of disarmament and
non-proliferation.
NAM highlights the importance of focusing
international public attention on the dangers of nuclear
weapons and the advantages of nuclear disarmament
for development, as well as for international peace
and security. Welcoming United Nations meetings
and activities for the commemoration of 26 September
as the International Day for the Total Elimination of
Nuclear Weapons, NAM invites Member States, the
United Nations system and civil society, including
non-governmental
organizations,
academia,
parliamentarians, the mass media and individuals, to
commemorate and promote that International Day
through all types of educational and public awarenessraising activities.
The Movement reaffirms that the total elimination
of nuclear weapons is the only absolute guarantee
against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons.
Highlighting the role of nuclear-weapon-free zones,
NAM calls upon all nuclear-weapon States to ratify the
related protocols to all treaties establishing nuclearweapon-free zones, withdraw any reservations or
interpretative declarations incompatible with the
object and purpose of those zones and respect the
denuclearized status of the zones.
In that context, member States of the Non-Aligned
Movement reiterate their full support for the
establishment in the Middle East of a zone free of nuclear
weapons and all other weapons of mass destruction and
as a priority step to that end and reaffirm the need for
the speedy establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone
in the Middle East. Pending its establishment, they
demand that Israel, the only country in the region that
has not joined the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) nor declared its intention to do
so, renounce its possession of nuclear weapons, accede
to the NPT without preconditions or further delay, place
all of its nuclear facilities promptly under the full-scope
safeguards of the International Atomic Energy Agency,
in accordance with resolution 487 (1981), and conduct

16-2665233/76

S/PV.7758

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

its nuclear-related activities in conformity with the
non-proliferation regime.
NAM States party to the Convention on the
Prohibition of the Development, Production and
Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin
Weapons and on Their Destruction emphasize its
important role in the international legal architecture
related to weapons of mass destruction and, in
particular, in the total prohibition of all biological and
toxin weapons, and reaffirm that the possibility of any
use of bacteriological agents and toxins as weapons
should be completely excluded, and the conviction
that such use would be repugnant to the conscience of
humankind.
Moreover, NAM States party to the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Development, Production,
Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on
Their Destruction reaffirm the effective contribution
of that Convention to international and regional peace
and security, which can be enhanced through its full
implementation. They express their serious concern
that certain possessor States parties have not met
their obligations regarding the deadlines for the total
elimination of chemical weapons, and therefore urge all
possessor States parties to take every necessary measure
to ensure their compliance with their detailed plans for
the destruction of chemical weapons remaining after
the final extended destruction deadline of 29 April
2012 in the shortest time possible, in order to uphold
the credibility and integrity of the Convention.
Finally, NAM member States condemn the use of
chemical weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic, which
reinforces the absolute necessity of eliminating all
chemical weapons. In that regard, they acknowledge
the accession of the Syrian Arab Republic to the
Convention and its commitment to implementing
its obligations. Furthermore, they encourage the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to honour
its commitment to eliminating the country’s chemical
weapons programme.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the
willingness of the Movement to cooperate with other
partners in addressing the threats posed to humankind
by the existing weapons of mass destruction, in
particular nuclear weapons.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mexico.
34/76

23/08/2016

Mrs. García Guiza (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral and other high-level representatives for their
participation in this debate. We welcome the fact that
the Security Council is addressing the topic of the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
as non-proliferation is one of the gravest risks to
international peace and security.
Mexico reaffirms its historical and staunch
commitment to nuclear disarmament and the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, as well
as its commitment to the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) as a crucial mechanism for coordinating
the efforts of the international community to take
on the challenge of enforcing the non-proliferation
regime, and particularly for impeding non-State actors
from acquiring weapons of mass destruction or their
components through the trafficking of related materials
or dual-use goods. Mexico hopes that the comprehensive
review of thr resolution will lead to commitments that
strengthen the non-proliferation regime and will yield a
work plan in that field.
Security in the twenty-first century should be
approached from a multidimensional perspective
that includes the consideration of public health,
biotechnology, epidemiology, monitoring and early
warning, the regulation of dual-use materials, and
intergovernmental
technological
and
scientific
development and cooperation. Mexico considers
it vital that the Convention on the Prohibition of
the Development, Production and Stockpiling of
Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and
on Their Destruction establish synergies with other
relevant bodies and mechanisms so as to pave the way
for its full and effective implementation and bring
about sustainable public policies, which would prevent
that technology and type of weapons from falling into
the hands of unauthorized actors.
The Convention on the Prohibition of the
Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of
Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction and
its monitoring authority, the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, have managed to lead
the international community to a historic landmark — we
are on the brink of physically eliminating all chemical
weapons worldwide. Nevertheless, despite the success
of those efforts, we have seen with great concern the
use of toxic chemical substances against the civilian
population of Syria in the context of the armed conflict
16-26652

23/08/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

in that country. Those facts and other recent events
in Libya underscore that the best way to ensure that
weapons of mass destruction will harm no one is to
pursue their total ban and elimination.
We need greater coordination and regulation of
States parties and relevant international organizations
in order to prevent non-State actors from gaining
access to biological materials and toxic chemical
substances. We must also promote a prevention and
response approach in case those actors try to utilize
chemical substances or pathogens as weapons of mass
destruction. The ability of terrorist groups to evolve
and adapt to the efforts of the international community
to contain and counteract their impact on peace and
security, including in the area of non-proliferation, has
heightened the importance of efficiently addressing the
underlying causes of terrorism.
Accordingly, 10 years after the adoption of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, we
have seen how it has become a genuine instrument for
coordinating cooperative efforts by the international
community to prevent and combat this scourge in
a holistic way. However, we must at last adopt a
comprehensive convention on international terrorism,
which would have a positive impact on efforts to
meet the challenges posed by non-State actors to the
non-proliferation regime.
Efforts to strengthen national capacities against the
risks associated with weapons of mass destruction must
be also be addressed in a holistic manner and without
overlooking the need to strengthen nuclear security.
Mexico therefore reaffirms that nuclear safety can be
understood only within the broad context of indivisible
security for all, which must be enshrined in the full
implementation of existing international commitments
on nuclear disarmament, non-proliferation and
safeguarding of the inalienable right of States to
develop nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): I thank the
Deputy Prime Minister and you, Sir, and commend
the Malaysian presidency for focusing today’s debate
on the global fight against the proliferation of all types
of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs), which are
posing one of the greatest threats to international peace
and security and human survival. We also appreciate

S/PV.7758

the tireless efforts of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
in this area.
For well-known historical reasons, I will
concentrate on the nuclear sector in my statement, as
issues of nuclear disarmament, non-proliferation and
nuclear security are the main foreign-policy priorities
of Kazakhstan. My country is currently the Chair of
Working Group I of the United Nations Disarmament
Commission on recommendations for achieving the
objective of nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation
of nuclear weapons. I would therefore like to address
some of the key points raised in Malaysia’s wellprepared concept note (S/2016/712, annex).
Kazakhstan
selected
nuclear-security
and
non-proliferation issues as one of the four main pillars
of its campaign for an elected seat on the Security
Council for the period 2017-2018, and it will remain a
priority for us even after our term has expired. Indeed,
nuclear terrorism poses one of the greatest challenge to
the security of all nations. It is clear that the role of the
Council should be greatly enhanced to help strengthen,
universalize and effectively implement all the key
instruments such as the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons, the Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban Treaty (CTBT), the Convention on Certain
Conventional Weapons and the Convention on the
Prohibition of the Development, Production and
Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin
Weapons and on Their Destruction, as well as such
Council resolutions as 1540 (2004), 1718 (2006), 2270
(2016), 2231 (2015), inter alia, as well as all policies and
mechanisms.
All United Nations entities need to regularize and
institutionalize their work undertaken with regional
organizations, as well as specialized agencies such as
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and
INTERPOL. Multilateral and bilateral support should
focus on capacity-building, training and exercises,
stronger counter-smuggling programmes and enhanced
border controls, as well as WMD forensics. We
commend Spain for its active chairmanship of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) and for its contribution to the
goals of the global non-proliferation movement.
The more secure a country feels, especially through
positive and negative security assurances, the more
likely it will be to abandon weapons. Serious attention
should be given to controlling technology transfer of

16-2665235/76

S/PV.7758

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

the means of delivery of WMDs. Long-range missiles,
cruise missiles and unmanned aerial vehicles are also
matters of grave concern. In the current biennium
2016-2017, Kazakhstan is chairing The Hague Code
of Conduct against Ballistic Missile Proliferation and
intends to submit a relevant draft resolution at the
seventy-first session of the General Assembly.
We also need to support multilateral institutions,
such as the United Nations Office for Disarmament
Affairs, the IAEA, the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons and the Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban Treaty Organization, which are charged with
verification and upholding compliance and must be
supported by regional and subregional mechanisms,
civil society and mass media. We all need to improve
policy coordination, export control and States’
ability to work together to prevent, detect, assess,
respond and mitigate possible use of WMDs and the
resulting destruction.
The
establishment
of
nuclear-weapon-free
zones strengthens global nuclear non-proliferation.
Kazakhstan, together with other countries in the
Central Asia region, established a nuclear-weapon-free
zone in their region. Having seen the great benefits of a
nuclear-weapon-free zone, we support the establishment
of a Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons and all
other WMDs.
My country can claim be the first country ever
to close a nuclear-test site. It later also renounced
the world’s fourth-largest nuclear arsenal. This year,
on 29 August, we will celebrate the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the closure of the Semipalatinsk nucleartest site — also the date designated by the General
Assembly as the International Day against Nuclear
Tests. An international conference devoted to the
anniversary will be held in Astana from 28 to 29 August,
and a commemorative meeting of the General Assembly
devoted to the International Day against Nuclear Tests
will be held in New York and hosted by the President of
the Assembly on 31 August.
Kazakhstan currently co-chairs, together with
Japan, the Article XIV Conference of the CTBT. As we
celebrate the twentieth anniversary of the CTBT this
year, we call on all States to fully implement the action
plan for facilitating the entry into force of the CTBT
in 2015-2017. To that end, President Nazarbayev of
Kazakhstan, in his recent security paradigm document
entitled “Manifesto: The World. The 21st century”,
36/76

23/08/2016

proposes a 2045 global strategic initiative plan to
eliminate the root causes of war and conflict and create
a nuclear-weapon-free world by the United Nations
centenary in 2045. Kazakhstan considers the adoption
of the Universal Declaration on the Achievement of a
Nuclear-Weapon-Free World by the General Assembly
last December to be the first step. It also calls for ending
political conflicts, reducing poverty and promoting
development assistance and human rights. Since
security and development are interconnected, President
Nazarbayev also called for transferring 1 per cent of the
defence budgets of Member States to the special United
Nations Sustainable Development Goals Fund.
In conclusion, we call on all States to promote
confidence and trust in order to reach comprehensive,
general and complete nuclear disarmament, create a
powerful global anti-nuclear movement and prevent the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Castañeda Solares (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): First of all, I would like to congratulate the
Malaysian delegation on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council and to express our appreciation for
the concept note (S/2016/712, annex) that is guiding our
discussions today.
As a country strongly committed to disarmament
and non-proliferation, Guatemala welcomes the
convening of this open debate. Resolution 1540
(2004) plays an important role in the international
non-proliferation regime, as it seeks to enhance the
focus on the commitments in terms of non-proliferation
without affecting its direct relationship with the
fulfilment of the obligations of all States with the
other disarmament pillars, including the peaceful use
of nuclear energy. In the current complex international
environment, it is imperative that all Member States
fulfil their obligations in preventing the proliferation of
all weapons of mass destruction, their means of delivery
and related materials, as well as their acquisition by
non-State actors and ensure that States possess the
necessary resources and capacity to that end.
The universal, comprehensive and balanced
implementation of the resolution is possible only if all
Member States play a key role and the Committee fully
implements its mandate. As expressed during the formal
open consultations held in June, it is essential that the
review of resolution 1540 (2004) be carried out in the
16-26652

23/08/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

broadest and most transparent and inclusive manner,
including an in-depth analysis of its implementation to
date with a view to identifying successes, as well as
shortcomings and gaps, in order to focus efforts and
resources on areas that have lagged behind, particularly
through improved outreach and assistance mechanisms.
In our view, assistance and information exchange
are the two key elements remaining in the full
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). In that
regard, in addition to continue seeking ways to improve
and advance its role as facilitator, the Committee should
consider the possibility of moving beyond that function
and seek ways to expand and develop a more direct role,
perhaps by directly providing assistance or via dialogue
among the donors and recipients of assistance, or even
by creating its own training programmes in capacitybuilding for States.
Just as it is important to establish a close relationship
with States, it is necessary to continue strengthening
and fostering communication and cooperation with
specialized regional and international organizations
to ensure the full implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). In that context, we would like to highlight the
role of the Regional Centres of the United Nations
Office for Disarmament Affairs. In our region we
welcome the role of the Regional Centre for Peace,
Disarmament and Development in Latin America and
the Caribbean and the Organization of American States
in assisting the States that so request in establishing
national action plans, reforming legislation in
accordance with the resolution and capacity-building
in various Government agencies, inter alia. Moreover,
we appreciate the efforts of the Chair of the Committee
in establishing more flexible communication channels
with Member States, including, for example, by setting
up national and regional focal points.
Guatemala is committed to the full implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). During our term as a
non-permanent member of the Council, we held the
role of coordinator of the 1540 Committee Working
Group on monitoring and national implementation.
Furthermore, in addition to providing its third national
report and updated matrix pursuant to resolutions 1540
(2004) and 1673 (2006), Guatemala requested technical
assistance from the Committee in developing a national
plan of action for the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) and in several ongoing legislative processes.

S/PV.7758

Finally, we must remember that the best way to
prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and prevent them from falling into the hands of non-State
actors is to ensure that they no longer exist. In that
respect, it is unacceptable that nuclear weapons are the
only weapons of mass destruction that have not yet been
prohibited. Guatemala, via its long-term commitment
to disarmament and non-proliferation, supports the
multilateral efforts currently under way to initiate
negotiations towards a legally binding instrument
prohibiting nuclear weapons, which threaten the very
existence of humankind, and in that regard we reaffirm
our unequivocal commitment to the cause of a safer
world in which weapons of mass destruction — nuclear,
chemical and biological — no longer exist.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Singapore.
Mr. Gafoor (Singapore): It is a pleasure to see
the delegation of Malaysia, and to see you, Sir, in
particular, presiding over the Security Council. I thank
Malaysia for convening this open debate. I also endorse
the statement made earlier by the representative of Iran
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
Singapore has no significant nuclear material or
facilities, but we take our international responsibilities
seriously. Singapore regards nuclear proliferation as a
very serious matter. We are concerned that the threat of
nuclear proliferation is being compounded by the threat
of terrorism and illicit activities by non-State actors. In
that regard, I wish to make three points.
First, all countries need to strengthen their
national legislation and internal processes to address
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
particularly to non-State actors. As a global
trans-shipment hub, Singapore is committed to working
with other countries to counter the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction and combat illicit
trafficking. In Singapore, we have upgraded radiation
screening technology at our ports and tightened our
export-control regime. We regularly review and update
our export-controls list to ensure that our system
is in line with international practice. Our financial
institutions are regularly subjected to review to ensure
the proper implementation of the controls necessary
to prevent proliferation financing, as part of their
compliance obligations.
Secondly, we have to strengthen intraregional and
interregional cooperation to build capacity and prevent

16-2665237/76

S/PV.7758

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

any loopholes in the international counter-proliferation
framework. In that regard, Singapore participates
actively in the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
Regional Forum meetings and other regional seminars
on export controls and non-proliferation. We also
continue to work with the European Union Chemical
Biological Radiological and Nuclear Risk Mitigation
Centres of Excellence Initiative in Southeast Asia.
Singapore also participates at the annual Asian exportcontrol seminars held in Japan, which is a good platform
for the sharing of experiences in counter-proliferation.
Thirdly, we need to support and strengthen
international efforts aimed at addressing the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction. Singapore plays its part
in the Proliferation Security Initiative (PSI). We have
hosted two PSI exercises to date and look forward to
hosting a third exercise in September. We have adopted
the Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering
recommendations to combat proliferation financing.
Singapore also hosts the INTERPOL Global Complex
for Innovation, which fosters information-sharing
among countries to counter transnational threats and
networks that exploit new technology.
As a responsible member of the United Nations,
Singapore has faithfully taken action to implement
the resolutions adopted by the Security Council
on non-proliferation. We contributed to the open
consultations on the review of resolution 1540 (2004)
in June, and will continue working with all United
Nations States Members to implement the resolution.
Let me conclude by saying that Singapore believes
that the international counter-proliferation regime
is only as strong as its weakest link. It is therefore
essential that we work collectively to create an effective
global framework to counter the threat of nuclear
proliferation. Singapore is fully committed to playing
its part by working closely with other countries at the
regional and global levels.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): We thank you, Sir, and
the Malaysian delegation for convening this important
debate, and would also like to thank the briefers for
their valuable comments.
Indonesia associates itself with the statement made
by the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
38/76

23/08/2016

The Hibakusha are a heartfelt testament to
the destruction of life because of weapons of mass
destruction. In the wake of the horrors of Hiroshima
and Nagasaki, and with the adoption of first General
Assembly resolution of the then new United Nations,
which sought to deal with the problems raised by the
discovery of atomic energy, it was thought that never
again would humankind be at risk of such suffering.
While the building of a multilateral structure and
machinery to control nuclear and other weapons
of mass destruction was largely successful, those
weapons, unfortunately, continue to exist and are being
modernized at an unprecedented level.
As a State party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons, the Chemical Weapons
Convention, the Biological Weapons Convention and
the Treaty on the Southeast Asia Nuclear Weapon-Free
Zone, and having ratified the Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban Treaty, Indonesia is deeply concerned that,
while it and many other countries have steadfastly
upheld the collective global norms against nuclear and
other weapons of mass destruction, some countries have
continued to shirk their responsibilities by retaining
such weapons or taking refuge under nuclear-security
umbrellas.
As it considers resolution 1540 (2004) to be
essential, Indonesia has supported it and will continue
to do so. Non-proliferation is one side of the coin, while
the other is complete disarmament. Both are necessary
for international peace and security.
The flawed concept of nuclear “haves” and
“have-nots” is morally indefensible and promotes the
legitimization of such weapons; as long as they exist,
proliferation risks will remain.
As highlighted in the President’s concept note
(S/2016/712, annex), my delegation firmly believes in
maintaining and bolstering, where necessary, measures
to ensure that nuclear weapons, knowledge on their
manufacture and delivery and related materials will
never proliferate.
Similarly, we must remain vigilant with regard to
actions on the part of non-State groups. However, the
issue of the acquisition of weapons of mass destruction
by non-State groups must be considered by all Member
States inclusively. Our actions must flow from
multilaterally negotiated treaties.
16-26652

23/08/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

A vital point on which to focus is capacity-building
assistance for States in establishing injunctions,
whereby no space in their territory would be available
to terrorists for engaging in their despicable activities.
Nuclear safety and nuclear security must rest with
individual States. Any multilateral norms, guidelines
or rules on nuclear security should be pursued within
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
framework.
As Indonesia detailed many of its actions in the
context of resolution 1540 (2004) during the formal open
consultations in June, I will now simply underline that
Indonesia’s commitment to the issue is demonstrated
by its vigorous adherence to, among others, the treaties
and instruments I have mentioned.
Through various national laws and programmes,
we have instituted comprehensive measures against
the development, acquisition, manufacture, possession,
transportation, transfer or use of nuclear, chemical
or biological weapons and their delivery systems.
At the national level, an inter-ministerial working
group coordinates the implementation of all national
regulations on chemical, biological and nuclear safety
and security.
Our national nuclear energy regulatory agency,
known as Bapeten, continues to strengthen its
monitoring systems and control capabilities regarding
our peaceful uses of nuclear energy. In the context
of the national monitoring system, we have recently
set in place, in cooperation with the IAEA, seven
radioactivity portal monitors in our main sea ports. We
are currently also in the process of finalizing a draft
law on biosecurity. Regionally, Indonesia is actively
participating in various Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) forums on export controls and
non-proliferation.
I would like to reiterate the significance of capacitybuilding and cooperation in the context of the various
elements of resolution 1540 (2004). The Committee
established purusant to that resolutionshould focus
more on that area. Moreover, countries and the
relevant international organizations with the requisite
capacities bear a special responsibility in the provision
of assistance, particularly technical and financial.
My delegation reiterates its call for the immediate
establishment of a fund dedicated to supporting Member
States in the implementation of their resolution 1540
(2004) obligations.

S/PV.7758

In conclusion, Indonesia would like to underscore
that, as long as a single nuclear warhead or other
weapon of mass destruction exists, the threat to
humankind, by design or by accident, along with the
devastating humanitarian consequences, persists.
My delegation welcomes the adoption, last week, of
the outcome of the Open-ended Working Group to
develop proposals to take forward multilateral nucleardisarmament negotiations for the achievement and
maintenance of a world without nuclear weapons, as
mandated by General Assembly resolution 70/33, which
brings us a step closer to commencing the negotiation
of an international legally binding instrument for the
prohibition of nuclear weapons and weapons of mass
destruction, which would lead to their total elimination.
Let us move forward boldly to realize the collective
vision of a world without nuclear weapons. Present and
future generations will not forgive us if we fail in our
responsibility to prohibit and eliminate nuclear and
other weapons of mass destruction. Together, let us
exercise our political will, discharge our commitments
and work resolutely to bring peace, stability and
security to humankind.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Chile.
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank Mr. Ahmad Zahid Hamidi, Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Home Affairs of Malaysia,
for convening and earlier presiding over this important
open debate on the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction. We also appreciate the briefings by
the Secretary-General and invited speakers.
Chile reaffirms its commitment to supporting
multilateral efforts aimed at non-proliferation and the
prohibition of the use and possession of all weapons of
mass destruction, and we continue to promote the debate
in a broad, transparent and democratic multilateral
space in line with our foreign policy.
The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) forms the cornerstone of the
disarmament and non-proliferation regime, and its
universalization and balanced implementation should
be based on its three pillars. We welcome the fact that
the Open-ended Working Group to develop proposals
to take forward multilateral nuclear disarmament
negotiations for the achievement and maintenance
of a world without nuclear weapons, which recently
completed its work in Geneva, has recommended, by

16-2665239/76

S/PV.7758

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

23/08/2016

an overwhelming majority, the start of negotiations on
a legally binding instrument banning nuclear weapons
with a view to their elimination, thereby complementing
the NPT. We expect advances in that process and look
forward to the possibility of concluding an instrument
that would ban the only weapons of mass destruction
that have never been explicitly prohibited, despite the
fact that they violate elemental norms of international
humanitarian law.

humanitarian law forming the basis of our understanding
of security, as we will continue to do especially in this
area.

With respect to chemical weapons, we urge
universal adherence to the Convention that regulates
and condemns their use under any circumstances,
including by non-State actors. Moreover, the
combined threat of biological knowledge, a global
health emergency and the possible use of toxin agents
by non-State actors calls for the urgent creation of a
verification mechanism for the Biological Weapons
Convention. We expect progress in that area at the next
Review Conference on the Convention, which is to be
held in November this year.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iraq.

The threat of non-State actors acquiring weapons
of mass destruction is more prevalent than ever before,
and States must therefore redouble their efforts to meet
the obligations of resolution 1540 (2004).
In conjunction with the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and the
United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs, we
are organizing the first training course for focal points
in the Latin America and the Caribbean region for the
resolution. The course will be held in Santiago from
24 to 28 October, and we hereby invite the States of our
region to participate through their focal points.
In 2017 we will organize, along with Argentina, the
second iteration of the bilateral exercise on cross-border
radiation safety known as “Paihuén” with the support
of the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism.
Finally, we are completing the steps towards being
accepted as a member of the Wassenaar Arrangement
on export controls relating to arms and dual-use
technologies, which will allow us to improve our import
and export standards regarding military and dual-use
material in alignment with the standards expected from
resolution 1540 (2004). We also support the ongoing
comprehensive review of the resolution.
Finally, our country supports the human security
paradigm that places the individual at the centre of
its priorities, with human rights and international
40/76

We express our gratitude to Malaysia as President
of the Security Council and to Spain as Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1540 (2004) for their leadership and
determination on this matter of crucial importance to
the international community.

Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to express our sincere congratulations to the
Minister for Home Affairs of Malaysia on his country’s
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. We also express our congratulations and
thanks to the Permanent Representative of Japan for
his wise conduct of the Council’s work last month, and
to Spain in leading the work of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004).
Access to weapons of mass destruction by terrorist
groups is one of the main dangers seriously threatening
international peace and security. No country in the
world can face or avoid such threats alone. Cooperation
and coordination are necessary among all parties in
the international community to face those threats
effectively and combat the production and illegitimate
transfer of nuclear materials and weapons of mass
destruction. Our common responsibility requires
that we establish a legally binding international legal
framework to prevent the dual use of, or access to, such
materials on the part of non-State parties.
We stress the importance of resolution 1540
(2004), which we consider to be the most effective
means available to take international measures to face
the danger of the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and their delivery systems. In that context,
I would like to stress that we have regularly briefed the
Secretariat on the Government of Iraq’s implementation
of the provisions of resolution 1540 (2004) through
executive and legislative measures aimed at preventing
access to weapons of mass destruction by terrorist
groups. We again stress our resolute support for all
international efforts aimed at preventing terrorist
groups from accessing weapons of mass destruction
and their means of delivery, as well as trafficking in
such weapons or the materials used in their production,
16-26652

23/08/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

in implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and other
relevant international resolutions.
Iraq also stresses the importance of promoting
relevant national and international legislation in that
regard. Article 9 (a) of Iraq’s Permanent Constitution
stipulates that the Government of Iraq shall fully
implement its international commitments in the area
of nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction.
It also prohibits all means of their development,
manufacture, production or use. Iraq has therefore
subscribed to all international treaties and agreements
in the area of weapons of mass destruction, as well as
conventions, agreements, protocols and international
resolutions against terrorism. We make every effort
and take the necessary steps to prevent any deviation
in the peaceful uses of such materials, thereby
complying with our commitments under the relevant
international instruments.
Iraq urgest all States Members of the United
Nations to fully implement the provisions of resolution
1540 (2004) by adopting robust, effective measures to
prevent the proliferation of nuclear and other weapons
of mass destruction and their delivery systems. In view
of the increasing terrorist threats and the possibility of
the use by terrorist groups of such weapons, we call for
the further enhancement of international and regional
cooperation in this area so as to contain and fully
eliminate the threats by providing the necessary knowhow, technical assistance and capabilities to all States
parties to enable them to detect such weapons and the
materials used in their manufacture.

S/PV.7758

First of all, allow me to thank the President for
organizing this open debate on an important topic and
for the concept note (S/2016/712, annex) prepared by
the presidency. Indeed, preventing the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction and related materials
and technologies to violent, extremist armed groups
and non-State actors is a key concern for the entire
international community.
The European Union is gravely concerned by the
possibility of non-State actors acquiring weapons of
mass destruction. Ongoing reports and allegations of
chemical weapons being used in Syria and Iraq are
gravely concerning in that regard. Such risks add a
further critical dimension to the current international
security context — one characterized by more acute
and diffuse threats, in which the distinction between
international and internal security is blurred.
It is vitally important to enhance international
cooperation, both in the framework of the United
Nations and among all Member States, in order to
address those challenges. Moreover, the European
Union calls on all States that have not yet done so to
become party to the International Convention on the
Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism, and all other
international instruments against terrorism listed by
the Secretary-General.

The President: I now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Ioannis Vrailas, Chargé d’affaires of the Delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations.

Resolution 1540 (2004) remains a central pillar
of the international non-proliferation architecture and
its importance has become even greater in today’s
challenging context. Since the beginning, we have
been a staunch supporter of the robust and effective
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), with the
objective of strengthening global efforts in that regard.
The EU has carried out a number of projects with a view
to continue promoting the full implementation of the
resolution and to provide assistance to third countries
in complying with their obligations under resolution
1540 (2004).

Mr. Vrailas: I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. The candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.

In June, the EU submitted a report entitled “EU
support to the full and universal implementation of
United Nations Security Council resolution 1540”.
The report demonstrates the strong and consistent
commitment of the EU and its member States to the
resolution during the past decade and sets out our
proposals on how that instrument should develop in the
future in order to adapt to the new security challenges.
I will not set out in detail all the elements contained in

In conclusion, we emphasize our determination to
continue working at national, regional and international
levels in promoting and strengthening our ability to
prevent the non-proliferation of nuclear and other
weapons of mass destruction.

16-2665241/76

S/PV.7758

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

this report, but let me draw the attention of the Council
to a couple of points relevant to today’s meeting:
First, Council members will notice throughout the
report the strong EU commitment to the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004), both internally within the
EU and on the international scene. I would point,
for example, to the EU-funded chemical, biological,
radiological and nuclear (CBRN) risk mitigation
Centres of Excellence initiative, launched in 2010.
With 8 regional secretariats and 54 partner countries,
it has been very successful in strengthening national
and regional CBRN governance. Another example is
the robust EU export control regime, which is directly
applicable and binding for all EU Member States.
EU legislation is updated regularly to take into
consideration technological developments and the latest
decisions of the relevant international non-proliferation
regimes and export control arrangements. The EU
has also developed a dedicated EU P2P export control
programme for dual-use items, worth €30 million, since
2004 and aimed at helping authorities in 34 States in six
regions to strengthen their export control regime and to
better comply with their obligations under resolution
1540 (2004) . In close collaboration with EU member
States, the EU continues to implement CBRN action
plans and to strengthen CBRN security throughout
the EU. Likewise, the EU Framework Programme
for Research and Innovation, known as Horizon
2020, encourages novel solutions to protect critical
infrastructure and fight crime and terrorism.
On the international scene, the EU and its member
States continue to strongly support such various regimes
as the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention
(BTWC), the Chemical Weapons Convention and the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
as well as the global partnership against the spread of
weapons and materials of mass destruction. In light of
new technological advances, current challenges and
future threats, the upcoming Review Conference of the
BTWC will offer an important opportunity to explore
ideas and agree on specific decisions and actions to
ensure the continued relevance and effectiveness of the
Convention in a fast changing world.
My second point is on assistance. The process used
by the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) for matching requests with offers of
assistance should be improved. The 1540 Committee
should have the technical, human and financial
42/76

23/08/2016

resources it needs to effectively fulfil its responsibilities.
It should support States in developing strong, detailed
assistance requests. Consideration should be given to
providing the 1540 Committee with a permanent or
longer-term mandate, reflecting the long-term nature of
proliferation challenges. The 1540 Committee should
strengthen its engagement with assistance providers,
including with the EU and its member States and other
donors participating in the global partnership. The
comprehensive review will likely result in new needs
and assistance requests. It is important that donors
respond accordingly by making the best use of available
resources and considering mobilizing additional
resources, including contributions in kind.
A third and last point is a very important one for
the EU — outreach to the private sector and to civil
society. The 1540 Committee should promote an active
role for industry, including through close coordination
with relevant EU programmes, the Wiesbaden process,
the Botticelli project and other industry initiatives.
Such efforts should include a broad range of countries,
regions, sectors, sizes — especially small and mediumsized enterprises — and types of players, including
suppliers, exporters and transporters. Outreach to
industry and the financial sector should in particular
aim at encouraging companies to set up internal
compliance programmes; encouraging cooperation
between Governments and industry/the financial
sector, for instance when drafting legislation or
implementing strategic trade controls; and addressing
the challenges posed by cross-border supply chains.
Increased outreach should also target civil society at
large, as well as academia, national parliaments and the
Inter-Parliamentary Union, to raise awareness of the
resolution and its legal requirements.
This year marks the comprehensive review of
resolution 1540 (2004) , and we expect it to reaffirm the
centrality, importance and authority of the resolution
in the multilateral non-proliferation architecture. The
review should also be used to strengthen support for the
1540 Committee and its Group of Experts. The EU and
its Member States believe that the future development
of resolution 1540 (2004) should take account of new
and emerging trends in nuclear, chemical and biological
security. The 1540 Committee and its Group of Experts
should be in a position to effectively support States in
implementing the resolution in light of these trends.
As a result of the comprehensive review, the EU
and its Member States favour a strong restatement of
16-26652

23/08/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

the Council’s support for the full implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), including, potentially, through
a further Security Council resolution.
The President: I now give the floor to observer of
the League of Arab States.
Mr. Fathalla (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, allow
me to offer our sincere congratulations to Malaysia on
its assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
this month. I express our appreciation for the convening
of this high-level open debate on the critical issue of
the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
I also wish to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
Mr. Roux, Mr. Koblentz and Mr. Kim Won-soo.
I should like to convey Arab disappointment
and displeasure vis-à-vis the failure of the 2015
Review Confererence of the Parties to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT) — a failure sought to maintain the interests of
one State non-party to the Treaty, although it alone in
the Middle East possesses nuclear weapons. The real
problem is the lack of political will to implement a
resolution adopted more than 20 years ago, on which
we have seen no genuine progress.
The League is deeply concerned that nuclear
weapon-States are developing and updating their
nuclear weapons, and continue to rely on them in their
military defence doctrines, counter to the provisions of
article VI of the NPT. It has been repeatedly stressed in
the international demands set forth in various forums
that the role of such weapons in State security policies
must be reduced. The latest such demand was made in
the Final Document of the 2010 Review Conference,
although the nuclear-weapon States have not committed
to its implementation. The technologies to develop these
weapons have become increasingly sophisticated. In
that regard, I join previous speakers in recalling that the
NPT is the cornerstone of the nuclear non-proliferation
architecture. All Arab States are party to the Treaty and
call on the international community to rid the world of
nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs).
The 1995 resolution on the Middle East was adopted
through compromise and consensus. It has been
partially implemented through the permanent extension
of the NPT, although the critical element that led to the
agreement — the elimination of all nuclear weapons in
the Middle East — has been ignored. Nuclear weapons
are more lethal than any other WMDs. In the absence

S/PV.7758

of measures to prevent their use, while it remains very
easy to obtain lethal weapons of all sorts, the objective
is not merely non-proliferation but indeed to rid the
entire world of weapons that threaten its very existence.
The 1995 resolution was merely one practical step to
that end.
Whereas the Middle East is today ravaged by
conflicts in which hundreds of lives are lost every day,
the non-proliferation of WMDs is essential to containing
and resolving such conflicts peacefully. Developments
on the ground must not be used as a pretext for double
standards or allowing the only nuclear State of the
region to remain outside the NPT regime, which
prevents the Treaty from attaining universality and
ridding the region of nuclear weapons. These fears were
heightened when Israel attained the chairmanship of
the Sixth Committee of the General Assembly — given
its record of numerous violations of international law
and relevant resolutions of the Security Council, the
General Assembly and the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) — and led Arab States to abstain in
the voting on the resolution concerning Israeli nuclear
capabilities at the IAEA General Conference. In that
regard, the League calls on the depositaries of the NPT
to discharge their responsibility for implementing the
resolution on the Middle East by pressuring Israel to
accede to the Treaty and subject all its facilities to
international control.
The League of Arab States calls on all States to
agree as soon as possible, and before the 2020 NPT
Review Conference, to rid the Middle East of all nuclear
weapons. We call on States that have resorted to double
standards to review their current position in order to
reach a regional balance in the Middle East, which in no
circumstances can be struck in the presence of WMDs.
In that regard, until an agreement can be reached to rid
the Middle East of WMDs, including nuclear weapons,
the Arab States must review the policies and positions
they have maintained for four decades in support of
non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament. We must
reconsider all means necessary to ensure regional
security in a region that cannot endure any further
destabilization.
In that respect, I refer to the declaration issued
by the League at its Summit in Nouakchott on 25 and
26 July, in which it renewed its appeal for Israel to
be compelled to accede to the NPT and subject its
programmes and facilities to international control, and
in which Arab Foreign Ministers called for a review of

16-2665243/76

S/PV.7758

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

the various issues related to the elimination of nuclear
weapons and other WMDs.
In conclusion, I pay tribute to the Open-ended
Working Group on Taking Forward Multilateral Nuclear
Disarmament Negotiations for its recommendations
concerning nuclear disarmament upon the conclusion
of its activities in Geneva on 19 August, where
participating States adopted clear proposals for the
launching negotiations on a legally binding treaty to
prohibit nuclear weapons in 2017.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the Organization of American States.
Mr. Koncke (spoke in Spanish): I am honoured to
participate in this open debate of the Security Council
on behalf of the Secretary General of the Organization
of American States (OAS). At the outset, I thank the
President of the Security Council for his initiative to
address an issue of such importance as the fight against
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
especially in the context of the review of resolution
1540 (2004).
OAS thanks the Kingdom of Spain for its strong
work as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) to ensure a broad and inclusive
review of the resolution based on consensus — a
critical task to which this open debate will undoubtedly
contribute significantly.
Since the adoption of resolution 1540 (2004) more
than a decade ago, the Organization of American
States, through its Secretariat for Multidimensional
Security and the Inter-American Committee against
Terrorism (CICTE), has directed its efforts towards
a regional framework of cooperation to enable the
effective implementation of the resolution by member
States, taking their needs into account and promoting
the strategic partnership between the OAS and the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), its Group of Experts and the United Nations
Office for Disarmament Affairs. The Organization of
American States is endowed with the Inter-American
Convention against Terrorism, which is the basic
legal instrument that ensures the best complement
between universal and regional treaties and other
sources of obligations in force in the matter, such as the
aforementioned resolution.
One of the most prominent aspects of resolution
1540 (2004) is that concerning export controls of
44/76

23/08/2016

dual-use materials, equipment and technologies. The
Latin American and Caribbean region is dynamic, with
diverse levels of economic growth and activities that
contribute significantly to international trade. Faced
with this reality, the OAS seeks and promotes a good
export control system that also acts as an incentive
for more prosperous and secure trade and investment,
which play a crucial part in the economic growth of its
countries and is relevant to other strategic areas, such
as the financial, tourism and services sectors. Having
appropriate regulatory and institutional frameworks to
promote trade and investment also strengthens border
controls, security and air, land and martime transport
and its critical infrastructure .
OAS is convinced that there is a shared responsibility
among States, international organizations, the private
sector, the scientific sector and society as a whole
in, first, preventing non-State actors from acquiring
dual-use material for criminal ends; secondly,
promoting greater understanding of the benefits of
promoting secure trade and investment as the engine
of community growth; and thirdly, increasing the
capacities of all stakeholders to achieve these purposes.
Since 2014, OAS has promoted the development and
implementation of national action plans in the Americas
as tools that complement national architectures
to combat the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. CICTE also promotes ongoing awareness
of resolution 1540 (2004) throughout the hemisphere.
Currently, OAS is supporting the efforts of 10 countries
of the region in that field, including Panama, with its
strong commitment to the fight against proliferation,
manifested in its willingness to host the next regional
conference on the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) and to assume the CICTE chairmanship for the
period 2017-2018, in addition to hosting, together with
OAS, a side event on non-proliferation on the margins
of the seventy-first session of the General Assembly.
I conclude by sharing some suggestions based on
our regional experience. The cooperation of regional
organizations should be instrumental in contributing to
the fight against proliferation and terrorism.
The legal dimension, by defining offences related
to the proliferation and financing of weapons of
mass destruction, as well as the enactment of laws
on strategic trade and export control, should become
a key component in the efforts of States parties. The
implementation of the resolution should reconcile the
16-26652

23/08/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

needs of international security and strategic and safe
trade. The efforts deployed by the CICTE and the
OAS to that end should not be seen as isolated; rather,
they are linked with the four strategic pillars of the
OAS — democracy, human rights, comprehensive
development and multidimensional security — all of
which falls under the established banner of promoting
increasingly expanded rights for a greater number
of people.
Let me conclude my remarks by expressing the full
confidence of the OAS in the idea that today’s open
debate will make a vital contribution to the success of
the review of resolution 1540 (2004) and its future in the
fight against proliferation, to which the organization I
represent remains fully committed.
The President: I thank Mr. Koncke for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): My
delegation wishes to thank Malaysia for its initiative
to hold today’s debate on the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction (WMDs), a theme at the top of
the international agenda in view of its importance for
collective security.
The delegation of the Kingdom of Morocco aligns
itself with the statement made by the representative of
the Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries.
The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
is a threat to international peace and security. The
Kingdom of Morocco shares the conviction of the
international community, which remains concerned
about the threat of terrorism and the risk that non-State
actors might acquire weapons of mass destruction and
their means of delivery, develop or use them or engage
in the trafficking thereof.
The terrorist threat has been exacerbated to the
point of jeopardizing the stability and territorial
integrity of States. Similarly, efforts by terrorist groups
to use WMDs have increased. This is the real threat
that reinforces the need for the full and universal
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
The adoption of resolution 1540 (2004), in 2004,
reflected a shared determination to step up the fight
against the proliferation of chemical, biological,
radiological and nuclear (CBRN) weapons and their
delivery systems, and in particular to prevent their

S/PV.7758

acquisition by non-State actors. The contribution of
resolution 1540 (2004) to the non-proliferation regime,
a unique instrument by virtue of its scope and the
universal support it enjoys, is undeniable. The 10-year
extension of the mandate of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) in 2011 reflects the
shared determination to pursue the objectives of the
resolution, which has filled international law gaps, in
particular by introducing a comprehensive approach to
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
The Kingdom of Morocco strictly complies with
its obligations under all the relevant international
instruments on WMDs and their means of delivery,
including resolution 1540 (2004). The reports submitted
regularly by Morocco highlight the efforts of the
Kingdom to fulfil its obligations.
Morocco also participates in the process and
international efforts to fight against proliferation
and to promote a culture of safety through training,
practical exercises and exchange of experience and best
practices, such as the Nuclear Security Summit, the
Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism and the
Centres of Excellence for reducing nuclear, radiological,
bacteriological and chemical risks. In that context,
Morocco, together with Georgia and the Philippines,
established a Group of Friends that aims to heighten
awareness and promote and coordinate international
efforts in the area of chemical, biological, radiological
and nuclear risk reduction. Morocco, which currently
chairs the Group of Friends, invites all Member States
to a high-level event on CBRN risks and counterterrorism, to be organized by the Group in cooperation
with the United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice
Research Institute on 29 September. Morocco will also
host, in cooperation with the 1540 (2004) Committee,
the first meeting of African national contact points.
The Kingdom of Morocco has always stressed the
need for international cooperation and appropriate
technical assistance to bolster national capacities
on non-proliferation of WMDs and their means of
delivery, especially in Africa. Only active international
cooperation based on the principles of solidarity and
shared responsibility can enable an effective and
universal application of the provisions of resolution 1540
(2004) and the relevant multilateral instruments. The
assistance mechanisms in place should be strengthened
to be able to meet the expectations of States in need
and to effectively help them to fulfil their obligations.
I would also point out that, without the contribution

16-2665245/76

S/PV.7758

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

of enhanced regional and subregional cooperation,
national efforts will remain inadequate.
I cannot conclude without reaffirming that the
international community should accelerate its efforts
to bring about the total elimination of WMDs as the
ultimate guarantee against their proliferation, use
or acquisition by non-State actors. The international
community must safeguard the credibility and
effectiveness of the relevant instruments by fulfilling
all international obligations, including those related
to disarmament. It is equally important in that context
for the international community to move seriously
towards delegitimizing nuclear weapons, the only type
of weapon of mass destruction not to be subject to
prohibition through an international legal instrument.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): I would like to thank the briefers
and our colleagues from the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and its Group of
Experts for their excellent work in facilitating the
comprehensive review of the resolution.
Italy aligns itself with the statement made by the
observer of the European Union and with the European
Union report in support of the full and universal
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
Italy is concerned about the proliferation risk posed
by non-State actors. All Member States, international
organizations and institutions should constantly update
their response to these developments by improving
transfer controls for sensitive materials and by
enhancing the role of information and communications
technologies and social media in countering
terrorist narratives.
We welcome the increase in the number of national
reports and voluntary national implementation action
plans. We are also pleased to recall that last year Italy
deposited its instrument of ratification to the 2005
amendment to the Convention on the Physical Protection
of Nuclear Material. Significant progress has also been
made on the ratification of the International Convention
for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism.
We believe that the cooperation among Member
States and the 1540 (2004) Committee should be
enhanced. An increasing number of States are inviting
the Committee, together with the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, to conduct visits, which is another positive
46/76

23/08/2016

sign of States’ commitment in this field. In that regard, I
would like to recall the Committee’s visit to my country
last year.
Italy promoted the Nuclear Security Summit Gift
Basket on Nuclear Security Training and Support Centres
in support of the work of the Centres of Excellence in
enhancing nuclear security worldwide. Every year we
organize the International School on Nuclear Security
at the International Centre for Theoretical Physics, in
Trieste, which trains professionals from countries of the
developing world on the international legal framework
on nuclear security.
To counter the risk of the proliferation of chemical
weapons, Italy has conducted several chemical security
programmes in collaboration with the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW),
whose inspectors are often trained at Italian chemical,
biological, radiological and nuclear defence centres.
Italian chemical industries participate widely in the
OPCW Associate Programme, training experts from
other countries in various industrial operations in
order to facilitate industry-related implementation
of the Chemical Weapons Convention. Italy has
also contributed to the Joint United Nations-OPCW
multilateral operation that safely and security
transported and destroyed Syrian chemical agents,
including providing the United Nations-OPCW Joint
Mission with in-kind and financial assistance.
Finally, we made a voluntary contribution to the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
project on the regional implementation of resolution
1540 (2004), concerning the comprehensive review of
chemical safety and security in Ukraine.
Italy believes it would be appropriate to continue to
focus on four main areas.
First, we invite those States that have not yet
submitted their first national report to do so as soon as
possible.
Secondly, we need capacity-building initiatives in
States that lack the necessary means, which should be
supported by providing the Committee with appropriate
technical, humanitarian and financial resources.
Thirdly, the active involvement of the private sector,
civil society, national Parliaments and academia should
be encouraged in the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004), while cooperation with industry representatives
would strengthen control on dual-use material transfers.
16-26652

23/08/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Fourthly, border controls and the protection of
sensitive materials and goods experts are key tools for
fighting the proliferation, smuggling and trafficking
of weapons of mass destruction. The European Union
expert control regulation, which is legally binding and
directly applicable to all Member States, is a valuable
example of border-control policy aimed at curbing
illegal trafficking.
In conclusion, Italy reiterates its support for a
renewed commitment by the Security Council to
preventing and countering the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction and their means of delivery. Italy
remains fully committed to further enhancing it by
participating constructively in all relevant international
organizations and initiatives, as well as through active
engagement by Italian industry, civil society and
academia.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, allow me to thank the President
for convening this important meeting. I would also
like to welcome the presence of the Malaysian Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Home Affairs at
today’s meeting.
The initiative to organize this meeting on the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) is particularly
important for my country. Twelve years ago, the
Security Council unanimously adopted resolution 1540
(2004) because it was convinced of the importance
and the need to enhance efforts aimed at putting an
end to the emerging threat of the possible acquisition
by terrorist groups and non-State actors of weapons
of mass destruction (WMDs), raw materials for their
manufacture and their means of delivery. National,
regional and international efforts have succeeded in
ensuring some positive outcomes. Despite all that,
however, there remain serious shortcomings and gaps
that are being exploited by terrorist groups to obtain
weapons of mass destruction and to use them to achieve
their criminal goals.
Furthermore, we also see States Members of
the Organization providing terrorist groups with
chemical weapons or their raw materials. We also see
some countries claiming to do one thing while in fact
doing something quite different on the ground. They
close their eyes to serious violations that represent a
grave threat to international peace and security. Their

S/PV.7758

effects go beyond one particular State or particular
geographical boundaries.
Serious violations of resolution 1540 (2004)
are unfortunately a reality in Syria, where criminal
terrorist groups have on many occasions used chemical
weapons against civilians and the military. They
have been supported by Arab and regional countries,
as well as by the intelligence services of important
countries in the region and in the Organization, even
including some members of the Security Council. As
an unfortunate example of the use of chemical weapons
by terrorist groups active in Syria, I would like to
highlight the fact that, on 13 June, terrorist groups
in the vicinity of Haush Al-Fara launched a chemical
weapon against a number of Syrian soldiers. For a more
recent example, on 2 August, armed terrorist groups
targeted Al-Awamid square, in the Old town of Aleppo,
with toxic-gas missiles, which caused six deaths among
civilians, and 20 others suffocated.
Some members of the Security Council are
absolutely determined to identify the terrorist groups
that launch chemical weapons while at the same time
referring to them as the “moderate opposition”, their
having been thus classified by their intelligence
services. Those countries are providing that terrorist
“opposition” and mercenary groups with weapons,
financing, cover and logistical support, which is
exacerbating the crisis at great cost. According to
statements made by Robert Malley, an assistant to
the American President and White House coordinator
for Middle East, the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic has informed the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons of the incident in
Al-Awamid and requested a fact-finding mission to be
sent to verify the allegations about the use of chemical
weapons in Syria and to undertake an immediate
investigation into the incident.
Given Syria’s concern and its determination to
reveal the truth behind the use of chemical weapons
by terrorist groups, I was also called upon by my
country, Syria, to inform the Office of the SecretaryGeneral and the chairmanship of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism. I provided them with
information on terrorist groups linked to or affiliated
with the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS).
They have produced 45 chemical weapons, including
the use of chlorine and mustard gas. They used them
in Mosul in Iraq and in Raqqah governorate in Syria,

16-2665247/76

S/PV.7758

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

under the supervision of a member of ISIS, namely,
Abdel Rahman Al-Nawi. Some of those rockets went to
Deir ez-Zor governorate.
The Syrian Arab Republic has transmitted through
dozens of official letters, communicated to the
Secretary-General and to the various Presidents of the
Security Council and the Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), information as to certain Governments that are
supporting terrorism in my country. I am talking about
Turkey and Saudi Arabia, which facilitate terrorist
groups in obtaining chemical weapons. We submitted
this information to the Security Council and the 1540
Committee. As of 8 December 2012 through 8 August
2016, we have provided detailed information that some
of the Al-Qaida groups have tried and tested chemical
weapons in a laboratory in a town in Turkey to use
against civil targets in Syria. We have seen efforts by
terrorists to smuggle a substantial amount of sarin gas
through Turkey and into Syria. The gas went to Turkey
from Libya via a commercial jetliner. That began in
2013, and they tried to accuse the Syrian Government
of that. We also have voice recordings and videos
related to that, which confirm the fact that terrorist
groups have obtained chemicals and have used them in
many areas of Syria.
Despite all that has been revealed with regard to
these attempts, which include the trafficking of sarin
gas through Turkey into Syria, there have been detailed
reports that concern the involvement of certain States
that are behind the attacks that have targeted Khan
Al-Asal, near Aleppo, and the area near Damascus on
21 August 2013. The Security Council has taken no
steps, because powerful countries prevented the team
led by Mr. Åke Sellström from fulfilling its role and
assuming its responsibilities to deal with the terrorism
to which Syria is exposed. The countries I am referring
to — which support terrorism have set out red, green
and yellow lines — have not played their due role
and assumed their responsibilities, but have assigned
responsibility to countries that in fact support terrorism.
There has also been an attempt to obstruct the RussianChinese draft resolution submitted to the Council that
aims at taking early measures to prevent non-State
actors from acquiring and using chemical weapons.
My Government reiterates once again its total
commitment to the international instruments and the
procedures now under way to promote cooperation,
exchange information and coordinate in order to face the
48/76

23/08/2016

threat of terrorists and non-State actors gaining access to
weapons of mass obstruction. The Government of Syria
has done so in a continuous way. We have submitted
five national reports to the 1540 Committee on the
implementation of that resolution. The Government
of my country now calls upon the Security Council
and its various subsidiary bodies to assume their
responsibility to ensure that terrorists groups that are
active in Syria do not get hold of chemical weapons and
to hold responsible those countries that are supporting
terrorism. That would contribute effectively to efforts
aimed at maintaining international peace and security
and would ensure the implementation of the mandate of
the 1540 Committee.
In conclusion, I would like to point out that the two
colleagues representing the United States of America
and the United Kingdom mentioned that the Joint
Investigative Mechanism would consider or review the
various cases where chemical weapons were recently
used. That means that those two delegations, which
represent permanent members of the Security Council,
do not know what they are talking about at all, because
the mandate of the Joint Investigative Mechanism does
not include recent incidents. It limits its work to the nine
cases identified by the earlier fact-finding mission. It is
not right for a representative on the Security Council
to speak of an issue of which he is totally ignorant,
particularly if he represents a permanent member.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Philippines.
Ms. Yparraguirre (Philippines): The Philippines
is indeed proud to see a member of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations in the Security Council
presidency for the month of August. The Philippines
congratulates the Malaysian presidency for convening
this open debate, which will deepen our discourse on
the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
The prevailing global security environment,
characterized by persistent inter- and intrastate
conflicts and frequent violent extremist activities,
makes it even more incumbent upon us to find urgent
and concrete measures that will ensure that weapons
of mass destruction (WMDs) are not propagated and
never used. The mere existence of those destructive
weapons makes the world highly vulnerable to their
use, whether by intent, miscalculation or accident. It is
therefore imperative to remain focused on the ultimate
goal of ridding the world of those weapons.
16-26652

23/08/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

The international community has made great strides
in the area of non-proliferation with the adoption and
implementation of Security Council resolution 1540
(2004) and other related initiatives, such as the Nuclear
Security Summit process, which complement other
existing global legal instruments. The changing face
of international conflict, however, necessitates tougher
measures and stronger international cooperation
that will guarantee effective implementation by each
individual State. In that regard, we welcome the open
consultations on the comprehensive review of the status
of implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) convened
by Spain last June. We look forward to the outcome of
the review in December, when we will have identified
and recommended ways and means to improve the
resolution’s implementation.
Resolution 1540 (2004) encourages all States to
prepare, on a voluntary basis, national implementation
action plans. More than a decade since the resolution’s
adoption, we have come to realize that the national
action plan is a vital, indispensable tool if States are to
be fully prepared to address the proliferation of WMDs.
The Philippines has in place its own chemical,
biological, radiological and nuclear (CBRN) action plan
aimed at reducing the threat of, and damage from, CBRN
incidents of accidental, natural or intentional origin,
including terrorist acts. Our CBRN national action plan
provides a unified approach to build the capacity of
the Philippines to respond to the risks associated with
CBRN materials. To make our CBRN national action
plan more effective, we recently signed into law a bill to
further strengthen our regime against the proliferation
of WMDs in our country. The Strategic Trade
Management Act will stop the spread of WMDs through
responsible management of trade and investment in
strategic goods and the provisions of related services.
We consider strategic goods as products that, for
security reasons or due to international agreements,
are considered to be of such military importance that
their export is either prohibited altogether or subject
to specific conditions. Such goods are generally
suitable to be used for military purposes or for the
production of WMDs. Our law requires establishing
a national strategic goods list to describe specifically
the strategic goods subject to authorization. The list
will be in conformity with international commitments
and non-proliferation obligations pursuant to bilateral
and multilateral treaties, international conventions and
international non-proliferation regimes.

S/PV.7758

Many Member States have pointed to the necessity
of international and regional cooperation being key
in our fight against WMDs. For countries that do not
yet have the highest level of detection capability to
intercept WMDs, continuous assistance in training and
resources from regional and international partners will
be essential. We also urge the Committee established
pursuant to Security Council resolution 1540 (2004)
to put in place an improved matchmaking system
to ensure prompt and effective response to requests
for assistance.
Finally, the Philippines has banded with 14 other
Member States to further promote CBRN risk mitigation
and security governance in the United Nations. As
mentioned earlier by the representative of Morocco,
in late September the Group of Friends of CBRN Risk
Mitigation and Security Governance will host a highlevel side event that will focus on CBRN risk mitigation
in the context of combating terrorism. The Group,
which has grown to 15 members, stands ready to work
with the 1540 Committee and other like-minded groups
to focus the spotlight on the risks of CBRN materials
falling into the hands of terrorists.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Grant (Canada): I have four main points to
make today on the challenges that we face in countering
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs) and their means of delivery.
First, on Security Council resolution 1540 (2004),
the resolution has contributed greatly to international
peace and security over the past 12 years. However, more
must be done to ensure that it is fully implemented by
all Member States and adapted to emerging challenges.
As part of the 31-member Global Partnership against
the Spread of Weapons and Materials of Mass
Destruction, Canada has helped partner countries meet
their resolution 1540 (2004) obligations, including by
providing more than $1.2 billion over the past decade to
prevent the proliferation of WMDs and related materials.
Unfortunately, as we underscored during the open
consultation on the comprehensive review of resolution
1540 (2004) in June, assistance requests received
through the Committee established pursuant to
Security Council resolution 1540 (2004) almost always
lack the specificity required for willing countries to
provide assistance. If resolution 1540 (2004) is to be
fully implemented, the Committee should establish

16-2665249/76

S/PV.7758

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

an implementation support unit dedicated to helping
Member States develop detailed and actionable
assistance requests.
(spoke in French)
Secondly, with respect to enhancing nuclear
security, Canada is strongly committed to maintaining
our own robust domestic regime and providing
international assistance. At the 2016 Nuclear Security
Summit, Canada committed $42 million for nuclear and
radiological security worldwide, and, along with Spain
and the Republic of Korea, spearheaded the adoption of
the joint statement on promoting the full and universal
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). To continue
implementing those nuclear-security commitments,
Canada is proud to be convening the first meeting of
the Nuclear Security Contact Group on the margins
of the International Atomic Energy Agency General
Conference to be held in September.
Thirdly, the full implementation of the Biological
and Toxin Weapons Convention and the Chemical
Weapons Convention will greatly help to prevent
non-State actors from acquiring chemical and
biological weapons. All Member States should ensure
effective national control of chemical and life-science
research to prevent its use for terrorist purposes, while
realizing its important peaceful benefits. We call on
all Member States to join those important conventions
and demonstrate their commitment to preventing the
proliferation of biological and chemical weapons.
(spoke in English)
Finally, let me underline Canada’s commitment
to progressive and pragmatic efforts to halt the spread
of nuclear weapons, draw down existing stockpiles
and eliminate them verifiably and irreversibly. Such
a step-by-step approach includes the negotiation of a
fissile material cut-off treaty that bans the production
of nuclear explosive materials — which is the next
logical step in advancing non-proliferation and nuclear
disarmament goals. Ending fissile material production
will clearly help counter WMD proliferation. We
strongly believe that the negotiation of a fissile material
cut-off treaty should commence as soon as possible,
and we will continue to work towards that goal.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belgium.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke
in French): I thank the President for organizing this
50/76

23/08/2016

debate, which is timely in the context of the current
review of resolution 1540 (2004).
Belgium aligns itself with the statement made by
the observer of the European Union.
As a member of the Group of Friends of resolution
1540 (2004), we wish to stress the importance and
relevance of that instrument in the fight against
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
particularly their manufacture, possession and use by
non-State actors.
Today, that struggle must take into account
the evolution of the risks posed, in terms of both
the hardware and propaganda used and its ongoing
geographical proliferation.
My country calls for the full implementation by all
States of all of the provisions of resolution 1540 (2004)
and for its strengthening. While progress has been
observed in the adoption by States of legal frameworks,
those measures sometimes still lack implementation.
It is also important that all organizations involved
in the implementation of the resolution coordinate
their efforts, seek constructive synergies and avoid
duplication of effort.
The fight against terrorism has a multidimensional
character, and we can only welcome the adoption
by the General Assembly of the Global Strategy
against Terrorism, revised in June, and call for its
implementation. The definition of new legal provisions
to take into account recent technical and technological
developments and to prevent the financing of terrorism
should also be encouraged.
Awareness of the private and civil-society sector is
also essential, as is, more specifically, outreach to the
academic world. In that regard, my country launched
an awareness campaign in the academic and research
sectors regarding the risks of the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and the role of academic
and scientific research in that context.
The issues of the maintenance and transport of
weapons of mass destruction deserve greater focus.
The adoption by the Security Council, on 22 July, of
resolution 2298 (2016), on the chemical weapons found
in Libya, is welcome. Another challenge concerns
export controls, the fight against traffickers and
border security.
16-26652

23/08/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Finally, international cooperation is the catalyst
needed to strengthen resolution 1540 (2004) in its
preventive aspects. My country is committed to
the concept of peer review. In the framework of the
Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production and Stockpiling of Biological and Toxin
Weapons and on Their Destruction, the Benelux
countries organized a peer review conference in 2015, the
results of which were shared with other States parties to
the Convention in view of the upcoming eighth Review
Conference in November this year. The objective is to
improve the implementation of the Convention at the
national level, build trust among partners, share best
practices and strengthen the debate on international
verification of compliance with the Convention.
The review of resolution 1540 (2004) must
also enable progress through joint efforts aimed at
strengthening the national structures of each State.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Peru.
Mr. Tenya Hasegawa (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
Peru welcomes the presidency’s convening of this
meeting and would like to reiterate its commitment
and full support for the Security Council’s robust
efforts aimed at promoting dialogue and cooperation
to confront the threat posed by the proliferation of
nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and their
means of delivery.
Since the founding of the United Nations, the
international community has promoted the building
of a comprehensive international legal regime
on disarmament, specifically nuclear, chemical
and biological weapons. The ultimate solution for
preventing proliferation lies in achieving the goal of
total elimination and prohibition. With respect to the
international legal regime, we note a synergy among the
mandates of the main international instruments on the
subject. Specific conventions accord with the provisions
of resolution 1540 (2004) in seeking to prevent access
by terrorists to weapons of mass destruction.
The adoption of resolution 1540 (2004) was a historic
milestone in addressing new threats to international
peace and security associated with the proliferation of
nuclear, chemical and biological weapons to non-State
actors. Peru was a sponsor the resolution because we
believed that it was necessary at the time, as it is now,
to act urgently to promote the international and full
universalization and implementation of multilateral

S/PV.7758

treaties to prevent the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, as well as to encourage States to
adopt effective national legislation to control the
illicit transfer of such weapons, their delivery systems
and related materials. We believe that it is necessary
that States continue along the path towards adopting
measures to prevent the financing of prohibited
activities related to weapons of mass destruction, their
delivery systems and related materials, including with
regard to the physical protection of, and accounting for,
materials related to weapons of mass destruction, all
the while ensuring their safe production, use, storage
and transport.
My country is firmly committed to efforts
aimed at achieving complete disarmament and the
non-proliferation of nuclear, biological and chemical
weapons, as well as their delivery systems. We therefore
support the enhancement and universalization of legally
binding multilateral agreements in that area, having
taken various administrative and criminal measures
to effectively fulfil the obligations under resolution
1540 (2004), mainly in the areas of border and customs
control, controlling air and maritime spaces, and
intelligence, in order to prevent the illicit production
of, and trade in, weapons of mass destruction. In that
regard, Peru has adapted its domestic legislation to
the standards set out in resolution 1540 (2004), as was
shown in the latest reports submitted by my country
on its level of compliance with it. My country urges
all States to support international efforts to prevent
terrorists from acquiring weapons of mass destruction
and calls for taking and strengthening national
measures, as appropriate, so as to prevent non-State
actors from acquiring weapons of mass destruction,
their delivery systems and materials and technologies
related to their production.
In conclusion, my delegation believes that the
maintenance of peace and security is a task that requires
the participation of the international community as a
whole. In that regard, Peru remains firmly committed
to the overall architecture of the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. We call upon all Member
States to intensify their efforts in that area. You can
count on Peru, Madam President, to continue to do its
part in this collective effort.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.

16-2665251/76

S/PV.7758

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Mr. Thoms (Germany): Let me express our
gratitude to the Presisdent for convening this open
debate on non-proliferation.
I would also like to align myself with the statement
made by the observer of the European Union.
While it is undisputable that substantial progress
has been made in the 12 years since the adoption of
resolution 1540 (2004), there is no doubt that the risk
of non-State actors acquiring, developing, trafficking
in or using weapons of mass destruction (WMDs) and
their means of delivery remains high. Unfortunately, it
is a risk that can quickly become a reality, as the use
of chemical weapons by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham in Syria, particularly in Iraq, has clearly
shown. We therefore urge all States to continue to
work towards the aim of full implementation, bearing
in mind the importance of a global, multilateral and
binding approach to non-proliferation.
Germany reaffirms its unwavering commitment to
the full and universal implementation of the obligations
deriving from resolution 1540 (2004). That of course
includes enhancing the security of nuclear materials
worldwide. Germany continues to encourage and assist
other States in implementing resolution 1540 (2004).
We have done so, for example, by sharing experiences
and identifying effective practices.
Against the background of recent proposals
to intensify efforts to combat the use of chemical
weapons by terrorists, we need to carefully examine
the contribution that resolution 1540 (2004) can make
in that context, while working closely with other
forums, such as the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons. The key to preventing such acts
is without any doubt the national implementation of
Security Council resolutions and other obligations. We
need to think more carefully about ways to enhance the
implementation of the relevant resolutions. Resolution
1540 (2004) requires States to take a number of
specific measures, adopti and enforce effective laws
and establish export controls of dual-use goods and
technologies.
At the same time, we need to keep in mind that, in a
globalized world, the involvement of the private sector
is vital for successful non-proliferation. After all, it is
the private sector that must implement many of the rules
and laws. Against that backdrop, Germany initiated the
Wiesbaden process in 2011, which focuses on private
sector engagement in the context of resolution 1540
52/76

23/08/2016

(2004). To date, four international industry outreach
conferences have taken place. Industry representatives
from diverse sectors, such as the aviation, biosecurity,
banking, finance, electronics, energy, public-health,
pharmaceutical and transportation sectors, have shared
best practices in export control and compliance. We are
proud that Wiesbaden has become a brand and that the
issue is part of the agenda on this resolution. Listening to
concerns and proposals of industry representatives has
helped and will facilitate more effective implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) — first, by strengthening
export controls, secondly, by controlling access to
intangible transfers of technology and, thirdly, by
controlling information that could be used for WMDs
and their means of delivery.
The fourth Wiesbaden Conference, held in November
2015, aimed at contributing to the comprehensive review
by focusing on lessons learned from past conferences.
There are three outcomes that I would like to mention
in particular: first, ways and challenges to effectively
implement compliance programmes within enterprises;
secondly, the creation of industry networks, especially
to help small- and medium-sized enterprises to comply
with all national regulations and requirements; and,
finally, the establishment of regional forums.
Moreover, on a broader scale, Germany is engaged
in fighting the proliferation of biological and chemical
weapons. We are of the opinion that it is crucial to
raise awareness of illegal procurement activities and
dual-use risks among enterprises in the biotechnology
and chemical industries. As producers of products that
are critical owing to their dual-use risk, enterprises play
a key role in the implementation process of resolution
1540 (2004).
Let me conclude by stressing that Germany stands
ready to broaden the scope of the Wiesbaden process
by addressing the issues of biosecurity, chemical and
nuclear security, transport, brokering and export control.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Observer of the Observer State of the Holy
See to the United Nations.
Brother Carroll: The Holy See commends the
presidency of Malaysia for bringing this topic to
the attention of the Security Council and the entire
international community.
At the very outset, my delegation wishes to
reiterate the Holy See’s constant and firm opposition to
16-26652

23/08/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

the production and use of weapons of mass destruction.
Any act or weapon that aims indiscriminately to destroy
entire cities or extensive areas, together with their
inhabitants, is against all international humanitarian
law and merits unequivocal and unhesitating
condemnation.
While treaties and conventions have been
reached to ban chemical and biological weapons and
prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons, human
genius continues to invent new ways of annihilating
humankind. For instance, conventional weapons
are becoming increasingly less conventional as
technological advances elevate their power to destroy
to the level of weapons of mass destruction.
For that reason, the Holy See recommends that
discussions on weapons of mass destruction go beyond
the traditional categories of nuclear, chemical, biological
and radiological weapons to include devastatingly
powerful conventional weapons used to perpetrate
war crimes and crimes against humanity. Military
forces, rebels, terrorists and extremist groups use, with
greater frequency, ever-more powerful conventional
weapons, showing scant regard for civilian immunity,
discrimination or proportionality.
Indeed, humanitarian disasters that continue
to unfold in real time before our very own eyes
show us that schools, hospitals and other civilian
infrastructure are blown up by the incessant use of
powerful conventional weapons. The tens of millions
of refugees and displaced persons send an important
message in the Chamber today: We must flee or die
as our cities and communities are entirely devastated,
not by nuclear, chemical or biological weapons, but by
powerful conventional weapons. These tragedies call
for the international community to strictly implement
all legally binding treaties and instruments on the
prohibition and non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, and urgently call us to review existing
classifications and definitions of what constitutes a
weapon of mass destruction.
In this very Chamber and in other forums, the
Holy See has repeatedly called on weapon-producing
nations of the world to severely limit and control the
manufacture and sale of weapons to unstable countries
and regions of the world, where the likelihood of their
illegal use and of falling into the hands of non-State
actors is real and present. The proliferation of weapons,
regardless of whether they are conventional or of mass

S/PV.7758

destruction, simply aggravates situations of conflict
and results in huge human and material costs, thereby
profoundly undermining development and the search
for lasting peace. Indeed, non-proliferation, arms
control and disarmament underpin global security
and sustainable development. Without them, the
achievement of the much-vaunted 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development will be seriously jeopardized.
Double standards in the implementation of
treaties and conventions on the prohibition and the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction can
only encourage disregard for the very same treaties
and conventions on the part of those who are aggrieved
or discriminated against. The discrimination between
countries with and without weapons of mass destruction
cannot be a permanent situation. If it is unthinkable to
imagine a world where weapons of mass destruction
are available to all, it is reasonable to imagine, and to
work collectively for, a world where nobody has them
at all. The international community must therefore
appeal and act with one voice to ban all weapons of
mass destruction. This objective requires the continued
advocacy and cooperation of all, because much remains
to be done.
There is no doubt that every step towards banning
weapons of mass destruction is a giant step towards
achieving the goal of a better world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I would first
like to thank Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Home Affairs Ahmad Zahid Hamidi and the Malaysian
presidency for organizing this important open debate.
We appreciate this opportunity for the Security Council
to focus on promoting the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) and to reaffirm its resolve against the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs).
I would also like to join others in thanking SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon, Special Representative Roux,
Mr. Koblentz and Under-Secretary-General Kim Won-soo
for their briefings.
Since its adoption in 2004, resolution 1540 (2004)
has been an important part of the global security
architecture. It has helped enable the international
community to meet emerging security challenges
coming from the possibility of non-State actors using
WMDs for terrorist purposes. Yet it can and should
play a greater role in the face of daunting challenges.

16-2665253/76

S/PV.7758

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Rapid advances in science and technology have
increased accessibility to WMDs and related materials
by non-State actors. International terrorists groups,
such Al-Qaida and the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL), are watching for loopholes in the
non-proliferation regime. On our efforts to secure the
full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), I would
like to make three points.
First, we must further cement partnerships with
regional and international organizations, academia
and civil society. In particular, the role of industry
is essential in preventing WMD proliferation, as it is
often at the front line of dealing with sensitive and
dual-use items. In that regard, the Republic of Korea
will host the first regional Wiesbaden Conference in
Asia for industry outreach on resolution 1540 (2004).
The Conference aims to enhance communication
between Government and the private sector and to
strengthen regional implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). We will share the results of the conference
with the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) with a view to contributing specific
recommendations from industry.
Secondly, we must enhance the 1540 Committee’s
role in providing assistance to Member States. This
is crucial for the broad spectrum of obligations to
be effectively met. As noted during the formal open
consultations in June, the number of assistance
requests from Member States has been declining, and
the responses to those requests modest. We need to
strengthen the matchmaking role of the Committee
to support national capacity-building in collaboration
with various regional and international organizations.
Thirdly, we need a more coordinated and holistic
approach to countering WMD proliferation. Identifying
new trends in the security environment and responding
in a timely manner cannot be achieved by the 1540
Committee alone. In that regard, we welcome the 1540
Committee’s efforts to coordinate with the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2254 (2015).
Before concluding, I would be remiss if I did
not mention the threat posed by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s nuclear programme. The
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea continues to
defy the international community by refusing to end
its pursuit of a nuclear-weapon capability. That was
demonstrated by its fourth nuclear test, on 6 January,
54/76

23/08/2016

and the 17 ballistic missile launches conducted this year.
North Korea’s persistent violations of international
obligations, including Security Council resolutions,
call into question its qualification as a United Nations
State Member. We must take united action to ensure
that North Korea complies with its obligations.
Once again, I would like to reaffirm the Republic
of Korea’s commitment to the full and universal
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). We will
continue to support and work closely with the 1540
Committee.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cuba.
Mr. Reyes Rodríguez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
The increasing challenges to the maintenance of peace
and security is a legitimate concern of the international
community. The possibility of attacks being carried
out using nuclear, chemical and biological materials
cannot be ruled out. Such risks cannot be eliminated
by applying a selective approach limited to horizontal
proliferation while ignoring vertical proliferation and
general and complete disarmament. In that regard, we
oppose measures that prohibit or restrict the legitimate
right of States to gain access to and use nuclear energy,
biological agents or chemical substances and the
technologies and knowledge associated with them,
whenever such use is for peaceful purposes.
We are deeply concerned about the threat posed
by the existence of weapons of mass destruction,
particularly nuclear weapons. We regret that the 2015
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) ended
without an agreement. We also regret the lack of
political will shown by certain nuclear-weapon States
and others protected by the so-called nuclear umbrella.
As a result, it has proved impossible to put an end to the
serious situation of parties’ non-compliance with the
provisions of the Treaty and the agreements reached at
the 1995, 2000 and 2010 Review Conferences.
Contrary to the provisions of the NPT and the calls
from the overwhelming majority of the international
community, multimillion-dollar plans have been
launched to modernize nuclear arsenals and create
new means of delivery. With new and modified nuclear
warheads, modern intercontinental ballistic missiles,
hypersonic systems and sophisticated drones, our
planet will not be a safer world.
16-26652

23/08/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

In Cuba, in accordance with the international
obligations that we have assumed under the NPT, the
Chemical Weapons Convention, the Biological Weapons
Convention and the International Atomic Energy
Agency, all of our programmes in the nuclear, chemical
and biological fields have a strictly peaceful character
and are directed to the socioeconomic development of
the country. Similarly, the Cuban State has adopted a
set of measures to ensure that no terrorist acts, which
we condemn outright, are committed in the country,
nor do we permit the organization or financing of acts
of that type against other States.
In connection with the review process of resolution
1540 (2004) that is taking place this year, Cuba has
stressed that the resolution should include a reference to
the imperative of total and complete disarmament and
the link between non-proliferation and disarmament.
Cuba supports the urgent start of negotiations aimed
at reaching agreement on an inclusive nuclear-weapons
convention that ensures the prohibition of such
weapons as well as their irreversible, transparent and
verifiable elimination.
Cuba is meeting its obligations and commitments
under the relevant international treaties to which
it is a party. The full implementation of the relevant
international instruments is an effective way to prevent
the acquisition and use of weapons of mass destruction.
At the same time, Cuba believes that international
cooperation in the implementation of the obligations
and commitments, as well as technical assistance,
without conditions or discrimination, plays a key role.
We believe that resolution 1540 (2004) must, as
a priority, preserve its non-proliferation component.
Cuba believe that the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) should play an important
role in assisting States in its implementation, which
is the purpose for which it was created. The actions
of the Security Council must not undermine existing
multilateral treaties on weapons of mass destruction,
international organizations established in connection
with those treaties or the role of the General Assembly.
We reaffirm our conviction that the only absolute
guarantee for preventing the acquisition and use of
weapons of mass destruction, including by terrorists, is
the complete and immediate elimination and prohibition
of all nuclear weapons from the face of the Earth.
No measure will be fully effective in preventing the

S/PV.7758

occurrence of terrorist attacks with weapons of mass
destruction as long as such weapons continue to exist.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): South Africa welcomes
the convening of today’s open debate on the challenges
we face in addressing the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction (WMDs), their means of delivery and
related materials. The subject of today’s open debate is
very important and relevant, particularly in the wake
of the continuous threats to international peace and
security posed by the continued possession, use and
threat of use of WMDs and their means of delivery.
Such threats are further compounded by the everincreasing chances that such weapons could end up in
the hands of non-State actors.
South Africa associates itself with the statement
made by the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries. I would like to share South Africa’s
perspective on the topic before us.
Since 1994, South Africa has been steadfast in its
commitment to multilateralism in addressing the peace
and security challenges facing the global community,
including the horizontal and vertical proliferation
of WMDs and their means of delivery. South Africa
reaffirms that no cause could ever justify the use or
threat of use of weapons of mass destruction anywhere,
by anyone or under any circumstances.
While significant progress has been achieved in
the elimination of biological and chemical weapons
through the universalization and implementation of
the conventions prohibiting biological and chemical
weapons, progress towards a world free of nuclear
weapons continues to lag behind. Significantly, nuclear
weapons remain the only WMDs yet to be subject to
a global prohibition. Regrettably, the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), which
constitutes the foundation of the nuclear non-proliferation
regime, continues to be subject to significant tensions
resulting primarily from the non-implementation of the
nuclear-disarmament obligations under article VI of the
Treaty and the related commitments made at the 1995,
2000 and 2010 NPT Review Conferences.
The three international Conferences on the
Humanitarian Impact of Nuclear Weapons held since
2012 and the Open-ended Working Group of the

16-2665255/76

S/PV.7758

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

General Assembly to develop proposals to take forward
multilateral nuclear disarmament negotiations for
the achievement and maintenance of a world without
nuclear weapons, which was convened in Geneva this
year, provided inclusive platforms for the international
community to explore options for taking forward
multilateral nuclear-disarmament negotiations aimed
at achieving and maintaining a world without nuclear
weapons. In that context, the Open-ended Working
Group has now recommended to the Assembly
that it convene a conference in 2017 to commence
negotiations on a treaty prohibiting nuclear weapons.
While such a treaty may not achieve immediate results,
it could, as an interim step, address a glaring gap in
the international legal architecture on the legality of
nuclear weapons. Such a treaty would also strengthen
the NPT and underline the urgency of accelerating the
implementation of nuclear-disarmament obligations
and related commitments.
With regard to biological and chemical weapons,
South Africa remains committed to the universalization
of the relevant instruments and to the full implementation
of all legally binding obligations. With the upcoming
2016 Review Conference of the Biological Weapons
Convention, South Africa will work constructively
towards an outcome that would strengthen the
Convention and its balanced implementation, including
through an enhanced inter-sessional process and an
appropriately resourced implementation-support unit.
In terms of the Chemical Weapons Convention,
South Africa welcomes the progress made towards
the destruction of chemical weapons around the
globe. In that regard, we welcome the progress made
in the elimination of the Syrian chemical weapons
and facilities. We furthermore welcome the progress
made by the Russian Federation and the United States
of America, which are scheduled to complete their
destruction activities in 2020 and 2023, respectively.
We share the concern of the international
community with regard to the threat posed by non-State
actors acquiring weapons of mass destruction. In that
regard, we remain committed to the strengthening of
transfer controls, as called for in resolution 1540 (2004).
We recognize the need for international assistance and
cooperation, especially for States that may not have the
requisite resources to give effect to their obligations.
South Africa participated in the formal consultations
on the comprehensive review of resolution 1540 (2004),
56/76

23/08/2016

which were ably organized by Spain in June. We look
forward to the review outcomes, which we hope will
strengthen the resolution and provide an added dynamic
in tackling the challenges of WMD proliferation,
particularly with regard to non-State actors.
Over the years, South Africa has strengthened
its implementation capability through comprehensive
national legislation focused on WMDs and their
means of delivery, which includes the establishment
of the Council for the Non-Proliferation of Weapons
of Mass Destruction. That Council is responsible
for coordinating the national implementation of our
international WMD obligations and regulations and
for monitoring compliance across all the relevant
stakeholders. Our domestic legislation is subject to
continuous review, which takes into account new
technological developments and experiences in
national implementation. South Africa remains ready
to continue to play its part in assisting countries
in our region and beyond in strengthening national
controls over sensitive items that may contribute to the
development of weapons of mass destruction and their
means of delivery.
While dealing with the the challenges I have
mentioned, it is imperative that no unwarranted
restrictions be imposed on the inalienable right of
Member States, particularly developing countries, to
use any related materials, equipment and technologies
for peaceful purposes. In that regard, the opportunities
provided by nuclear technologies in the implementation
of the Sustainable Development Goals, particularly in
areas such as food security, public-health technologies
and clean energy, cannot be overlooked. Furthermore,
the exchange of scientific information, equipment and
materials for peaceful purposes is greatly needed in
Africa to deal with the spread of infectious diseases,
which could derail socioeconomic growth and
development if not adequately addressed.
South Africa’s experience with the implementation
of WMD regimes has demonstrated that the challenges
of WMDs and their delivery systems can be addressed
through the following ways. First, we must strengthen
national legislation and implementation capabilities.
Secondly, we need to accelerate the provision of
capacity-building and technical expertise, especially
to developing countries, including those in Africa.
Thirdly, we must strengthen international cooperation
with other related international organizations.
Fourthly, we need to ensure adequate and predictable
16-26652

23/08/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

S/PV.7758

funding for the relevant international organizations and
implementation-support structures to enable them to
implement their mandates. Fifthly, we must strengthen
cooperation between regional organizations and the
relevant multilateral organizations. Sixthly, and lastly,
we need to enhance cooperation with civil society and
the private sector.

led to significant progress in reducing the amount
of weapons-usable nuclear material in circulation.
It strengthened the international nuclear-security
architecture and enhanced international cooperation in
that field. In addition, the Summits themselves served
to raise awareness at the highest political levels of the
nuclear and radiological terrorism threat.

In conclusion, the threat of WMD proliferation
can be dealt with effectively only through increased
international cooperation and assistance and the
strengthening of the relevant multilateral instruments
and institutions. Non-proliferation is not a goal in itself,
but a means towards the goal of a world free from the
threat posed by weapons of mass destruction and their
means of delivery. Selectivity and discriminatory
practices will not serve our collective interests in
strengthening international peace and security. What is
required is a faithful and balanced implementation of
the various international legally binding instruments.

As the Summit host in 2014, we sought to contribute
actively to translating the Nuclear Security Summit
political commitments into concrete actions. In the
same vein, the Netherlands is currently the international
coordinator for the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear
Terrorism. The Initiative has been instrumental in
enhancing national capabilities through practical and
effective international cooperation, which seeks to
prevent, detect and respond to nuclear terrorism.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I join my
colleagues in expressing my appreciation to Malaysia
for organizing this timely and important debate.
The prevention of the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction (WMDs) and related materials and
technologies to violent, extremist armed groups and
non-State actors is of crucial importance to global
security. Such proliferation represents a threat that
requires strong national and international mechanisms
and calls for effective international cooperation. It is
therefore essential to maintain its prominent place on the
international agenda. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
is, and will remain, a dedicated international partner
in that regard, which we hope to demonstrate further if
elected as a member of the Council in 2018.
I align myself with the statement made earlier today
by the observer of the European Union.
Let me take this opportunity to highlight some
of the activities and priorities of the Netherlands. I
will focus on three issues, namely, nuclear security,
inclusiveness and resolution 1540 (2004).
On nuclear security, the prevention of nuclear and
radiological terrorism has been one of our top priorities
for the past several years. We took active part in the
Nuclear Security Summit process and hosted the
meeting in 2014 held in The Hague. The Summit process

My second point concerns inclusiveness. Through
the initiatives and activities I have just mentioned, a
robust network of political, judicial, intelligence and
technical contacts has been established. Collaboration
within and across Governments has been enhanced.
Other relevant groups have also become more engaged,
including industry and civil society. That engagement
is essential to our efforts to prevent the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction — a point made so
clearly by our colleague from Italy earlier today.
Going forward, we believe it is necessary to take steps
to maintain such networks and to sustain close and
effective international cooperation.
My third point concerns resolution 1540 (2004).
The Kingdom of the Netherlands remains firmly
committed to the full and effective implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004), which we see as a central
instrument for preventing the spread of weapons of mass
destruction to non-State actors. The comprehensive
review of resolution 1540 (2004) offers a very welcome
opportunity to strengthen that implementation, and
we greatly appreciate the leadership of Spain in that
regard. We pay tribute to the open and inclusive
nature of the review process, as set up by Spain.
Especially commendable is the involvement of the
wider membership.
Enhancing the effective implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) requires the sustainable
enforcement of national laws and regulations. That
concerns not just law enforcement, but also export
controls, physical protection and control of the financial
channels used by non-State actors to proliferate

16-2665257/76

S/PV.7758

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

weapons. Challenges clearly remain when it comes to
effective implementation.
From our perspective, we see three ways to
strengthen the implementation mechanism. The first
involves providing technical assistance, the point
raised by our South African colleague, who spoke just
before me. The further provision of technical assistance
is quite crucial. Secondly, we must promote regional
collaboration so as to prevent implementation gaps.
And, thirdly, we need to promote active engagement
with industry, the private sector and civil society.
In conclusion, although much has been
accomplished to prevent the spread of WMDs, related
materials and technologies, much more remains to
be done. We should maintain momentum in raising
awareness of the threats and challenges in that regard.
Together we should devise and implement the measures
needed to combat the chemical, biological, radiological
and nuclear terrorism threat. Only by working together,
all of us, can we be truly effective. The Kingdom of
the Netherlands looks forward to continuing to work
closely with partners on this issue as part of peace,
justice and development.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Perera (Sri Lanka): Let me take this opportunity
to join other speakers in commending the Malaysian
presidency for convening this timely open debate on
the challenges we face in addressing the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction, their means of delivery
and related materials. We express our appreciation to
Mr. Ahmad Zahid Hamidi, Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Home Affairs of Malaysia, for presiding
over the meeting this morning, and to the SecretaryGeneral for his opening remarks.
The need to achieve a world free of nuclear
weapons and other weapons of mass destruction is now
more urgent than ever. As the menace of terrorism, with
the increasing threat of destabilization of established
States, continues to confront the international
community, there is the danger that weapons of
mass destruction, their means of delivery and related
material will fall into the hands of non-State actors,
with unthinkable consequences.
Our urgent attention must be focused on this
grave issue. There is a dire a need to enhance the
coordination of efforts at national, subregional, regional
58/76

23/08/2016

and international levels in order to strengthen a global
response to that serious challenge and the threat it poses
to international security. Resolution 1540 (2004), a key
component of the global non-proliferation architecture,
underlines the importance of promoting dialogue and
cooperation among States in addressing the threat posed
by the proliferation of nuclear, chemical or biological
weapons and their means of delivery. This open debate
is an important step in that direction.
Strengthening the disarmament treaty regime is
essential to ensure a rules-based regime for nuclear
disarmament. In that connection, we wish to recall,
and reiterate our support for, the key recommendations
of the Weapons of Mass Destruction Commission
of 2006, specifically with regard to the paramount
value of multilateralism and the overall importance
of treaties and international law in achieving the
goal of disarmament. Apart from the key instruments
in the field of disarmament, such as the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT),
there is the Convention on the Physical Protection of
Nuclear Material and the International Convention
for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism,
which address specific situations involving access to
nuclear material by non-State actors. They provide a
comprehensive normative framework for international
cooperation to address this challenge.
We also welcome the work carried out by Spain as
Chair of the Committee established pursuant to Security
Council resolution 1540 (2004) in the comprehensive
review of the resolution. This debate will no doubt
make rich contributions to that ongoing comprehensive
review process, which is expected to come up with
proposals by the end of the year for Member States
to strengthen the implementation of the resolution.
The review process must address new challenges that
have arisen, such as the utilization of information
and technological developments, particularly on the
Internet, for proliferation purposes. The challenges
that developing countries face with regard to capacitybuilding and training needs in their efforts to achieve
the objectives of resolution 1540 (2004) must also
be addressed.
Sri Lanka’s commitment to the elimination of the
threat posed by nuclear weapons and other weapons
of mass destruction is reflected in the international
treaty obligations we have undertaken in the field of
disarmament. We believe that a transparent, sustainable
and credible plan for multilateral nuclear disarmament
16-26652

23/08/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

is required in order to achieve the ultimate goal of a
world free of weapons of mass destruction. Their total
elimination is the only absolute guarantee against the
use or threat of use of these weapons. All States have
an obligation to negotiate in good faith to achieve the
objective of the total elimination of nuclear weapons
and other weapons of mass destruction.
We wish to reiterate the centrality of the
international treaty regime, including the NPT, as well
as the Action Plan of the 2010 NPT Review Conference
and the 13 practical steps towards nuclear disarmament
agreed to at the 2000 NPT Review Conference, and the
importance of adherence to all other principal legal
instruments in that field.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): My delegation
expresses its appreciation to the presidency of Malaysia
for convening this open debate.
Bangladesh aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
The potential consequence of weapons of mass
destruction (WMDs), especially nuclear weapons,
falling in the wrong hands is only too vivid to require
reiteration. That possibility has become more and more
real as terrorists and other non-State actors continue
to choose their targets without discrimination, and
accordingly keep evolving their modes of operation
to carry out their heinous acts. Such evolving trends
require us to devise innovative, well-coordinated and
foolproof mechanisms to effectively prevent the illicit
use or transfer of weapons of mass destruction and their
means of production and delivery.
The adoption by consensus of General Assembly
resolution 70/36, entitled “Measures to prevent terrorists
from acquiring weapons of mass destruction”, has been
a right response within the United Nations framework.
It is critical that there be in-depth and evidence-based
discussions on that, involving all Member States, in
order to coordinate international and national efforts,
as appropriate. Focus should be placed on identifying
gaps in national response that may be addressed
through customized international cooperation. The
current review of resolution 1540 (2004) can be quite
critical in that exercise.

S/PV.7758

Bangladesh recognizes the seminal importance of
resolution 1540 (2004) and its successor resolutions in
ensuring the non-proliferation of WMDs. The varying
levels of capacity among Member States, as identified
through voluntary national reports, deserve to be
addressed with a sense of priority. One response to
that effect would be to consider further strengthening
the capacity-building mandate of the panel of
experts concerned.
We believe the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) remains the cornerstone of
the global nuclear non-proliferation regime. In general,
the NPT has significantly helped limit the horizontal
proliferation of nuclear weapons.However, the ongoing
reality is that tens of thousands of nuclear weapons
continue to threaten humankind, while billions of
dollars are being spent to modernize them despite
pressing development needs and challenges all over.
Bangladesh therefore favours a balanced approach, that
is, nuclear non-proliferation pursued in tandem with
nuclear disarmament.
We have no doubt that nuclear weapons are wrong
weapons. Far from securing us, they only endanger
our lives. We therefore consistently stress the total
elimination of those weapons in order to provide an
absolute guarantee against the use, either by design or
by accident, or threat of use of such weapons, and also
against the danger of their falling into terrorists’ hands.
We cannot help but note with concern that all
nuclear-weapon State parties to the NPT officially
envisage relying on large, modernized nuclear forces
as a central component of their security postures
for decades to come. Once again, we urge them to
accomplish the total elimination of their nuclear
arsenals in fulfilment of their relevant multilateral legal
obligations and to cease all plans to further modernize,
upgrade, refurbish or extend the lives of their nuclear
weapons and related arsenals.
As an important building-block to that effect, we
call for the urgent commencement of negotiations in
the Conference on Disarmament (CD) for the early
conclusion of a comprehensive convention on nuclear
weapons, pursuant to the mandate given by General
Assembly resolution 68/32. Unfortunately, the CD
has been overshadowed by inertia for more than a
decade. That must change. Otherwise, there will be
initiatives to find solutions through parallel means,
such as last year when the General Assembly adopted,

16-2665259/76

S/PV.7758

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

by an overwhelming majority, a resolution calling
for convening an open-ended working group to take
forward the negotiations on nuclear disarmament .
Bangladesh supported the resolution and has continued
to attend the working group session this year.
Pending the total elimination of nuclear weapons,
we underscore the importance of an effective,
non-discriminatory and legally binding framework for
negative security assurances to non-nuclear-weapon
States. We support the establishment of nuclearweapon-free zones in all parts of the world, including
in areas where currently no such arrangements exist.
The recurring outbreak of epidemics and pandemics
makes us all the more aware of the potentially deadly
consequences of the use of biological weapons.
Bangladesh joins the call for resuming multilateral
negotiations aimed at concluding a non-discriminatory,
comprehensive and balanced legally binding
verification regime to further strengthen compliance
with the Biological Weapons Convention.
We remain committed to the cause of the complete
cessation of the development, production, stockpiling
and use of chemical weapons. We join calls for the
universalization of the Chemical Weapons Convention
and for all possessor State parties to ensure the
elimination of their existing stockpiles in a time-bound
manner at the earliest possible date.
Promoting peace and justice is one of the
fundamental goals underlying the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development. The challenges of
disarmament and international security have become
increasingly complex and intertwined as countries,
regions and the world as a whole have evolved. We must
invoke the spirit of multilateralism more to revitalize
the United Nations disarmament machinery, and thus
contribute to international peace and development
through effective arms control, non-proliferation and
disarmament.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil): I thank the
President for organizing this open debate. Let me
also thank the High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, the Special Representative of INTERPOL and
Mr. Koblentz for their briefings, and let me congratulate
the Secretary-General for a particularly eloquent and
sharp intervention.
60/76

23/08/2016

Brazil firmly believes that the mere existence of
weapons of mass destruction constitutes the greatest
threat to humankind, and therefore to international
peace and security. The possibility that such weapons
might fall into the hands of non-State actors, particularly
terrorists, is a matter of special concern. Resolution
1540 (2004) is a valuable tool in addressing the issue
and complementing the main multilateral legally
binding instruments in the field.
Brazil actively participated in the discussions
leading to the adoption of resolution 1540 (2004) and to
its first review, resolution 1977 (2011), as a member of
the Council. Since then, we have been firmly committed
to its implementation, as shown by the matrix prepared
by the Panel of Experts. The Brazilian Federal
Constitution forbids the conduct of any non-peaceful
nuclear activity on Brazilian territory. Brazil is party
to all the major treaties and conventions in the field
of disarmament and non-proliferation, such as the
Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin
America and the Caribbean, the Treaty of Tlatelolco,
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT), the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty,
the Chemical Weapons Convention and the Biological
Weapons Convention. We are also members of export
control regimes such as the Nuclear Suppliers Group
and the Missile Technology Control Regime.
We have incorporated into our national legislation
all obligations deriving from those instruments, as well
as those from flowing from resolution 1540 (2004), and
we have submitted national reports to the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). Brazilian
legislation clearly safeguards the peaceful applications
of sensitive and dual-use goods and items, especially in
activities related to industry, research and development.
In that context, the Brazilian Government promotes
constant and structured outreach to inform the private
sector on applicable restrictions and controls.
Brazil has also been following with interest the
current comprehensive review of resolution 1540
(2004), and took part in the open consultations convened
in June by the 1540 Committee Chair, Ambassador
Román Oyarzun Marchesi of Spain. We were
particularly pleased that strong emphasis was placed
on international cooperation and assistance, which in
our view are key to ensuring the full implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004). We acknowledge the important
work that has been carried out by the 1540 Committee
and its Panel of Experts in that respect, and we expect
16-26652

23/08/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

S/PV.7758

that this important issue will be addressed with a sense
of priority in the outcome of the comprehensive review.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ecuador.

Notwithstanding the importance of resolution
1540 (2004), circumscribing international efforts
exclusively to countering proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction is insufficient. Disarmament efforts
are essential to any effective strategy to avoid those
weapons being acquired by non-State actors — for,
as long as weapons of mass destruction continue to
exist, there will be those interested in acquiring or
developing them.

Mr. Sevilla Borja (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): The
Ecuadorian delegation thanks Malaysia, as President
of the Security Council for the month of August, for
convening this open debate on the challenges posed by
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.

Over the past 50 years, the international community
has adopted multilateral, legally binding instruments
that ban some categories of those lethal armaments,
such as biological and chemical weapons. The NPT, in
its article VI, establishes an obligation
“to pursue negotiations in good faith on effective
measures relating to cessation of the nuclear arms
race at an early date and to nuclear disarmament”.
We remain frustrated, however, by the absence of
political will and leadership on the part of States
possessing nuclear weapons to initiate similar
negotiations aimed at the complete elimination of such
weapons, with clear benchmarks and timelines.
Last week’s ground-breaking results of the
Open-ended Working Group on taking forward
multilateral nuclear disarmament negotiations were
most encouraging. Its recommendation to the General
Assembly to convene a conference in 2017 — open
to all States, international organizations and civil
society — to negotiate a legally binding instrument
to prohibit nuclear weapons, leading towards their
total elimination, can place the nuclear disarmament
agenda on a new path, thereby overcoming its
protracted deadlock.
Time and again, the international community is
offered the argument that security concerns hamper the
objective of disarmament. That is a false dichotomy.
Relying on nuclear deterrence doctrines and strategies
undermines the medium- and long-term security of all
States. The risk that non-State actors may wish to acquire
nuclear weapons is only one among many examples of
such long-term security challenges. As the SecretaryGeneral himself once said, “there are no right hands for
wrong weapons.” It is imperative that the international
community take decisive steps to achieve the common
and long- overdue nuclear disarmament objectives.

Articles 15 and 416, respectively of the Constitution
of Ecuador
“prohibits the development, production, possession,
sale, import, transport, storage and use of chemical,
biological and nuclear weapons” and “condemns
the development and use of weapons of mass
destruction”.
Those firm constitutional principles apply both
nationally and internationally. That is why my country
has the legislative tools and appropriate regulations
in place to prevent proliferation and combat illicit
trafficking in nuclear, chemical and biological weapons
and their delivery systems, thereby fulfilling its
obligations under resolution 1540 (2004).
Ecuador is proud to be a part of the first
densely populated area — Latin America and the
Caribbean — to be declared free of nuclear weapons,
created by the Treaty of Tlatelolco, as well as part of
a region of peace, as solemnly declared by the Heads
of State and Government of the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States at the 2014 Summit in
Havana, as reiterated in Costa Rica in 2015 and in my
country’s capital, Quito, in 2016.
However, we must point out that the danger of the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction is inherent
in their continued existence, particularly nuclear
weapons. As long as those weapons exist, the danger
of them falling into terrorists’ hands will remain high.
As noted by the Secretary-General in 2013, “there are
no right hands for the wrong weapons”. They are not
only wrong, but also a danger to the very existence of
humankind, as was shown by the nuclear bombings of
Hiroshima and Nagasaki, the seventy-first anniversary
of which was observed this very month of August.
We must therefore take great care that the
important debate on the non-proliferation of such
weapons, whether by State or non-State actors, does
not obscure the need to achieve nuclear disarmament,
especially as we are now more aware of the serious
humanitarian impact of any detonation of a nuclear

16-2665261/76

S/PV.7758

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

weapon, whether intentional or accidental. From that
perspective, the nuclear-weapon States have a special
responsibility to prevent the proliferation — whether
vertical or horizontal — of such weapons, as well as to
ensure their elimination. Ecuador of course rejects the
understanding that the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons gives a few States the monopolistic
right to possess such weapons indefinitely.
While my country does not aspire, and never
has, to possess nuclear weapons, it is aware of the
responsibility it shoulders as a party to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, in
particular under article VI, within the framework of the
Working Group on nuclear disarmament established
by the General Assembly in resolution 70/33. The
group met in Geneva this year and proposed, along
with other countries — including your own, Sir,
Malaysia — that in 2017 the General Assembly
launch the negotiation process for a treaty banning
nuclear weapons. Just a few days ago, on Friday, 19
August, the Working Group formally adopted that
recommendation, which will be submitted for
consideration by the Assembly through the First
Committee at the next session.
The delegation of Ecuador will continue to firmly
support that proposal, as we are convinced that just
as the international community has banned chemical
weapons and biological weapons through legally
binding instruments, nuclear weapons should also be
banned through a treaty as part of a process that is open
to all and cannot be blocked by anyone. Ecuador is
therefore fulfilling its commitments on this matter, not
through speeches but through actions.
No one can be under the illusion that a treaty
banning nuclear weapons will lead immediately to their
elimination. But it is essential to make clear the legal
standard that such weapons are contrary to the law
regardless of who possesses them. The implementation
of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, the Chemical Weapons Convention and the
Biological Weapons Convention is important. The
provisions of resolution 1540 (2004) must be broadened
and implemented. However, from its perspective,
Ecuador insists that only the full elimination of weapons
of mass destruction will ensure their non-proliferation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
62/76

23/08/2016

Mr. Heumann (Israel): The threat that the world
faces from the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction (WMDs) is greater than ever. Advances in
science and technology, combined with the evolving
nature of terrorism, present challenges never seen
before. And nowhere is the threat more real than in the
Middle East, where failing States have transformed
the region into a breeding ground for terrorists who
now control vast areas of territory and dominate
large populations.
For the people of Israel, the scale of the danger
posed by the combination of terrorism and weapons of
mass destruction is not abstract. Israelis have lived with
conventional and unconventional threats for decades,
and the prospect of terrorism is a daily reality. Israel
understands the grave nature of the threat and views
the prevention of the proliferation of WMDs as a matter
of paramount importance for the international agenda.
In our time, we have witnessed the shocking
erosion of the absolute prohibition against the use of the
world’s most horrific weapons. We now live in a world
in which the premeditated use of chemical weapons on
innocent civilians is no longer even treated as breaking
news. Nowhere is that trend more evident than in Syria.
And there can be no mistake: the primary responsibility
for the widespread use of chemical weapons in Syria
lies squarely at the feet of the Al-Assad regime. That
is the same regime that has been killing, attacking and
besieging its own people, supported by Iran and its
terror proxy Hizbullah.
Last August, the Security Council established
the Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM) in response
to the conclusions of the fact-finding mission of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons,
which found “compelling confirmation” that a toxic
chemical had been used “systematically and repeatedly”
to attack Syrian villages. The JIM was given the
mandate to investigate and to identify those responsible
for the use of those lethal chemical weapons.
Over the course of the past year, as the teams
were on the ground working to assign attribution for
that heinous war crime, the Syrian regime brazenly
continued to use toxic chemicals against its own
population. Zaher Sahloul, a Syrian-American doctor
who regularly treats the injured in Aleppo and has
briefed the Council, said,
“Using chemical agents without accountability
has become the new normal in Syria”.
16-26652

23/08/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

In fact, just two weeks ago, Syrian Government forces
conducted air strikes on the Zabadieh neighbourhood
of the besieged city of Aleppo, in an attack that was
widely reported to have included the use of chlorine
gas.
We cannot allow that to become the new normal.
Al-Assad’s actions are not only in violation of
international law and an affront to humankind itself,
but they also increase the chances of weapons of
mass destruction falling into the hands of non-State
actors. The systematic use of chemical weapons by
the Al-Assad regime has made WMD-related material
and know-how widely available, paving the way for
non-State actors to achieve such horrific capabilities.
Make no mistake: the regime’s actions lead to further
cracks in the WMD non-proliferation regime. At a time
when terrorist groups are increasingly emboldened and
practice unspeakable acts of cruelty on a regular basis,
the consequences of Al-Assad’s actions should be clear
to everyone in the Chamber.
In the face of those dire threats, the international
community must show resolve and take determined
action to counter the proliferation of WMDs. Israel
views resolution 1540 (2004) as an essential tool in that
collective effort. This year, we have an opportunity to
review the achievements of the resolution and look ahead
with renewed dedication for the full implementation of
its provisions. A positive trend has been evident over
the years, as a growing number of States have increased
their measures for the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). Most prominent have been the legal actions
that States have undertaken to prohibit the activities of
non-State actors with regard to nuclear, chemical, and
biological weapons and their means of delivery.
As we look to the challenges ahead, Israel believes
there are practical and legal steps that can advance the
effective implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
Let me mention three steps that can readily be put into
practice.
First, States must have at their disposal the tools and
the infrastructure necessary to meet their commitments
under the regime established by the resolution. States
must be further encouraged to report, update existing
reports and designate a national focal point to be
responsible for reporting and coordinating the national
implementation of the resolution.
Secondly, Israel believes that cooperation with the
academic community is key. Strengthening outreach

S/PV.7758

to the academic world can achieve a balance that
preserves the independence of academic institutions
while safeguarding sensitive technology and know-how
against unintentional leakage to non-State actors.
Finally, here at the United Nations, we see room for
increased coordination among the relevant bodies. For
example, expanding the cooperation of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and its
Group of Experts with United Nations bodies with
regard to terrorists and WMD proliferation will help the
Committee to better equip States to deal with threats in
their own territories.
The issue under discussion today is a matter of the
highest priority for the State of Israel. Let me conclude
by outlining the steps that Israel has taken as part of our
robust policy aimed at preventing the proliferation of
WMDs. As detailed in the reports submitted by Israel
to the 1540 Committee in 2004 and 2012, Israel has
taken wide-ranging legal and practical steps intended
to curb proliferation. At the national level, Israel has
implemented counter-proliferation measures through
legislation and practices that are strictly enforced by
the relevant authorities. Those measures include, inter
alia, gathering and sharing intelligence, improving
border controls, developing advanced detection and
identification devices, enhancing the security of
facilities and the relevant dual-use materials and
strengthening export controls. That multipronged
strategy is part of Israel’s comprehensive approach
to preventing the proliferation of non-conventional
weapons, as well as to preventing terrorists from
acquiring such weapons. As part of the international
community’s ongoing efforts, Israel is fully committed
to acting with determination against this threat.
Finally, allow me to comment with regard to what
we have heard today with regard to the establishment
of a WMD-free zone in the Middle East. Israel’s longheld vision of a more secure and peaceful Middle East
requires that all regional States engage in a process
of direct and sustained dialogue to address the broad
range of regional security challenges. Such a dialogue,
based on the widely accepted principle of consensus,
can emanate only from within the region, and address
in an inclusive manner the threat perceptions of all
regional parties with a view to enhancing and improving
their security. Direct contact, combined with trust
and confidence-building, is an essential basis for the
creation of a new security paradigm in a region that is

16-2665263/76

S/PV.7758

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

increasingly fraught with wars, conflicts, disintegration
of national territories and human suffering.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Panama.
Ms. Flores Herrera (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
Panama would like to begin its statement in this open
debate by welcoming the wise initiative of the Malaysian
presidency to convene this event to exchange views on
something of ever-increasing importance and on the
challenges we face as a global community in ensuring
the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs), their delivery systems and related materials.
We would like to first thank the Secretary-General and
the initial briefers for their contributions, from both the
tactical and academic points of view.
My country aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the representative of Iran on behalf
of Movement of Non-Aligned Countries. In our national
capacity we would like to add a few additional remarks.
Panama is proud to belong to the only region in the
world that is free of nuclear weapons. As a feature of
our foreign policy, we have committed, in all forums,
to the non-proliferation of all nuclear weapons and their
delivery systems, as we are convinced that they pose
the greatest threat to international peace and security.
My country believes that the ability to live in a world
free of nuclear, biological and chemical weapons is an
ethical imperative. Thereby, we consider disarmament
to be an essential component of efforts to promote not
only international peace and security but development
as well.
Forty-nine years after the signing of the Treaty
of Tlatelolco, we should recognize that the Agency
for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin
America and the Caribbean has been a reference point
in various parts of the world for the establishment of
nuclear-weapon-free zones, and we hope that trend
will continue. Today we reaffirm our unwavering
commitment, adopted in 1967 with the signing of the
Treaty of Tlatelolco, as well as with the ratification of
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
the Chemical Weapons Convention and the Biological
Weapons Convention, the Comprehensive Nuclear-TestBan Treaty and, more recently, the resolutions of the
Security Council, particularly resolution 1540 (2004).
In step with the review opportunities offered
by the conventions, such as the Biological Weapons
64/76

23/08/2016

Convention Review Conference in November, and as
Panama does not have an army nor weapons of mass
destruction, we have reiterated our support for efforts
that tend to yield more encouraging results that are in
line with their stated objectives.
Coinciding with your concept note (S/2016/712,
annex), Mr. President, my country is aware of
emerging trends of proliferation of technological and
scientific progress and international commerce, and as
Mr. Koblentz noted this morning, this fourth industrial
revolution, which implies greater democratization of
those advances, makes them more vulnerable to the
threat that non-State actors will obtain and exploit
them. Hence the importance of resolution 1540 (2004),
through which, in this multilateral forum, we pledge
to stop weapons of mass destruction from reaching
dangerous non-State actors.
To that end, and with a view to better contribute to
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), Panama
has worked consistently to adopt a national plan and
to effectively regulate dual-use materials in order to
prevent chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear
materials from being diverted to non-State actors, to
the detriment of commerce and safe investments and
humankind itself.
Panama has been firm in its call for the immediate
cessation of recent tests, and we have reiterated that the
development of WMDs and their use is an act against
peace and international cooperation that only aggravates
tension among States and regions, threatening their
political stability and seriously jeopardizing the
peaceful coexistence of their peoples. Making strides
towards a more peaceful, secure world is a collective
global responsibility.
Noting the importance of regional coordination
efforts and their positive impact on the world, I am
pleased to share that in December, along with the
Organization of American States, Panama will host the
regional high-level conference on the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). That will be a prelude to
Panama’s assuming the presidency the Inter-American
Committee against Terrorism in 2017. There we
hope to continue the work of capacity-building and
strengthening cooperation, which are both necessary to
face this significant challenge.
In today’s world, with the growing relevance of
gender equality, I wish to point out the need to consider
the role of women in the promotion of peace and in
16-26652

23/08/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

disarmament efforts. While scientific studies have
shown that women and children are the most affected
by radioactive exposure, thanks to their being highly
vulnerable in conflicts, they should not be seen merely
as victims but as part and parcel of the resolution and
decision-making process.
Additionally, it is essential to recognize the danger
represented by the production and possession of nuclear
weapons when they are seen as political tools to ensure
the distribution of power in the world. The strategy of
nuclear deterrence is but a myth by which, in reality,
we are exposing ourselves to a great danger. We must
recognized it as such and assume the corresponding
responsibility if we are to achieve a sustainable world.
Finally, Panama would also like to highlight
the pressing need to raise public awareness of
the importance of bringing about a world free of
threats, a world in which Governments, civil society,
intergovernmental organizations, non-governmental
organizations, academia and social media are called
on to promote education as a tool for peace that leads
to security, disarmament and the non-proliferation
of WMDs. Along those lines, I wish to stress the
multidimensional focus of security linked to human
rights and development. The non-proliferation of
WMDs through the effective implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) is indisputably the path to true
sustainable development that will ensure a safer world.
The Security Council’s efforts and, more important,
the commitment of Member States, are therefore
fundamental to achieving that objective.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Costa Rica.
Mr. Castro Cordoba (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): Costa Rica would like to thank you,
Mr. President, and your delegation for having convened
this important debate. Our country is firmly committed
to the international legal system and believes that global
disarmament and the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction can, and should, be achieved through
dialogue and the negotiation of legal instruments.
Over the years, a number of proposals and
measures have been put forward to make progress
in this area. We have banned nuclear tests, but the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) has
not yet entered into force. We have attempted to ban
the production of fissionable material, but we have
not yet been able to begin the negotiations in the

S/PV.7758

Conference on Disarmament, which has been paralysed
for years and does not have universal membership. We
have called for greater transparency with regard to
arsenals, for the verification of any arsenal reductions
by the International Atomic Energy Agency and for the
cessation of programmes to upgrade arsenals; however,
bilateral and unilateral verification processes continue
to be the norm. We also adopted resolution 1540 (2004),
which imposes a number of binding obligations on
all Member States, including, inter alia, the duty to
refrain from providing any support to non-State actors
who might attempt to develop, acquire, manufacture,
possess, transport, transfer or use nuclear, chemical
or biological weapons and their means of delivery.
However, implementation still faces many challenges.
All of those steps and objectives are very important
for some States, but not for all. And yet the international
community has not given up on its attempts to achieve
a world without nuclear or other weapons of mass
destruction, and even less on achieving that objective
with the benefit of sophisticated verification and
control systems.
Costa Rica is a small, democratic, disarmed and
civilian-based country. The multilateral system and
international law are our only means of defence. We
know quite well that peace and security as a global
public good can be achieved, in part by honouring the
Charter of the United Nations, in particular Articles 10
and 26, as Costa Rica has been advocating for decades.
As a country without an army, we possess no
weapons of mass destruction. In our legislation there is
a ban on devices that produce asphyxiating, poisonous,
paralysing, irritating or tear-generating gases. We have
also banned the use, production or introduction into the
country of gases, chemicals, toxic or deadly viruses
or bacteria that could lead, inter alia, to irreversible
physical or mental consequences.
Precisely because we have sufficient credentials
and, above all, the moral authority flowing from those
customs and practices, we reiterate our call to the
international community to avoid an increase in the
number of new States that possess nuclear or other
weapons of mass destruction, which might be acquired
either through the use of their own technology or through
technology that they have acquired from other States.
In addition, we must continue working to eliminate the
increase in the quantity and quality of nuclear and other
types of weapons by States that already possess such

16-2665265/76

S/PV.7758

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

weapons. Finally, we must avoid at any cost an increase
in the number of States that possess weapons of mass
destruction as a result of the evolution of the civilian
use of nuclear and other technologies.
As mentioned in the concept note (S/2016/712,
annex) that provides the basis for today’s discussion,
globalization and technological development facilitate
the efforts of the international community to reduce
new risks and threats. However, such tools can have
unintended effects: they can also foster the danger
that, in the long run, such weapons might end up
falling into non-State hands. It is therefore necessary
to strengthen international mechanisms for controlling
the technology and materials needed to develop such
weapons. We must also redouble efforts to prevent
terrorist groups from acquiring any type of weapon of
mass destruction and ensure that the export and import
of materials, equipment and technology needed to
develop such weapons is subject to control.
We stress the importance of compliance with
Article 26 of the Charter of the United Nations, which
provides for the Security Council to submit to Members
plans
“for the establishment of a system for the regulation
of armaments”
with a view to
“the establishment and maintenance of international
peace and security with the least diversion for
armaments of the world’s human and economic
resources”.
We are convinced that a world without weapons
of mass destruction is the only way to achieve
humankind’s main objectives, namely, peace, security
and sustainable development. That is why we will
continue to work towards what is a utopia for some,
but an achievable goal for us, namely, a world free of
nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction.
The President: I nowg give the floor to the
representative of Nicaragua.
Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke in
Spanish): First of all, Nicaragua wishes to congratulate
Malaysia for its excellent stewardship of the Security
Council this month and for convening today’s debate
on an issue as important as the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction (WMDs).
66/76

23/08/2016

My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
Nicaragua has always stressed the importance
of further progress towards total and complete
disarmament, including not only nuclear weapons but
also other conventional weapons of mass destruction,
the use of which violates the fundamental principles of
international law and international humanitarian law.
It is unjustifiable and unacceptable that, despite the
recent adoption of a new agenda for development for
the next 15 years, spending is increasing on the means
to develop, upgrade and test weapons of all kinds, while
every day less is being spent to promote the lives and
development of human beings. While millions of people
are suffering the effects of the economic crisis, poverty,
hunger and disease, global military expenditures are
increasing at an astounding rate.
We would like to reaffirm Nicaragua’s position of
peace and solidarity in favour of the non-proliferation
of all weapons of mass destruction. We affirm the role
of the General Assembly and its resolution 70/36 on
measures to prevent terrorists from acquiring weapons
of mass destruction. We firmly believe that the only
guarantee for preventing the use or threat of use of
weapons of mass destruction and their non-proliferation
to non-State actors is the total and complete elimination
of nuclear weapons. Our urgent wish and priority is to
have a world free of nuclear weapons. We welcome and
celebrate the date of 26 September as the International
Day for the Total Elimination of Nuclear Weapons
and the efforts that truly contribute to that end.
We also reaffirm that all efforts to ensure nuclear
non-proliferation must go hand in hand with nuclear
disarmament efforts.
Nicaragua strongly believes that, by establishing
nuclear-weapon-free zones, the non-proliferation
regime will be strengthened, with international peace
and security being an important contribution to the
achievement of nuclear disarmament. We recall the
crucial importance of the Treaty of Tlatelolco and the
Declaration of Latin America and the Caribbean as
a Zone of Peace. In that regard, we regret the failure
in 2012 to hold an international conference for the
establishment of a zone free of nuclear weapons and
other weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East.
We reiterate that such a conference is an important and
integral part of the final outcome of the 2010 Review
16-26652

23/08/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Conference of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT). We urge the parties to hold
that conference as soon as possible.
Nicaragua attaches special importance to
compliance with the NPT as the only legally binding
instrument of international consensus in the global
system of non-proliferation, disarmament and the
peaceful use of atomic energy. Nicaragua condemns
any use of chemical weapons or other weapons of mass
destruction and is firmly committed to the Chemical
Weapons Convention and to strict compliance with
its provisions.
We recognize the explicit political will of the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to accede to
the Chemical Weapons Convention and the assistance
provided by the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons, which led to the successful
programme to achieve the destruction of all chemical
weapons in Syria and the completion of an extraordinary
plan under exceptional circumstances. Resolution
1540 (2004), unanimously adopted by the Security
Council, affirms that the proliferation of nuclear,
chemical and biological weapons and their means of
delivery constitutes a grave threat to international
peace and security. We should focus on improving its
implementation so as to bring about, above all, greater
assistance and cooperation among States. It is vital to
respect the nature, integrity and objectives of resolution
1540 (2004) and its methods, which were designed to
achieve positive results.
Nicaragua rejects the use of double standards by some
countries that claim to be in favour of the eradication of
terrorism and support the non-proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction and of biological and chemical
weapons to non-State actors, while at the same time
they undertake warlike acts, on the pretext of a war
against terrorism, and/or campaigns geared towards
toppling legitimate Governments, as well as picking on
specific countries for purely political interests. At the
same time, they ignore the nuclear capacities of other
States. The proof of this is the military doctrine of the
NATO countries to use nuclear weapons as a security
policy, which remains intact. While they threaten with
their missiles, they are also developing new strategies
to be able to place them in outer space.
We have often highlighted the deadlock in the
disarmament machinery. Nevertheless, we must be able
to resolve the real problem: the actual political will of

S/PV.7758

certain States to make real progress, in particular when
it comes to nuclear disarmament.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Begeç (Turkey): Let me begin by thanking
you, Mr. President, for organizing this debate on the
challenges in addressing the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction (WMDs), their means of delivery
and related materials.
Turkey aligns itself with the statement made by the
observer of the European Union. I shouldl ike to make
the following remarks in our national capacity.
The security policies built upon WMD capabilities
do not guarantee the safety of any country or region,
but instead increase insecurity and instability. As
a country that has never had an intention to pursue
a WMD programme, Turkey firmly opposes the
development, production, stockpiling and use of
such weapons. We have consistently advocated the
elimination of all WMDs. Furthermore, the presence of
chemical and biological weapons around our borders,
by State and non-State actors alike, constitutes a source
of security concern for us. With that understanding,
Turkey strongly supports the universalization of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
the Chemical Weapons Convention and the Biological
Weapons Convention. Turkey cooperates with the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW), the Sub-Working Group on non-State Actors
of which was recently revitalized.
The current instances of the use of WMDs
serve to reinforce the calls for a resolute and global
approach. No country is immune from the risks of
the proliferation of WMDs in the hands of non-State
actors. Without enhanced international cooperation, we
cannot address those challenges. The Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), which is now a central component of the global
security architecture, is one of the greatest tools at our
service in efforts against proliferation. I would like to
reaffirm Turkey’s strong commitment to the full and
effective implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
Turkey has been working with the 1540 Committee
since its inception and contributes to its work. We are
also a member of the recently established Group of
Friends of Resolution 1540 (2004). Turkey has in place
the necessary legislation to implement resolution 1540
(2004) and abides, by and participates in, all the relevant

16-2665267/76

S/PV.7758

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

international legal instruments and the voluntary ad hoc
mechanism on non-proliferation and export controls.
We also attach importance to collaboration between the
1540 Committee and other United Nations bodies, such
as the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs,
and international organizations and mechanisms, such
as INTERPOL and the Global Initiative to Combat
Nuclear Terrorism.
Just as the international security environment
today differs greatly from that of 12 years ago, the
risks flowing from nuclear proliferation to non-State
actors is also greater and calls for more coherent and
robust international cooperation. The comprehensive
review process of resolution 1540 (2004) provides a
valuable opportunity to strengthen the implementation
of the resolution and address the new challenges caused
by the proliferation of WMDs to non-State actors.
Following its tradition of close cooperation with the
1540 Committee, Turkey will actively contribute to the
comprehensive review process of the resolution.
This open debate has been particularly timely
in the sense that the OPCW-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism is expected to publish its final
report tomorrow, identifying, pursuant to resolution
2235 (2015), those responsible for, or related to, the
use of chemical weapons in Syria. I wish to reiterate
here our expectation that those who committed those
grave crimes, as well as those who were linked to them,
be held accountable for their actions. That, followed
by the measures that the Security Council undertook
in its relevant resolutions, would constitute the right
message to all those concerned, namely, that the use of
chemical weapons will not go unpunished. That would
be the greatest service to the international community’s
efforts against the proliferation of WMDs.
Before I conclude, let me say that we categorically
reject the allegations of the representative of the Syrian
regime, which lost its legitimacy long ago. We have
once again observed in this debate attempts to divert
attention from the enormous destruction and human
suffering caused by that regime. My country’s track
record complies with the non-proliferation and export
control regimes, and its counter-terrorism efforts are
well established. Turkey will continue to support the
efforts at preventing impunity for the perpetrators
of inhumane practices, including the use chemical
weapons, which are a clear affront to international law.
68/76

23/08/2016

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mr. Lal (India): I thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this debate on an issue of continuing concern
for the international community that requires constant
vigilance and genuine cooperation among Member
States to address the challenge effectively. We also
thank the briefers for updating us on the current trends
that are relevant to this issue.
We are fully cognizant of the catastrophic dangers
that the transfer of weapons of mass destruction to
non-State actors and terrorists could entail. Clandestine
proliferation networks must be rolled back and their
resurgence prevented. The global community must
join hands in eliminating the risks related to sensitive
materials and technologies falling into the hands of
terrorists and non-State actors. In that regard, India
has enacted a number of effective laws and regulations
and has put in place institutionalized administrative
mechanisms to prohibit access to weapons of mass
destruction by terrorists and non-State actors.
Since the adoption of resolution 1540 (2004), more
than a decade ago, India has taken additional steps to
further strengthen its existing legislative and regulatory
mechanisms for exercising control over weapons of
mass destruction and their means of delivery. India
is committed to maintaining the highest international
standards with reference to the control of nuclear,
chemical, biological and toxin weapons and their means
of delivery. India has strong, law-based national export
controls consistent with the highest international
standards. India has filed reports regarding resolution
1540 (2004) and hosted the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) in New
Delhi in 2012. Earlier this year, India joined the Missile
Technology Control Regime and The Hague Code of
Conduct against Ballistic Missile Proliferation.
The focus on non-State actors should in no way
diminish State accountability in combating terrorism and
dismantling its support infrastructure and its linkages
with weapons of mass destruction. India believes that
the primary responsibility for ensuring nuclear security
rests at the national level, but national responsibility
must be accompanied by responsible behaviour, as well
as sustained and effective international cooperation.
India participated in the Nuclear Security Summit
held in Washington, D.C., earlier this year. We welcome
the outcome of the Summit and view the Summit process
16-26652

23/08/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

as having catalysed significant progress on nuclear
security through international cooperation. Our recent
steps taken to strengthen nuclear security include the
setting up of a counter-nuclear-smuggling team and
joining the Joint Statement on Strengthening Nuclear
Security Implementation. India has also offered to
host an event in 2017 as part of an initiative to combat
nuclear terrorism.
The goal of the complete elimination of nuclear
weapons can be achieved by a step-by-step process
underwritten by a universal commitment and an
agreed multilateral framework that is global and
non-discriminatory. That was reiterated by our
Minister for External Affairs, Mrs. Sushma Swaraj,
speaking in the General Assembly last October (see
A/70/PV.22), when she stated that India was aware of
its responsibilities as a nuclear-weapon State and that
its support for that goal was undiminished.
All States that possess nuclear weapons can make
a contribution by engaging in a meaningful dialogue
in order to build trust and confidence by reducing the
salience of nuclear weapons in international affairs
and security doctrines. We believe that increasing the
restraints on the use of nuclear weapons is not only an
essential first step, but is also necessary in the current
complex international environment to enhance strategic
trust globally.
The Chemical Weapons Convention and the
Biological Weapons Convention are examples of
global non-discriminatory treaties for the complete
elimination of the respective categories of weapons
of mass destruction. They also fulfil an important
non-proliferation function. India has fulfilled its
obligations under the Chemical Weapons Convention.
We look forward to a successful eighth Review
Conference of the Biological Weapons Convention in
November. In that regard, India will organize a regional
workshop in New Delhi early next week, from 29 to
30 August.
In conclusion, may I say that all States should
fully and effectively implement the obligations arising
from the disarmament and non-proliferation-related
agreements or treaties to which they are parties.
Furthermore, the essential role of the United Nations on
issues of disarmament must be preserved. In particular,
it is important to enhance confidence in the United
Nations disarmament machinery, consisting of the
General Assembly, the United Nations Disarmament

S/PV.7758

Commission and the Conference on Disarmament. The
Security Council has a role, as specifically provided
in the relevant disarmament-related instruments and
treaties and in the Charter of the United Nations.
Taking forward disarmament and non-proliferation
issues globally requires a genuine commitment to
multilateralism and to building common ground.
India remains committed to those objectives of
global disarmament and non-proliferation and is
willing to work with other Member States to advance
those objectives.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Ms. Wilson (Australia): As others have noted,
a range of events over the past year remind us of the
ongoing threat to peace and security posed by the use
of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs). Non-State
actors are becoming increasingly sophisticated and
creative in their ability to source sensitive information
and materials relevant to the delivery and design
of WMDs. Today, we are all faced with the global
mobility and connectivity of terrorist groups. We know
that those seeking WMDs will exploit the weakest link
to pursue their goals. That has been demonstrated not
only by non-State actors but also by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, whose proliferation
activities we strongly condemn. In the face of those
threats, the Council’s leadership and global cooperation
are essential. We need to work together to bolster
non-proliferation norms, strengthen export controls,
continue to share information and support developing
countries’ non-proliferation efforts. Export control
regimes and multilateral counter-proliferation efforts
must adapt and remain relevant, capable and equipped
to succeed.
Resolution 1540 (2004) remains a centrepiece
of the international non-proliferation regime. It has
established and reinforced the strong international
norm that proliferation involving non-State actors is
unacceptable. Australia welcomes the attention that
Spain, as Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004), has given to revitalizing the
implementation of the resolution, including by helping
to mobilize resources and expertise to assist States
in strengthening their national practices. We need to
strive for the universal implementation of the resolution
in order to maximize the impact of our collective
endeavours.

16-2665269/76

S/PV.7758

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

During the 1540 Committee’s open consultations
convened by Spain last June, Australia offered three main
thoughts on how the resolution could be strengthened.
We supported, first, extending the mandate of resolution
1540 (2004), given that the fight against proliferation is
an ongoing one; secondly, better leveraging of linkages
with other United Nations instruments and multilateral
non-proliferation and export regimes, including the
Australia Group; and, thirdly, practical measures
identified in the United States non-paper for the 1540
Committee to monitor, coordinate and share experience
in assistance provision. We look forward to continued
cooperation with the Chair of the 1540 Committee in
finalizing the comprehensive review of the status of
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) at the end of
this year.
During the June open consultations, we also
drew the attention of Member States to our hosting,
in partnership with the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs, of the first Asia-Pacific regional
training session on the Secretary-General’s mechanism
for investigation of alleged use of chemical and
biological weapons. We can confirm that the training
will be held in Canberra from 17 to 28 October. Member
States from the region will be joined by INTERPOL, the
World Health Organization and the World Organization
for Animal Health. Australia supports the training
as a practical mechanism for coordinating counterproliferation and counter-terrorism efforts.
The International Atomic Energy Agency must
be supported in its central role in the global nuclear
security architecture to coordinate nuclear security
activities among international organizations and other
initiatives. We should all access and utilize existing
mechanisms, such as the Global Initiative to Combat
Nuclear Terrorism. The focus of the Global Initiative on
achieving operational and practical outcomes is its core
strength. Its guidance documents have been pivotal in
informing Australia’s national approaches in the area
of nuclear security, such as nuclear detection capability
and radiation monitoring at the border.
In conclusion, weapons of mass destruction and
their potential to fall into the wrong hands threaten
global peace and security. Malaysia’s initiative today
in convening this open debate and the determination of
Spain to re-energize the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) are very timely and welcome indeed.
Australia, too, will continue to play an active role in
70/76

23/08/2016

support of our collective interests to halt the potential
for WMD proliferation and use.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Viet Nam.
Mr. Do Hung Viet (Viet Nam): I join previous
speakers in thanking the Malaysian presidency for
convening this important meeting to discuss the
challenges that Member States face in addressing the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. I thank
the Secretary-General for his valuable insights, as
well as Mr. Kim Won-Soo, Mr. Emanuel Roux and
Mr. George Koblentz for their informative briefings.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
Today’s debate is being held as the world continues
to face the dire threats posed by terrorism related
to weapons of mass destruction (WMDs) and their
proliferation. Their very existence, especially nuclear
weapons, remains a danger for international peace,
security and stability. This debate is also opportune
as the demand for chemical, biological, radiological
and nuclear technologies, materials and equipment for
peaceful purposes continues to grow as countries strive
for sustainable development.
Viet Nam believes that addressing WMD
proliferation must be coupled with substantive progress
in WMD disarmament, particularly towards the total
elimination of nuclear weapons. We underline the
importance of regional nuclear-weapon-free zones,
including the Southeast Asian Nuclear-Weapon-Free
Zone, and the need for nuclear-weapon States to
accede to their respective protocols. At the same
time, non-proliferation efforts should not hinder the
legitimate rights of States to acquire, produce and use
chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear (CBRN)related materials, equipment and technology for
peaceful purposes.
Viet Nam has consistently been committed to
WMD disarmament and non-proliferation efforts, and
strongly advocated for the peaceful use of CBRNrelated materials and technologies. Viet Nam is party
to, and complies fully with its obligations under, all
key WMD disarmament and non-proliferation treaties,
including the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty,
16-26652

23/08/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Chemical Weapons Convention and the Biological
Weapons Convention, as well as the International
Atomic Energy Agency safeguards agreement and its
additional protocol. Viet Nam seriously implements the
relevant Security Council resolutions and participates
in related initiatives, including the Global Initiative
to Combat Nuclear Terrorism and the Proliferation
Security Initiative. As a concrete example of its efforts,
Viet Nam completed the conversion of fuel at its only
research reactor, from highly enriched to low-enriched
uranium. That was done in close collaboration with the
Russian Federation, the United States and the IAEA.
For the past 12 years, resolution 1540 (2004)
has played an important role in the international
community’s efforts to prevent WMDs, their means
of delivery and related materials from falling into the
hands of non-State actors. Viet Nam welcomes the
upcoming review of the resolution. As a member of the
Group of Friends of resolution 1540 (1040), we look
forward to engaging in the deliberations.
As the President suggested, it is essential that we
identify and address the challenges that States face
in implementing resolution 1540 (2004) and other
non-proliferation commitments. Viet Nam’s experience
has revealed many challenges. In our view, there is a
need for increased international cooperation to raise
the awareness and understanding of the threats posed
by WMD proliferation and to strengthen the capacity
of States, in particular of developing countries,
in implementing their respective obligations and
commitments. That may include building the necessary
national databases, enhancing capacity to tackle
transnational and new types of crimes, providing
technical assistance for stronger import- export control
and supporting the application of security and safety
standards in the use of chemical, biological, radiological
and nuclear materials and technologies. Care must also
be taken to avoid placing undue burden on States in
those efforts.
International efforts to address the proliferation of
WMDs and related materials require renewed political
commitment, as well as enhanced partnerships and
cooperation, including with the United Nations and the
relevant international organizations, such as the IAEA
and OPCW. Viet Nam remains strongly committed and
will fully cooperate with the international community
towards a world free from all weapons of mass
destruction.

S/PV.7758

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Mr. Garcia Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in
Spanish): First of all, I want to thank the delegation of
Malaysia for convening this open debate.
The United Nations, and the Security Council in
particular, has repeatedly stressed that the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction poses a threat to
international peace and security. The Council sent
a clear message in 2004 by adopting resolution 1540
(2004), which provides a response to the growing risk of
weapons of mass destruction falling into the hands of,
and be used by, non-State actors. The resolution was a
milestone in for the first time putting all Member States
on an equal footing in the field of non-proliferation
and establishing common standards for the national
monitoring of sensitive technology exports. Since its
adoption, Argentina has joined the consensus in the
Security Council because it strengthens the capacity
of multilateral institutions and strengthens the United
Nations as the appropriate forum in responding to
challenges to international security.
Argentina submitted its first report on 26 October
2004, and subsequently updated it. The latest is
currently being drafted. We have demonstrated an
undeniable commitment to the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. To date, we are the only
Latin American country to have joined the five exportcontrol regimes, namely, the Australia Group, the
Zangger Committee, the Nuclear Suppliers Group, the
Wassenaar Arrangement and the Missile Technology
Control Regime. The Argentine Republic is convinced
that an effective system of export controls must be based
on four basic pillars. The first is a national system for
the issuance of transparent and standardized lisences.
The second is the effective implementation of existing
legislation applicable to export controls. The third is
promoting corporate awareness about the importance
of this system for industrial development and the safety
of international trade. And the fourth is close regional
cooperation.
With regard to our region, it is important to highlight
the unwavering commitment to non-proliferation by
the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean,
which have been pioneers in establishing a zone free
of weapons of mass destruction. This year marks the
twenty-fithth anniversary of the Mendoza Declaration,
signed on 5 September 1991 by the Ministers for Foreign

16-2665271/76

S/PV.7758

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Affairs of Argentina, Brazil and Chile, later also joined
by Bolivia, Ecuador, Paraguay and Uruguay. Through
that declaration, our countries committed themselves
to refrain from developing, producing, stockpiling,
transferring or using chemical and biological weapons.
Resolution 1540 (2004) has been an opportunity
to deepen cooperation among Latin American and
Caribbean countries in order that all the countries of
the region can access the necessary technology and
capacities to respond to current non-State threats.
Argentina provides assistance and training for the
identification of sensitive items both at the regional
and subregional level, as well as in the context of
South-South cooperation with African countries. Our
commitment to region is clear. Argentina will continue
offering assistance to countries that request it.
Argentina views the global review of the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) from its
traditional two-fold perspective. The first is respect for
the right to the development and peaceful use of advanced
technologies, while the second is the non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction — whether nuclear,
chemical or biological — and their means of delivery
and related technologies. Argentina highlights the
sovereign right to the development of advanced and
sensitive nuclear technologies, such as chemical,
biological and pharmaceutical technologies, as well
as nanotechnologies, with Government and private
coordination, as an tool to achieve the development of
our industries.
At the same time, Argentina actively cooperates
with the efforts of the international community in
the field of disarmament with a view to achieving
a world free of weapons of mass destruction and to
further the principle of an absolute prohibition on their
development, possession, acquisition, transfer or use.
As a country strongly committed to non-proliferation
and elimination of weapons of mass destruction,
Argentina welcomes the comprehensive review process
on the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) with a
view to establishing the foundation for continuing joint
efforts to address the risk of non-State actors acquiring
weapons of mass destruction, their Means of delivery
and related technologies.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Poland.
Mr. Radomski (Poland): Poland aligns itself with
the statement delivered on behalf of the European
72/76

23/08/2016

Union. I should like, however, to make several remarks
in my national capacity.
Allow me to thank the President for convening
this crucial open debate and for preparing an excellent
concept note (S/2016/712, annex).
Poland strongly supports the strengthening of the
global non-proliferation and disarmament architecture,
based on the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, the Chemical Weapons Convention and the
Bilogical and Toxin Weapons Convention. Resolution
1540 (2004) plays a pivotal role by reinforcing the
architecture by encouraging cooperation in the area of
non-proliferation. Its significance is even more striking
against the backdrop of emerging threats posed by
non-State actors. Such threats have become dangerous
in recent years with the growth in the capabilities of
some terrorist organizations, most notably the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham, to produce and use toxic
substances as weapons.
For the past two years, Poland has conducted a
comprehensive review of its national procedures for
interdicting weapons of mass destruction (WMDs).
The main goal was ensuring reliable decision-making
processes for scenarious involving detecting illegal
transfers of WMD materials. Equally important was
making certain that all national institutions were aware
of their responsibilities in such cases. That work led to
the development of a document on a national interdiction
mechanism, which aggregates all our international
obligations on non-proliferation, including United
Nations and European Union sanctions and tools for
their implementation.
At the regional level, jointly with Croatia, we
carried out a voluntary peer review of the national
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). Poland
traditionally undertakes efforts to strengthen and
support the enforcement of chemical non-proliferation
instruments, while promoting a chemical-security
culture and enhancing the security of chemicals
in transit. Within the global partnership, we have
contributed to that work by co-chairing, together with
Ukraine, the chemical security sub-working group
from 2012 to 2015. One of its most visible outcomes
was the development of the integrated chemical
security and safety programme in Ukraine under the
auspices of the Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development.
16-26652

23/08/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

The ongoing comprehensive review of resolution
1540 (2004) provides a unique opportunity to take action
on a broad spectrum of issues related to international
security. Poland supports the work carried out to date
by the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) and looks forward to the conclusion of the
review, which will reaffirm the Committee’s central role
in the global non-proliferation architecture. We would
like to take this opportunity to commend Spain for its
tireless efforts in guiding us all through that crucial
process, aimed at a concrete outcome in December.
It is important to maintain a dialogue between
the 1540 Committee and the various non-proliferation
mechanisms and export control regimes. That is already
happening in the case of the Missile Technology Control
Regime. There are numerous global initiatives the
objectives of which are in line with those of the 1540
Committee, such as the Global Partnership against the
Spread of Weapons and Material of Mass Destruction,
the Nuclear Suppliers Group, the Nuclear Security
Summit, the Australia Group, the Union European
Union Chemical Biological Radiological and Nuclear
Risk Mitigation Centres of Excellence Initiative,
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe and the Proliferation Security Initiative. We
believe that there is a large scope for building closer
ties and synergies between those groups and the 1540
Committee, which is the only universal forum with the
potential to focus diverse expert knowledge.
The threat posed by the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction to non-State actors is global, and
no country will be able to prevent it from happening
without close cooperation with other partners. The
sharing of best practices and peer reviews are essential
to minimize those threats throughout the world.
Poland stands ready to share its experiences and assist
interested countries in the preparation and conduct of
1540 peer reviews or national review decision-making
procedures for preventing the proliferation of WMDs to
non-State actors.
In conclusion, let me assure the Security Council
that we join others in the Chamber who call for effective
and committed implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) and for enhanced efforts aimed at combating the
threats posed by international terrorism.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovenia.

S/PV.7758

Mr. Logar (Slovenia): I join the previous speakers
in welcoming the decision of Malaysia organize this
important and timely debate on challenges in addressing
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs).
Slovenia aligns itself with statement made earlier
on behalf of the European Union. Allow me to make
some additional comments in my national capacity.
Resolution 1540 (2004) remains one of the
most important instruments of the international
non-proliferation architecture. Let me express the firm
determination of the Government of Slovenia to support
the efforts of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) to strengthen global capacity
to prevent, detect and respond to WMD terrorism.
In order to neutralize those threats, there should be
ongoing and relentless engagement by the relevant
national structures in the area of security, while also
effectively addressing safety issues.
Slovenia is fully committed to the resolution 1540
(2004) and has joined the Group of Friends of resolution
1540 (2004). We regularly report on the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). So far, we have provided three
national reports. As we carry out the comprehensive
review of resolution 1540 (2004) this year, we are
preparing the next review of our own national report.
We stand ready to contribute to a successful outcome
of this year’s comprehensive review — which is being
led by Spain, which we congratulate for its excellent
work — with the aim that it will deliver positive and
tangible results.
Resolution 1540 (2004) has become even more
important in the today’s context, when we bear in
mind that the potential acquisition and use of chemical,
biological, radiological or nuclear materials by terrorist
groups presents a clear threat to international peace
and security. Slovenia therefore believes that the
international community must stand united against
that threat by improving the effectiveness of resolution
1540 (2004) at the 2016 comprehensive review, which
can be achieved only through enhanced international
cooperation within the United Nations among
Member States, different regional and international
organizations and civil society, academia, and national
Parliaments.
Slovenia is committed to treaty-based nuclear
disarmament and arms control and advocates the
universal adherence to and the full implementation

16-2665273/76

S/PV.7758

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

23/08/2016

of all non-proliferation and disarmament treaties and
conventions. Slovenia also firmly believes that the proper
way to combat effectively the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction is through the universalization of
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
the Chemical Weapons Convention, the Biological and
Toxin Weapons Convention and the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty. I would also add to those
other very important international instruments in this
area, such as the Proliferation Security Initiative, the
International Code of Conduct against Ballistic Missile
Proliferation, international export control regimes and
the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism,
which this year marked its tenth anniversary. We should
also spare no effort to initiate the fissile material cutoff treaty negotiations as soon as possible.

to our collective security. That indeed is a global
challenge, which requires a concerted and sustained
effort on the part of the international community,
including the Security Council.

The International Atomic Energy Agency plays a
crucial role in finding adequate solutions to nuclear
security and in offering technical assistance to those
who need it in implementing those solutions. During our
upcoming third membership in the Board of Governors
for September 2016 to September 2018, Slovenia will
constructively engage in the work of the Board.

Nigeria reiterates its commitment to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT).
We regard the NPT as the cornerstone of the global
non-proliferation regime. As no country is immune to
the dangers posed by nuclear weapons to our common
security, it is essential that we all remain committed
to the globally agreed ideals set out in the NPT and
other relevant instruments. We recognize the right of
any party to pursue a peaceful nuclear programme.
However, that must be pursued within the ambit of the
NPT and other relevant international instruments. We
stress that efforts aimed at nuclear non-proliferation
should dovetail with simultaneous efforts aimed at
nuclear disarmament.

In conclusion, as an active country in the field
of arms control, disarmament and non-proliferation,
Slovenia hosted the twelfth annual NATO WMD
conference last May. The emerging threat of the
acquisition, production and use of WMDs was also
among the discussed topics, and we believe that the
conference contributed in a meaningful way to our
mutual endeavours and efforts to fight the peril posed
by non-State actors, including terrorists.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nigeria.
Mr. Bosah (Nigeria): I thank the Malaysian
delegation for convening this important debate. I
commend the Secretary-General for his remarks made
earlier this morning. I also would like to thank the
briefers for their incisive briefings and for sharing their
thoughts with us.

We are deeply concerned about the potential for
the immediate, indiscriminate and massive death and
destruction that could be caused by the detonation of
any nuclear weapon. The long-term effects of such an
action on human health, the environment and other vital
economic resources could endanger the lives of both
present and future generations. We furthermore express
deep concern about the catastrophic humanitarian
consequences of any use of nuclear weapons and call
upon all States to comply, at all times, with applicable
international law, including international humanitarian
law.

Nigeria is concerned about the slow pace of progress
towards nuclear disarmament and the lack of progress
by the nuclear-weapon States to accomplish the task of
the total elimination of their nuclear stockpiles. We call
on the nuclear-weapon States to fulfil their multilateral
legal obligations on nuclear disarmament.

Nigeria aligns itself with the statement made by
the representative of Iran on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries on this subject.

We appreciate the role of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) in assisting States
and international institutions in the implementation of
the relevant Security Council resolutions, especially
by considering requests from States regarding the
provision of technical assistance in the energy and
extractive industries. That allows States and institutions
to implement the relevant Council resolutions.

At the outset, I wish to reaffirm Nigeria’s
commitment to the ideal of a nuclear-free world. We
regard the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs) and their means of delivery as a grave threat

Nigeria reaffirms its view that resolution 1540
(2004) and its effective implementation remain a key
component of the global architecture for countering
the danger posed by the threat of the proliferation of

74/76

16-26652

23/08/2016

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

S/PV.7758

weapons of mass destruction. We continue to believe
that the establishment of effective precautionary
measures and systems to address potential nuclear,
chemical or biological proliferation is a collective
responsibility incumbent upon all Member States. We
must all take the lead.

Fourth, we legitimately look forward to seeing
established an appropriate balance between the need
for peaceful uses of technology for development and
socioeconomic progress and the concern to protect
ourselves from any misuse of those technologies by
uncontrolled or improper sources.

We recognize the relevance of the Secretariat in
facilitating, coordinating and supporting cooperation
between and among the various United Nations entities
in preventing the proliferation of WMDs to non-State
actors. Indeed, the Security Council, consistent with its
primary responsibility under the Charter of the United
Nations, must continue to play a vital role in that regard.

Fifthly, it is evident to us that the review should
clearly indicate the right to have access to such
technologies for peaceful purposes and the ways
to define precisely international cooperation and
appropriate funding.

In conclusion, I wish to restate Nigeria’s conviction
of the validity of multilateral diplomacy in the field of
disarmament and non-proliferation. We shall continue
to advocate for multilateralism as the core platform
for negotiations in the area of disarmament and
non-proliferation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Algeria.
Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): I would like to thank
Malaysia for the convening of this open debate with
the presence of His Excellency Deputy Prime Minister
Ahmad Zahid Hamidi. Algeria hopes that this meeting
will blaze a trail not only in fulfilling and following
up on resolution 1540 (2004), but also in the general
endeavour of disarmament, which we see as a shared
and common responsibility.
My country is fully committed to the statement
made by the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, but I would like to stress the following points.
First, we look forward to examining in depth
the review to be concluded by the end of the year on
strengthening and following up on resolution 1540
(2004).
Second, we see that next step as part of the
disarmament architecture in all its aspects. We clearly
underscore that it is our common duty to make sure that
no weapons of mass destruction (WMDs), no technology
and no trade end up in the hands of non-State actors.
Third, it is the firm conviction of my country that
the elimination of WMD is the surest way to prevent the
threat they pose to all of humankind, as stated 70 years
ago during the first session of the General Assembly.

Sixth, the common defence and security policy of
the African Union clearly sets out all those objectives
and position, including strong support to resolution
1540 (2004) resolution and great expectations from
international cooperation in all fields linked to
combating weapons of mass destruction. Moreover, the
African Commission on Nuclear Energy, established
by the Pelindaba Treaty, is today an impressive
reality that ought to be supported. In that regard,
we specifically recall resolution 1977 (2011), and in
particular its paragraphs 10,15 and 17, and we expect
Committee established pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1540 (2004) to set the practical steps for
regional cooperation.
Seventh, we understand that the general actions
for the achievement of those goals need further and
stronger encouragement. However, it must be said that
we expect more. In particular, in some cases, such as
with regard to the Non-Proliferation Treaty, the nuclearweapons States owe it to the world to start to fulfil their
commitments to disarmament and to allow equitable
access for the peaceful uses of associated technologies.
In the prolonged absence of such fulfilment, the
relevance of the Treaty might be questioned. We do not
see those commitments as amorphous promises, but as
clear international legal obligations.
Eighth, the path charted by the international
community with regard to chemical and biological
weapons should set the example for the nuclear threat.
My country deeply regrets that we are not even at
the starting point for the establishment of a nuclearweapon-free zone in the Middle east — an issue
that impeded any positive outcome at the latest NPT
Review Conference.
Ninth, let me reiterate the importance of negotiation
processes and multilateral mechanisms, all of which
must be strengthened and respected. They remain

16-2665275/76

S/PV.7758

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

the most appropriate frameworks — in particular the
Conference on Disarmament and the General Assembly.
Lastly, Algeria, which will chair the First Committee
during the seventy-first session of the General
Assembly, will spare no effort for the accomplishment
of the overall goals of security and disarmament as
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. Our
deep conviction continues to be that eradicating the
threat of all nuclear, biological and chemical weapons
must be based on the complete elimination of the
weapons themselves, so as to prevent the doomed fate
they pose to all humanankind
The President: The representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic has asked for the floor to make a further
statement. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Hallak (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): We are entirely bewildered by the hypocrisy
of the representative of Israel’s accusations. The Arabic
proverb is quite apt: if you are guilty of vices, you
should hide. Everyone knows that Israel introduced
terrorism into our region. Israel has introduced its
nuclear, chemical and biological weapons into the Arab
region. Without its support and that of certain countries
with great influence in the Security Council, Israel’s
nuclear-weapons programme would have disappeared
long ago.
During the 1973 Yom Kippur War, Israel
threatened to use nuclear weapons against Egypt and
Syria. And Israel has used various types of weapons of
mass destruction in its aggression against the peoples
of the region. The Committee established pursuant to
resolution Security Council resolution 1540 (2004)
works to ensure that biological, chemical and nuclear
weapons do not fall into the hands of non-State actors.
However, Israel has offered all kinds of assistance

76/76

23/08/2016

in the form of weapons, munitions and intelligence
to terrorist groups in Syria, especially to Da’esh and
Jabhat Al-Nusra and affiliated groups. In doing so, as
usual, it is in violation of all of the Council’s resolutions
concerning counter-terrorism. Israel is not party to any
treaty on weapons of mass destruction. If that proves
anything, it is Israel’s hypocrisy in its possession
of many types of weapons of mass destruction. The
Council must assume its responsibility to prevail upon
Israel to put an end to all its military, chemical and
biological weapons programmes.
Turning to the statement made by the representative
of the Turkish regime, everyone knows, and reports of the
Council themselves note, that sarin gas was trafficked
from Lybia into Turkey on a commercial aeroplane
and that terrorists supported by the regime used those
weapons in the city of Gaziantep, a Turkish town now
known as Turkish Tora Bora. We demand that the
Turkish regime repudiate those facts instead of hurling
accuations against the Syrian Government, which
has demonstrated to the entire world what the former
has done in terms of arming, training, supplying and
providing other assistance and access to international
terrorism — Islamist terrorism coming from Turkish
territory. The relevant reports on counter-terrorism,
including those of the 1540 Committee, are replete
with facts that underscore the hypocrisy of the Turkish
regime and the support and assistance it provides to
terrorists when it comes to using chemical weapons on
Syrian territory, originating on the Turkish border.
The allegations made by the representative of the
Turkish regime that his country has no weapons of
mass destruction are completely false: tactical nuclear
weapons of a nuclear Power are based on Turkish
territory.
The meeting rose at 5.25 p.m.

16-26652
