UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1997/26
8 May 1997
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: ENGLISH, FRENCH
AND RUSSIAN

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3775th meeting of the Security Council, held on 8 May 1997 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Croatia", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council welcomes the letter of the Secretary-General of
29 April 1997 (S/1997/343), which conveys the conclusions of the
Transitional Administrator regarding the successful holding of the
elections in the region of Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium in
the Republic of Croatia beginning on 13 April 1997, under the direction of
the United Nations Transitional Administration for Eastern Slavonia,
Baranja and Western Sirmium (UNTAES).
"The Security Council shares the assessment of the Transitional
Administrator that the holding of these elections has been an essential
step for further progress in the peaceful reintegration of the region and
marks an important milestone for the legitimate representation of the local
population in the Croatian constitutional and legal system. It urges early
formation of the newly elected bodies of local government and prompt and
full implementation of the undertakings contained in the Basic Agreement
(S/1995/951, annex) and the letter from the Government of Croatia of
13 January 1997 (S/1997/27, annex), including the establishment of the
Joint Council of Municipalities and the appointment of local Serbs to the
guaranteed positions in the parliamentary and administrative structures of
Croatia.
"The Security Council underlines the Transitional Administrator’s
finding that no intimidation, violence or electoral improprieties were
observed or reported before, during or after the elections. The Council
welcomes the good-will and sense of cooperation demonstrated by the parties
to the process.
"The Security Council emphasizes the importance of the two-way return
of all displaced persons in Croatia, as well as the right of residents of a
State to choose freely where they wish to live. In this context, it
welcomes the Agreement of the Joint Working Group on the Operational

97-12164 (E)

080597

/...

S/PRST/1997/26
English
Page 2

Procedures of Return (S/1997/341, annex). It urges the Government of
Croatia strictly to implement this Agreement. The Council calls upon both
sides to cooperate in good faith on the basis of the Basic Agreement and
stresses the need to respect human rights, including rights of persons
belonging to minorities, throughout the country, in order to ensure the
success of the process of reintegration.
"The Security Council expresses its appreciation to UNTAES and to
those elements of the international community, including observers from the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the Council of Europe
and members of the diplomatic community, whose efforts made possible the
successful holding of elections. The Council commends UNTAES for resolving
technical difficulties by taking decisive actions, which contributed
significantly to the successful holding of the elections.
"The Security Council looks forward to the recommendations of the
Secretary-General, in the light of the parties’ progress towards fulfilling
the Basic Agreement, for the further United Nations presence in Eastern
Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium, possibly a restructured UNTAES,
consistent with the fulfilment of the Basic Agreement, for the six-month
period beginning from 16 July 1997, in accordance with its resolution
1079 (1996)."

-----
