TWENTY-FOURTH

YEAR

rd
MEETING:
NEW

17 DECEMBER 1969

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1523) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . .
Adoption of the agenda

. , ... ......... ........ ................

Complaint by Guinea:
Letter dated 4 December 1969 from the ChargC d’affaires ad interim of Guinea
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/9528) . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Slav.1523

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents tire composed of capital letters combined with
fisures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of fhe Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information

about it is given.

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

,

FIFTEEN

HUNDRED

Held in New York
President: Mr. V. J. MWAANGA

on

AND TWENTY-THIR

ednesday, 17 December 1969, at 3.00 p.m.

(Zambia).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, Colombia, Finland, France, Hungary, Nepal,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Spain, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and Zambia,

Algeria,

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 523)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Complaint by Guinea:
Letter dated 4 December 1969 from the Chargir
d’affaires ad interim of Guinea addressed to the
President oF the Security Council (S/9528).
Adoption of the agenda
The agendawas adopted.
Complaint by Guinea
Letter dated 4 December 1969 from the Charge d’affaires ad
interim of Guinea addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/9528)
1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision
taken at the 1522nd meeting, I propose now, with the
consent of the Council, to invite the representatives of
Guinea and Portugal to take their seats at the Council table
in order to take part in the discussion without the right to
vote.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. A. Tour6 (Guiltea)
and Mr. I;. 13. de Miranda {Portugal) took places at the
Council table.
2. The PRESIDENT: The representatives of Mali, Syria
and Congo (Brazzaville) have also requested [S/9561,
S/9562] to be allowed to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote, and if I hear no objection I shall
invite them to take the places reserved for them at the side
of the Council chamber, on the understanding that they
will be invited to take a seat at the Council table when it is
their turn to address the Council,
At the invitation of the President, Mr, S. naore (Mali),
Mr. G. J. Tomeh (Syria) and Mr. J. Mornbouli (Congo
(Bruzzaville)) took the places reserved for them.

3. The PRESIDENT: In addition, I have just received a
letter dated 17 December from the representatives of
Liberia, Madagascar, Sierra Leone and Tunjsia /S/9JG3],
requesting to take part in the discussion without the right
to vote. If I hear no objection I shall invite them to take the
places reserved for them at the side of the chamber, on the
usual understanding that they will be invited to take seats
at the Council table when it is their turn to address the
Council.
At the invitation of the President, Mr, L. H. Diggs
(Liberia), Mr. B. Rabetafr’ka (Madagascar), Mr. F. B. Savage
(Sierra Leone) and Mr. A. M’Sadek (Tunisia) took the
places reserved for them.
4. The PRESIDENT: The Security Couacil will now
continue its consideration of the complaint submitted to it
by Guinea on 4 December 1969 in document S/9528.
5. Mr. AZZOUT (Algeria) (trunslated j?orrz French): The
Security Council is once again meeting to consider a serious
complaint made by an African country, Guinea, against
Portugal. Once again, more than 40 States members of the
Organization of African Unity support the complaint, for
Portuguese aggression against Guinea is felt by each
independent African State as an aggression directed against
itself.
6. For six months the countries adjoining African Territories under Portuguese domination have found themselves
the targets of daily bombings. Since last July the Council
has been called upon to consider the complaints of Zambia,
Senegal and now Guinea. Portuguese colonialism in Africa,
not content with waging a merciless war against the African
peoples of Angolp, Mozambique and Guinea (Bissau),
wishes today to extend the area of the fighting in order to
conceal its utter failure. This attempt to flee from one’s
problems by going over to the attack is a tested practice of
the colonialist countries, which have imposed murderous
wars on the peoples of Africa and Asia. Being unable to
conquer the fierce resistance of peoples that have decided
to free themselves from the foreign yoke, the colonialist
forces have recourse to the bombing of innocent villages
and to the abduction of persons under the false pretext of
destroying the rear bases of the resistance movements.
7. Whereas the representative pf Guinea in this Council
made a merciless indictment of typical aggression carried
out by the Portuguese forces against the *territory of his
country, the representative of Portugal, far from denying
these facts, contented himself with justifying his country’s
actions by alluding to the existence of alleged rear bases for

resistance movements against the Portuguese presence in
the Territory of Guinea (Bissau). We need hardly recall that
the African people of that Territory has for more ihan eight
years been carrying on a heroic struggle to regain its
independence and national sovereignty.

world will, in the last analysis, depend on the total
liquidation of colonialism and the accession of the peoples
under its domination to independence and national saver.
eignty.
14. Mr. BOYE (Senegal) (translated from Rench): My
delegation is taking part in this debate to express its
complete solidarity with the Republic of Guinea, which is
bound by many ties to Senegal. The aggression committed
against the Republic of Guinea, like all the acts of
aggression perpetrated by the Government of Portugal
against independent and sovereign African Governments,
results from the fact that Portugal, despite all appeals,will
not listen to any talk about the self-determination of
peoples. This is an outdated attitude. Yet the independent
African countries feel no hostility whatever towards Portugal. All they ask of it is that it should act in accordance
with the relevant resolutions of the United Nations.

8. The debates in the General Assembly, which is about to
conclude its twenty-fourth
session, have this year again
been dominated by the question. of the elimination of
colonialism in the world. As long as this phenomenon,
which is a remnant of the past continues in the countries of
the third world, peace and security will be endangered.
That is a fact, recognized in resolution 15 14 (XV) adopted
by the General Assembly ten years ago, the tenth anniversary of which our Organization is preparing to commemorate.
9. It might have been hoped that recognition by the
international community of the fact that colonial situations
constitute a direct threat to international peace and
security and that they should be eliminated would have
accelerated the process of decolontiation. A new era would
thereby have dawned for the young peoples, enabling them
to mobilize all their resources for their social, economic and
cultural development.

15. It is here that my delegation would like to make itself
quite clear and to say plainly that certain former metropolitan countries that have succeeded in guiding peoples
towards self-determination and independence, without
bloodshed and in friendship, deserve our sympathy and
trust. Portugal should emulate the example of those
countries and say to itself that, being a small, under-developed country, it cannot long sustain a colonial war even
with the assistance of some of its friends which, we are
sure, have not asked that the weapons they have furnished
it should be used against the peoples that aspire to
self-determination and independence.

10. Even the liberation of a large part of Africa, thanks to
the strenuous struggles of its peoples and the heroic struggle
against Portuguese domination by the peoples of Angola,
Mozambique and Guinea (Bissau) pointed to the certain
and swift fall of the Portuguese colonial empire. That
would have been the normal course of decolonization had
not Portugal found military and diplomatic support among
its North Atlantic Treaty Organization allies and the
rdgimes of southern Africa. This shows that the responsibility for the murderous wars waged by Portugal against the
peoples of Africa devolves just as much upon its allies. It is
not without reason that Portugal today is opening wide the
doors of the African Territories under its domination to the
great economic and financial interest of its Western
partners.

16. Portugal has, of course, other friends who have
installed themselves by force in Africa and are giving it
financial and material assistance to help it in its efforts to
strengthen its hold over the peoples which it dominates.
Portugal should know that Salisbury and Pretoria are not
good counsellors. It would do better to follow the example
of the former colonial Powers and heed the appeals
addressed to it, Lisbon’s negative response takes the form
of violent acts of aggression against independent countries,
as in the case of the Republic of Guinea. It is high time for
these aggressions to come to an end, for we need to pursue
our work of development in peace.

11. What is more, the aim of Portugal and its allies is not
only to exploit the wealth of these African countries but
also to weaken the economies of other independent African
States engaged in the struggle to develop their economies
and thus strengthen their national independence. Such is
the true explanation of Portuguese aggression against
Zambia, Senegal and Guinea.

17. The PRESIDENT:
Congo (Brazzaville).

I now call on the representative of

18. Mr. MOMBOULI (Congo, Brazzaville) (translatedfiom
French): Mr. President, because of the special ties linking
our two countries, I should first like to express my
delegation’s pride at seeing you preside over the debates of
this Council. I wish also to express our deep gratitude to
the other members of the Council who have given us an
opportunity to discuss the complaint of a brother country,
the Republic of Guinea, with which Congo (Brazzaville) has
very close relations. We are confident that With your
dynamism and your qualities as an experienced diplomat,
you will, like your predecessors, discharge your duties most
ably.

12. On the eve of the tenth anniversary of the proclamation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples, the Security Council, the
principle organ of the United Nations, is in duty bound to
condemn unequivocally Portugal’s intensified aggression
during the past six months against the independent COUI+
tries of Africa.
13. But we should not deceive ourselves about the fact
that the permanent threat against the territorial integrity
and independence of African countries will continue to
exist just as long as colonialism in general, and Portuguese
colonialism in particular, continue in Africa. Peace, justice
and progress in our continent, and thus throughout the

19. More than once my Government, through its rePresentatives, has had occasion to call the attention of the
Council and the General Assembly to the most barbarous
2

and retrogressive acts of aggression of the Government of
Lisbon. Every delegation which has had an opportunity
to
llw petitioners speak about the coIoniaI policy of Portugal
in Africa during debates in the Fourth Committee was able
to realize the pain and suffering caused by the treatment
inflicted on the freedom fighters of Angola, Mozambique
and Guinea (Bissau). Only the day before yesterday, at the
last meeting of the Council, our friend the representative
of
Gujnea described an example for us and everyone of us was
obliged to make a strenuous effort to control his feelings.
We are glad to note in this connexion that the representative of Portugal felt he should not dwell on this question
and, in our opinion, his silence signified his Government’s
reclognition of SW~I practices, which are contrary to
international morality and respect for human rights.

mercenarieswho went rampant around the area of
Tando-Bizenga.They intercepteda car occupied
only
by
civilians who were going from Kisenzi to Pointe-Noire.
The Port%uese soldiery obliged the driver, under the
threat of arms,to divert the carto Cabinda”-whichis on
the border of my country-“Despite the gravity of the
incident, the CongoleseGovernment has until now
maintained silence,hoping that the Portuguesecoloni.
dists would recover their senses
and releaseour peaceful
citizens, captured on our territory. However, of the
eleven passengers,
two children and four womenwere
returned,but five menarestill unlawfully detained.”
22. The membersof the Councilwill realizethe similarity
between these Portugueseacts and thosedrawn to their
attention by the representativeof Guinea.Thusno further
proof is needed that the Portuguesecolonialistsare in
Africa only to threatenthe freedomandsovereigntyof the
independentcountriesof this continent, Not only doesthe
Lisbon Government take pleasurein fiercely, cruelly and
barbarouslyopposingthe just and tirelessstrugglecarried
on by the liberation movements,but, assuredof logistic
support by certain Statesmembersof this Council,it also
daresto challengeindependentStates,in flagrantviolation
of the rules of internationallaw andthe relevantprovisions
of our Charter.

20. This is not exactly the subject of my interventiu‘l, and
members of the Council will easily understand the concern
of my Government in the face of constant premeditated
acts
of aggression by Portugal, perpetrated against our
brother countries of Zambia, the United Republic of
Tanzania, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Senegal
and the Republic of Guinea and its national territory. It is
thins concern that makes me bring to the attention of the
Council the statement made by my Government only a few
months ago, following new acts of aggression by Portugal
against Congo (Brazzaville).
21. That statement, which I shall now read and which
completes to a large extent the previous complaints and the
adequately documented complaint of the Republic of
Guinea, should help to enlighten public opinion:
“On 4 June 1969 a commando of militants of the
Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola deflected
from its course and compelled to land at the airport of
Pointe-Noire a commercial Portuguese aircraft DC-3
CRLY of the DTA Company, carrying 13 passengers.
“That operation had been planned and carried out
outside our national territory and was part of the just
struggle carried out by Angolese patriots against the
colonial and backward r&gime of Lisbon, which persists in
maintaining its hold over part of Africa, despite the
:repeated condemnations of the overwhelming majority of
the nations of the world which love justice and freedom,
and despite the condemnation of international organizations. We did not initiate this action, but there can be no
doubt that we stand solidly with the Angolesepatriots.
After the simpleidentification formalities, the Congolese
Government allowed the aircraft to leaveagainWith all of
its crew and passengers.
During their stay at Pointe-Noire,
which wasat the expenseof the CongoleseGovernment,
they were treated with great consideration.However, the
CongoleseGovernment was unable to allow the three
uniformed Portuguesemercenariesin the aircraft to leave,
sincethey formed part of the clique which day to day is
spreadingdeath and suffering amongthe familiesof our
brothers in Angola, Cabinda, Mozambique and Guinea
(Bissau).

23. A readingof documentS/9549 of 10 December1969
will show the solidarity of the whole of Africa with the
sister Republic of Guinea. We therefore appeal to the
conscienceof the Statesmembersof thisCouncilandhope
that this appealwill be heeded,for the Councilcannot be
allowedto play the role of the ostrich so asnot to assume
its responsibilitiesby adopting effective and urgent
measures.Only a few days ago the Council took an
important decisionto the moral satisfactionof our brother
country of Senegaland of sorely tried Africa. The Council
now has the opportunity to reaffirm the positionsit has
previously taken and to condemnunequivocallythe Portugueseacts of aggression
andviolationsagainstthe Republic
of Guinea.In the light of what hasbeensaid,the Security
Councilshouldrequire Portugalto releaseimmediatelythe
Guineanpeasantsarbitrarily detainedin the Bissauprisons,
to restore the aircraft AN 14 of the National Companyof
Air &i/z&e which is unlawfully being held by the Portuguese authorities, to return the motor launch Pazk
Lumumba, which wasarbitrarily seizedand to pay reparations to all the victims of Portugueseactsof aggression
on
Guineannationalterritory.
24. In conclusion, 1 should like to state that if the
Security Council wishesto continueto embodythe hopes
of the peoplesof the world, if it wishesto guaranteePeace
and freedom throughout the world, and if the United
Nations Charter is to remain the guide for Statesin their
relations, it is high time for our Council to provide just
solutions h the problemssubmitted to it. For its Part,
Congo (Brazzaville) is always prepared to suPPort all
solutions which might make Portugal heed the voice of
reasonandjustice.
25. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative
of Congo
(Brazzav~le) for the kind words he addressedto the
President.

“In return for our humane action, on 7 July 1969, the
watchdogs of decaying Portuguese COh’Iialism
illegally
brought into our national territory a commandoof armed
3

That solidarity extends likewise to those of our brothers
who are fighting for their freedom and independence.

26. I should like to inform members of the Council that 1
have just received letters from the representatives of
Lesotho and Saudi Arabia [S/9564, S/956.5/ asking to be
invited to participate in the discussion now in progress in
the Council. In conformity with the usual practice of the
Council, and if there is no objection, I propose to invite
those two representatives to fake the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council table, on the usual
understanding that they will be seated at the Council table
when they are called upon to take the floor.

33. In the second place, we have too much respect for the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, and in this
particular case for the principles governing the establishment and maintenance of normal relations among Member
States, not to feel concerned when acts such as those
described by the representative of Guinea at the 1522nd
meeting of the Council seriously jeopardize the reasons
which maintain our faith in an international community
where security, justice and peace should prevail.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. M. ‘i: Mashologue
(Lesotho) and Mr, J. M. Baro0d.V (Saudi Arrrbia) took the
places reserved for them.

34. Lastly, on the formal level, the repetition of certain
events, according to practices which are now familiar and
which are directed against the countries bordering on
Territories under Portuguese administration, cannot leave
us indifferent to the real intentions of the Portuguese
authorities both as regards the national liberation movements and as regards African countries faithful to the spirit
of the Lusaka Manifesto.1

27. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Madagascar, on whom I now call.
28. Mr. RABETAFIKA
(Madagascar) (translated from
French): The fact that in the space of a few months our
delegations have been invited on three occasions to participate in the debates of this Council on the various
complaints of independent African States against the acts
of Portugal should be no cause for surprise since we, for our
part, intend to discharge in all circumstances the mandate
entrusted to us.

35. We have very little to add to what the representative
of Guinea told the Council when he so eloquently set forth
the facts with which Portugal is reproached. We find the
same complaints and the same acts of provocation or
aggression, bringing in their wake the destruction of
property, abduction and the victimization of innocent
civilians. Such acts of violence cannot be justified and
undoubtedly deserve the disapproval of the international
community. The right of self-defence may once again be
invoked, but this right, recognized by the Charter, must, we
believe, be exercised within the limits imposed by the
Charter and not for the purpose of flouting such principles
as the right to self-determination or the right to independence.

29. However, over and above that mandate, we have
further reason to take part in the present proceedings of the
Council, and we should like to thank the President, and all
the members of the Security Council, for giving us a further
opportunity to express our views clearly on a question
which cannot but be of concern to all African States by
reason of the far-reaching and listing repercussions that it
may have on the future of our continent.

36. Morally, we would not be able to accept that such acts
should be perpetrated in Guinea (Bissau) against the
African population living there. It follows that legally we
can still less accept that such acts should, in effect, be
directed against the sovereignty and the territorial integrity
of an independent State.

30. It is now clear after the att:!!sks on a number of
African States in recent years, that there can be no real
peace and security for us so long as Portugal maintains its
long-outdated course of conduct and that that course,
artificially maintained despite historical and political realities, will inevitably impel it to disregard the fact that the
aspirations of a people cannot with impunity be put down
by threats or violence.

37. The representative of Guinea mentioned incidents,
some going back as far as April 1969 and others to March
1968, the seriousness of which cannot be judged in terms of
the order in which they occurred. The fact that an incident
was not immediately brought to the attention of the
Security Council in no way means that we are ready to
forget the sufferings 0‘ a population or the affront made to
a State in the deliberate violation of its sovereigntv.

31. For that matter, what assurance have we of peace and
security so long as by their very nature, Portugal’s
operations against the liberation movements go far beyond
the bounds within which they should be confined?
However, this last consideration must not in any way be
construed as supporting, in one form or another; these
operations which we shall continue to denounce but to
which we must refer for the sake of practical argument.

38. The Republic of Guinea has realized that, following
the attacks of which it was the victim, its security was far
from being guaranteed and, in turning to the Security
Council, its representative has asked the Council to require
of Portugal the cessation of all provocative acts. Such a
demand, based on respect for the principles of the Charter
and dictated by the concern to preserve the sovereign rights
of a State, is normal and should be easily met.

32. I mentioned a moment ago the reasons for our
participation and I should now like to revert to them
briefly. The lasting solidarity among African peoples and
Governments is one of the principles to which we are firmly
attached since this solidarity enables us, regardless of any
possible differences between us, to follow unswervingly the
road which must lead us to the liberation of the African
continent, drawing on all resources and taking all steps that
may be justified both in their motivation and in their end.

1 See Official Records of the General Assembly, mew-fourth

Session,
Annexes, agenda
item 106,documentA/7754.
4

39. Furthermore, there have been civilian victims, property has been destroyed and no restitution has been made
for goods, and WC think that Portugal should be asked what
its real intentions in that respect are. The representative of
Portugal has suggested that the Council should recommend
an invedtigation. But what assurance do we have, when
established facts are continually called into question, that
any such investigation will result in compensation for the
victims, in the freeing of prisoners, and in the restitution of
goods?

46. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Saudi Arabia, Mr. Jamil Baroody. I invite
him to take a seat at the Council table and make his
statement.
47. Mr. BAROODY
(Saudi Arabia): I am somewhat
constrained to ask permission to speak on the item of
which the Security Council is seized due to the fact that it
behoves Portugal to put an end to the bloody conflict
between itself and its neighbours. Innocent blood is being
intermittently
shed; this will deepen the hatred and
unnecessarily feed the rancour between the contending
parties.

410. We do not doubt the good faith of anyone. But in the
present situation, we think we should have some fairly
convincing proofs of this good faith so that we may come
to a sensible conclusion about it.

48. It seems only yesterday that the Council passed a
resolution condemning Portugal for its aggression against
our sister State, Senegal. Today the Coundil is resuming the
discussion on a complaint which has been submitted against
Portugal by Guinea. Our colleague from Portugal seemed to
take exception to this latest complaint due to the fact that
the representative of Guinea did not follow up his two
letters of 4 and 5 December with an immediate request for
a Security Council meeting.

41. In our opinion, the decision taken by the Security
Council on the complaint by Guinea should take into
account two essential factors. In the first place, we consider
that a Member State should be able to find, when having
recourse to the Organization, the full and complete
safeguard of its sovereignty and its territorial integrity when
confronted with acts of aggression and provocation.
Secondly, the international community cannot remain
@different to the fate of populations whose only desire is
to live in peace and tranquillity once again. For, just as a
State has the compelling duty to preserve its dignity and
sovereignty, so do we have the duty to ensure the
e:limination of everything which may be regarded as a
source of insecurity for our peoples and for those for whom
we have agreed to accept a certain responsibility.

49. I believe that the Government of Guinea, as well as the
representative of Guinea, should be lauded for having
exercised infinite patience and for not having precipitated
any immediate action. They so did advisedly, to allow time
for cooling down and for seeing what would be the best
procedure to follow in the Council so that it could render
judgement on the complaint without heated debate. I
believe they have succeeded in doing that, because the last
two or three meetings of the Council have, I think, been the
calmest that I have ever witnessed, thanks to the representative of Guinea, irrespective of the sometimes bitter
language that was exchanged between him and my colleague from Portugal. Anyway, it is natural to feel deeply
about such matters because of the pressure of the people
who were bereaved. If be were to talk a little less
vehemently, our colleague from Guinea would be considered as having failed in his duty towards his own people.
Likewise, I believe that our colleaguefrom Portugal wasnot
free from addressing some bitter phrases against our
colleague from Guinea. That can go on interminably
between colleaguesinvolved in such a complaint and in
similarcomplaints.

42. We hope that those considerations, which are based
both on morality and on law, may prevail in the consideration of this case and that there may be a clear
decision both as regards the right of the Republic of Guinea
to claim the protection of its interests, its sovereignty and
its territorial integrity, and as regards the right of the
populations of the region to a normal life, free as they then
will be of any fear as to the defence and recognition of
tlheir lawful interests.
4.3. But our wishes do not stop there. We have been told
several times that in cases such as the one now under
consideration by the Council, we should not discuss the
general policy of Portugal but should confine ourselves
strictly to consideration of the complaint lodged by one
party or the other.

50. What shall we do here in the Security Council, or
rather, what will the membersof the Council do--becauseI
do not have the right to vote here-in the face of such
repeatedcomplaints againstPortugal? I leave that question
to the Council and I shall perhaps answer it not on the
Council’s behalf, but on the basisof what I would do if I
were sitting on the Council.

4.4. We again affirm that we have no intention of
interfering in the domestic affairs of a State. Nevertheless,
when it is clear that certain events would not have taken
place if the policy of that State had been in one way or
another modified in time, it seems difficult not to pass
judgement on the correlation between the events for which
one is responsible and the principles one preaches.

51. I would say that Guineawaited for at leastnine or ten
days before finally decidingto lodge the presentcomplaint
after submitting the two aforementionedletters in order to
ascertain the stand of its sister African States. And the
result wasmore eloquent than any debate in the Council. It
is only necessaryto look at document S/9549, the letter
dated 5 December 1969, which is co.sponsoredby 40
African States-I repeat, 40 African States-which constitute about one third of the United Nations membership.

4.5. We shall not address ourselves once again to these facts
clr to these obsolete principles which are only too well
k;nown. Suffice it to say that on the day the Territories
under Portuguese administration are given the right to
decide, in freedom and in full awareness, their own destiny,
we shall be able to extend the hand of co-operation to
[‘ortugal without useless recrimination or mental reservations.
5

like an eye and the resistance is like an awl, a big needle
which is used to bore leather. The eye cannot fight the awl.

52. I feel sorry for the pathetic situation in which Portugal
finds itself. One third of the United Nations is against
Portugal. Now once in a while we say that the majority errs.
Quite often we find that’, due to pressures, due to solidarity
and due to special arrangements, members vote with others
because of their ties or alliances, without due regard to the
merits or demerits of a question. In those cases the majority
is usually wrong, because members vote on the grounds of
numbers rather than of justice.

56. The Portuguese are a small people. I gather from my
African brothers that they do not wish to see the
Portuguese economic interests dissipated. They would
rather enhance economic relations with Portugal. What is
the alternative? I might say to my dear brother from
Portugal that the alternative would be if his Government
persists-and I say your Government because many people,
the youth, nowadays in countries bigger and smaller than
Portugal are rebelling against the warmonger everywhere.
We know that in every country, including Portugal, there
are certain economic circles that derive the lion’s share of
the material interests of many Portuguese colonies to the
detriment of the Portuguese people who will have to shed
their blood to defend the interests of those small circles,

53. Mere it is not a question only of self-determination of
the peoples that are under the yoke of Portugal. The
incident centres around the vitims; but what is the root
cause of all those victims? Those victims in numbers are
negligible compared with what is happening in South-East
Asia and in the Middle East. But, I submit, they are
symbolic of the primary factor which has caused 40 States
of the African continent to come together not merely
through solidarity but to uphold the inalienable rights of
the people who are being ruled against their will by
Portugal, If it were only solidarity, as we sometimes witness
it here in the [Jnited Nations through so-called blocks and
so-called groups, one might give the benefit of the doubt to
our colleague from Portugal that all those African States
congregated against him and his Government. But the facts
are for everyone to see. That is not an isolated case. The
complaint of our brother from Guinea does not deal with
the victims alone; it deals with the whole African continent.
Otherwise those 40 States would not have seen fit to stand
solidly behind Guinea.

57. In fairness to Portugal I must say that we all have
them in our part of the world and we cannot motivate it
any more. In Portugal they are fighting for patriotism, The
youth of Portugal as is the youth everywhere is awakened;
why shed your blood and African blood? For what
purpose? All the money that you are deriving from those
delicious sardines and port wines will not meet a fraction of
the cost, will not be sufficient for 5 per cent of the cost of
the war against the African nations. I mention sardines and
port wine, but Portugal has other products the gain from
which will be earmarked to sustain the conflict against
Guinea, Senegal or any other African State contiguous with
your colony.

54. There is another point which I should like to make,
with the permission of the members of the Council.
Portugal, geographically speaking, is a European country.
Its culture, to a large extent, is European, although it has
been mixed with the cultures of the Mediterranean and our
own culture of the Middle East since the days when the
Phoenicians populated the northern part of Portugal. That
is why I would venture to say that it is paradoxical that
Portugal, which has benefited from the Mediterranean
culture, should be more stubborn in its colonial stand than
those countries Iike the United Kingdom, France, Belgium
and the Netherlands, which at one time had vast colonies
and which relinquished those colonies because they tltought
the better part of wisdom was to liberate the people that
live under their rule.

58. I heard the representative of Portugal say the other
day that the Guineans or Africans from another State had
captured certain Portuguese nationals. I was given to
understand that there is a liberation movement that is
active all over Africa and that those Portuguese prisoners
are the prisoners of the African liberation movement. In
any country, whether it be Guinea, Senegal or the United
Republic of Tanzania or any country which has a direct
conflict with Portugal, and were the Governments to say to
the liberation movement “You have no right to be on our
soil and have prisoners”, I’ll wager they would fight their
own people, because they are Africans. Those African
States cannot renounce the African liberation movement,
neither could we in our own area; I am talking from
experience, without dragging in another question-I am shy
of doing so. There is a parallel, and we learn from
experience rather than from books, History sometimes is
not always oriented to tell the objective truth, it is
sometimes subjective.

55. This was done to the profit of those metropolitan
Powers because we find there is no rancour between the
peoples of the erstwhile colonists of those countries which I
have enumerated and the people of the ex-colonies. It is
indeed an anachronism to find a small State resisting this
urge in Africa for liberation and for independence. Although I was given to understand that the new Government
in Portugal is viewing this question with a different
orientation from the previous Government, this is not
enough. Time is of the essence. Time indeed may determine
whether there will be an interminable conflict between our
African brothers and our brothers from Portugal; I call
them brothers because they are all brothers in humanity. It
wouId be foolish-if
my colleague from Portugal wodld
allow me to say so-regardless of the various incidents that
have taken place, incidents which, as I have said, may
deepen the hatred and feed the rancour, for them to do
something for which we have an Arabic proverb. Portugal is

59. We in our area in the Middle East, the Arab States, do
not dare suppress the Arab liberation movement in the
region; to do so would kill the Government. Therefore, it is
high time for Portugal to wake up from such nostalgia
because it is like a dream of the seventeenth, eighteenth and
nineteenth century, Portugal is the oldest colonial Power in
Africa and once it wakes up to this situation there will be
no more incidents with Senegal one day, with Guinea
another day; Portugal will live amicably with them.
60. Perhaps, as I mentioned in my last statement when I
addressed myself to the Senegalese complaint ll517th
6

s
i
/

1

,

-

meetingf, bY accelerating the movement, not to mention
the details, of self-determination by education, as the
representative of Portugal once said his Government was
doing, and bY letting those who are fighting against
Portugal participate in that acceleration of self-detcrmination, I assure the representative of Portugal that Portugal
would be highly esteemed and highly regarded as France is
today by the Algerians and the African states that were
once French colonies. Also Portugal wotild be esteemed and
highly regarded as the United Kingdom is. Many of the
peoples of the erstwhile colonies of the United King&ml
today are free and they stand on the same ground as the
French and the United Kingdom. I always watch them and
find how they act like brothers. Portugal should not want
to make enemies, enemies which it cannot cope with on
practical grounds and which will defeat it, Therefore, I
draw the attention of my colleagues around this table to
these facts which I have adduced. I began by saying what
could be done.
61. A lot could be done by your fellow Europeans if they
would not consider military alliances as paramount and
would not consider solidarity with Europe as most essential, and if they would rise above the pettiness of narrow
nationalism and narrower regionalism, narrower sometimes
because collectively a conglomeration of nations can act
more foolishly than when they are by themselves, because
they gain more power. People who gain more power
collectively become more foolish.
62. That is why I would appeal to my European colleagues
sitting round this table to reason with Portugal and to find
a s801ution--not necessarily on the lines I have inentioned-to accelerate process of self-determination, to make
arrangements between the peoples of the Portuguese
African colonies and the metropolitan Power, which is
Portugal. And then not only will there be peace and
concord, but the interests of Portugal will be best served.
We will no longer be seized of similar incidents, and there
will be prosperity both in Portugal and in Africa.
63. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Lesotho, on whom I now call.
64. Mr. MASHOLOGU
(Lesotho): Mr. President, my
delegation and the Government of Lesotho are grateful to
you for granting our request to be allowed to participate in
this, debate on the serious matter before the Security
Council.
65. Before proceeding to the substance of my remarks,
allow me first of all to express the congratulations of my
delegation on your assumption of the presidency of this
most important Council. We do so in full recognition of
your outstanding diplomatic skills and in the full knowledge of your unswerving commitment to the achievement
of the noble ends of justice, peace and security for all men,
irrespective of colour, race or creed, which are at the heart
of lhe Charter of the United Nations.
66. My delegation is one of the signatories of the letter
addressed to the President of the Security Council by 40
African States [S/9549/ in support of the request for the
convening of a meeting of the Council following the

violations by Portugal of the territorial integrity of the
Republic of Guinea. In associating ourselves with the text
of that letter, we were expressing the deep concern of the
Government and people of Lesotho at the spate of
incidents perpetrated by Portugal against the Republic of
Guinea, and indeed against other African territories in the
past. As the text of the letter states, Senegalwas a victim as
early as 1963, and acts of aggression have been committed
in the territories of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Republic of Zambia. The Republic of the Congo
(Brazzaville) has been subjected to frequent shelling by
Portugal. Also, the United Republic of Tanzania has
suffered attacks on its territorial integrity at the hands of
Portugal.
67. Only last week the Council censured Portugal for the
most recent attacks on the territory of the Republic of
Senegal. The nature and frequency of these attacks on
African territories is such that they cannot be ignored by
any African State, and we hope that the Council, which is
primarily responsible for peace and security, will deem it fit
to take appropriate and effective action as soon as possible
and, in any case, before the situation gets out of hand.
68. In the view of my delegation, these acts of violence
can no longer be regarded as isolated incidents, but must be
regarded as deliberate acts of policy. In this connexion, I
should like to refer to a statement made by the Prime
Minister of Lesotho during his address to the General
Assembly as long ago as 25 September 1967 about the
situation in the Portuguese-dominated territories of Africa:
“We wish to warn Portugal, as the Administering
Authority of those Territories that its policies may also’
have extremely dangerous consequences, for already
many States experience tension in their relations with
Portugal, simply because of its colonial policy-because
colonialism is always so unjust and unrealistic that it
automatically raises barriers to normal relations between
States. And such barriers, my Government believes, can
be removed only by the granting of freedom and
independence to the people who are still living under
[Portuguese]
colonialism.“2
69. The incidents which are the subject of Guinea’s
complaint to the Council obviously show that Portugalis
unable to maintain normal, peacefu1relations with the
Republic of Guinea. Indeed, a detailed study of the
catalogue of events listed in document S/9554 of 12
December 1969 reveals certain consistentfeatureswhich
are a causeof very deepconcernto my Government.The
first of these is wanton disregardfor the value of human
life. It is especiallydistressingto note that amongthose
killed in the course of theseincidents are to be found
women and children.We deemit our duty to reaffirm the
value of humanlife and to emphasizethat the lives of the
people of Guinea and of the other Territorieswhich have
beenthe objectsof attack are$ our view asvaluableasthe
lives of the people of any other State and should be
accorded the protection that is due to them from the
Security Council.
2 Ibid., menty.,yecond

ing,para.21.

&wion,

Plenary Meetim

1565th meet-

70. A second feature which is noticeable from a study of
the catalogue of incidents is the tendency to,wards the
collective and indiscriminate nature of the attacks which
frequently take the form of shelling or bombing of villages.
We are not convinced that there could be any justification
of these basically ?nmoral methods, whatever the Portuguese representat.ive i;lay say.
71, A third disturbi lg feature is that of flagrant violations
of territorial integri y. ‘This is a matter of particularly
serious concern beca:!se those territorial violations, if they
should remain unchtcked, could lead to a very serious
deterioration of the sil uation in all the African States which
have been the victims \>f such attacks.
72, The Government of Lesotho is convinced that the
primary basis for the cynical attitude of the Government of
Portugal to the Charter lies in its desperate determination
to cling to its universally condemned colonial policies in
Guinea (Bissau), policies which by their nature are in
conflict with the basic tenets of the Charter. This policy,
together with its more cynical aspects, constitutes a
permanent affront to the entire African community of
nations, and it cannot possibly be reconciled with the
beliefs of Africans anywhere, including those Africans who
are still living under Portuguese domination. The present

course of events can only result in generating increased
condemnation and bitterness among those who are concerned about freedom and peace in Africa.
73. We have come before this Council to state our distress
at the continuation of those very unfortunate practices on
African soil and against African Governments and people.
We are deeply concerned also because we feel that the
freedom of the newly independent African States is being
challenged in so far as we cannot be truly free if a foreign
Power like Portugal continues to indulge in those cynical
acts against our people without being checked. We therefore appeal to the Council to take the strongest measures
against Portugal to ensure that there is no further recurrence of those incidents.
74. The PRESIDENT: I have no further speakers on my
list for this afternoon’s meeting. If no representative wishes
to take the floor at this stage, and if there are no
objections, I propose to adjourn the meeting. On the basis
of informal consultations, I wish to announce that the next
meeting of the Security Council will be held tomorrow, 18
December, at 3 p.m.
The meeting rose at 4.45 p.m.

HOW

TO

05TAlN

UNITED

United
Notions
publications
Ihe world.
Consult
yaw

NATIONS
may
bookrlore

PUBLICATIONS

be obtained
or write

from
bookrhxes
and dirlribulorr
to:
United
Nations,
Soles Section,

throughout
New York

or Geneva.

COMMENT

LES PUBLICATIONS

SE PROCURER

Les publications
ddposilairer
du

des
monde

Nations
enlier.

Section

des

Unier
sent
Informer.vour

Notions

Unies,

venter,

New

KAK

I-IOJlYYklTb

M3AAHMFl

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

in United

Nations,

New

York

Price:

$U.S.

York

0.50

NATIONS

UNIES

en venle
dons
Ies libroiries
et les ogencer
aupr&
de votre
librairie
ou adresser-vow
6:
ou Genbve.

OPrAHM3A4MM

Las publicociones
de lar Naciones
en todar
porfes del mundo. Conrulte
Ventor,
Nuevo
York o Ginebro.

Litho

DES

DE LAS

06bEAMHEHHblX

NACIONES

Unidor
erl6n
o IV librero

(or equivalent

en venta
o dirijase

HAUHti

UNIDAS
en

in other

librerias
y cosos distribuidorar
CI: Naciones
Unidos,
Seccibn

currencies)

de

82300-December

1972--2,050
