S/2005/635

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
7 October 2005
Original: English

Letter dated 7 October 2005 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
As you are aware, following the Security Council’s consideration of my report
on the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), of 23 May
2005 (S/2005/335 and Corr.1), I appointed Mr. Kai Eide (Norway) as my Special
Envoy to undertake a comprehensive review of the situation in Kosovo (Serbia and
Montenegro). The purpose of the review was to assess whether the conditions are in
place to enter into a political process designed to determine the future status of
Kosovo, in accordance with Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) and relevant
Presidential Statements. Mr. Eide has now submitted his report to me, which I
attach.
As indicated in the report, Mr. Eide has concluded that, while standards
implementation in Kosovo has been uneven, the time has come to move to the next
phase of the political process. Based on the assessment provided in the report and
further consultations I have undertaken, in particular with my Special
Representative, Mr. Søren Jessen-Petersen, I accept Mr. Eide’s conclusion. I
therefore intend to initiate preparations for the possible appointment, in the light of
the outcome of the forthcoming Council deliberations, of a special envoy to lead the
future status process. In undertaking this sensitive exercise, the special envoy would
be conscious of concerns in the subregion. I would emphasize that, at the same time,
standards implementation must continue with greater commitment and results.
Progress in this regard is essential for the success and sustainability of any future
status process.
In the light of the comprehensive nature of the report presented by Mr. Eide, I
do not intend to submit to the Security Council a separate report on the activities of
UNMIK at this time. My next periodic report on UNMIK would therefore be issued
by the end of January 2006.
I would like to take this opportunity to put on record my appreciation to Mr. Eide
for accepting this important assignment and preparing an excellent report, as well as
for his efforts to contribute to an environment conducive to taking the political
process forward.
I should be grateful if you would bring the attached report to the attention of
the members of the Security Council.

(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

05-54069 (E) 141005

*0554069*

S/2005/635

Annex
A comprehensive review of the situation in Kosovo
Summary
This report contains a comprehensive review of the situation in Kosovo with
the aim of assessing whether the conditions are now in place for initiating and
conducting the future status process. The review has also been used to seek progress
on the ground and to contribute to an environment conducive to taking the political
process forward.
Following a period of political stagnation and widespread frustration, Kosovo
has entered a new period of dynamic development. A political process is under way
and is gaining momentum. It is based on a comprehensive political strategy, which
includes the prospects for a future status process.
The standards implementation process is an important part of this dynamic.
The record of implementation so far is uneven. Particular progress has been made in
the development of new institutional frameworks. After the end of the conflict in
1999, there was a total institutional vacuum in Kosovo. Today, a comprehensive set
of institutions has been established which includes executive, legislative and judicial
bodies at the central as well as the local levels. Much progress has also been
achieved in the development of a sustainable legal framework. The legislative work
of the Assembly, the Government and UNMIK has been ambitious, covering
essential areas of public life and the economy. Systems providing public services
have been put in place across most of Kosovo. A civil service is taking shape. Over
the recent period, a significant transfer of competences has occurred. The local
leaders have gradually assumed ownership of their own institutions. The
development of new institutions is undermined by a strong tendency among
politicians to see themselves as accountable to their political parties rather than to
the public they serve. Appointments are, therefore, regularly made on the basis of
political and clan affiliation rather than competence.
The Kosovo Serbs have chosen to stay outside the central political institutions
and maintain parallel structures for health and educational services. The Kosovo
Serbs fear that they will become a decoration to any central-level political
institution, with little ability to yield tangible results. The Kosovo Albanians have
done little to dispel this fear. The interests of the Kosovo Serbs would be better
served if their representatives returned to the Assembly. The Kosovo Albanian
parties should stimulate such a process. The time has also come for Belgrade to
abandon its negative position towards Kosovo Serb participation.
With regard to the economy, significant progress has been made. Economic
structures have been established and modern legislation exists in many essential
areas. Nevertheless, the current economic situation remains bleak. The
unemployment rate is still high and poverty is widespread. Grave problems exist
with regard to lack of public income as well as an antiquated energy sector. To
improve the situation, serious efforts must be undertaken. There are, however,
positive longer-term prospects. The privatization process is well under way. It could
have a direct and positive impact on the economy in Kosovo as many of the socially
owned enterprises have been idle. However, the privatization process could lead to
discrimination in employment along ethnic lines and affect the sustainability of

2

S/2005/635

minority communities. It is important to avoid such negative effects. Kosovo also
has valuable and unexploited natural resources, which would turn Kosovo into an
energy exporter in an energy-hungry region.
If a future status process is launched, this will certainly have a positive effect
on the economy of Kosovo. However, the Kosovo authorities must understand that
they cannot depend on the international community to solve their problems. They
must take steps to ensure that shortcomings are addressed. Investment and
integration will depend not only on status, but also on a predictable and stable
Kosovo, where the rule of law is respected.
Today, the rule of law is hampered by a lack of ability and readiness to enforce
legislation at all levels. Respect for the rule of law is inadequately entrenched and
the mechanisms to enforce it are not sufficiently developed. The Kosovo Police
Service (KPS) is gradually taking on new and more demanding tasks. However,
crimes of a more serious nature or with ethnic dimensions remain difficult for the
KPS to address. The Kosovo justice system is regarded as the weakest of Kosovo’s
institutions. The civil justice system is of particular concern, its increasing backlog
of cases now stands at several tens of thousands. Combating serious crime, including
organized crime and corruption, has proven to be difficult for the KPS and the
justice system. It is hindered by family or clan solidarity and by the intimidation of
witnesses and of law enforcement and judicial officials. For inter-ethnic crime, the
law enforcement mechanism is also weak.
Organized crime and corruption have been characterized as the biggest threats
to the stability of Kosovo and the sustainability of its institutions. These are
widespread phenomena, but their level is difficult to assess. The government has not
taken the necessary administrative and legislative action to fight organized crime and
to prevent corruption in provisional institutions.
The Kosovo police and judiciary are fragile institutions. Further transfer of
competences in these areas should be considered with great caution. In a deeply
divided society, which is still recovering from post-conflict trauma, the
establishment of ministries of justice and the interior could lead to the impression
that they have fallen under the control of one political party or one ethnic group. The
transfer of competences in such sensitive areas cannot work without a firm
oversight, intervention and sanctioning policy. In the light of the limitations of the
police and judicial systems, there will be a need for a continued presence of
international police with executive powers in sensitive areas. The current ongoing
reduction in the number of international judges and prosecutors is premature and
should be urgently reconsidered.
With regard to the foundation for a multi-ethnic society, the situation is grim.
Kosovo leaders and the international community should take urgent steps in order to
correct this picture. The overall security situation is stable, but fragile. The level of
reported crime, including inter-ethnic crime, is low. However, on the ground, the
situation is complex and troubling, especially for minority communities. There are
frequently unreported cases of low-level, inter-ethnic violence and incidents. This
affects freedom of movement in a negative way. To correct this situation, it will be
important to prosecute crime more vigorously. When perpetrators remain at large, a
sense of impunity prevails. Belgrade should abstain from inflammatory comments,
which could contribute to an insecure environment.
Respecting property rights is one of the most urgent challenges with regard to
ensuring a truly multi-ethnic society. At present, property rights are neither respected

3

S/2005/635

nor ensured. A great number of agricultural and commercial properties remain
illegally occupied. This represents a serious obstacle to returns and sustainable
livelihoods.
The overall return process has virtually come to a halt. The general atmosphere
in many places is not conducive to return. Multi-ethnicity is often not seen as a goal.
While overall statistics are hard to find, there is a widespread view that currently as
many or more Kosovo Serbs are leaving Kosovo than are returning. A viable return
process will require support and attention over a longer period of time, in particular
to facilitate access to services and repossession of land. Greater attention will also be
needed to those who have remained.
The return process is hampered by the fact that assistance is only provided to
those who return to their home of origin. A more flexible policy of assistance should
be considered to support the return of people to where they can live and not only to
where they have lived. However, it must be ensured that a more flexible policy is not
misused for political manipulation.
The continued existence of camps inside Kosovo is a disgrace for the
governing structures and for the international community. The Roma camps in
Plementina and Zitkovac are particularly distressing. They should be dealt with on
an emergency basis.
The Serbian Orthodox religious sites and institutions represent a critical
element of the spiritual fabric of Kosovo Serbs. They are also part of the world
cultural heritage. There is a need to create a “protective space” around these sites,
with the involvement of the international community, in order to make them less
vulnerable to political manipulation.
To achieve sustainable return and viable minority communities, a wider
decentralization process will be required. It could envisage enhanced competences in
areas such as the police, justice, education, culture, the media and the economy. It
could allow for horizontal links between Kosovo Serb majority municipalities. It
would also facilitate the absorption of parallel structures into legitimate entities.
However, it should not endanger central institutions in Kosovo or weaken Pristina’s
authority. The international community must stand ready to assist in the
establishment of arrangements for wider decentralization.
There will not be any good moment for addressing Kosovo’s future status. It
will continue to be a highly sensitive political issue. Nevertheless, an overall
assessment leads to the conclusion that the time has come to commence this process.
The political process, which is now under way, must continue. Based on a
comprehensive strategy, it has provided Kosovo with a political perspective. Kosovo
having moved from stagnation to expectation, stagnation cannot again be allowed to
take hold.
Further progress in standards implementation is urgently required. It is unlikely
that postponing the future status process will lead to further and tangible results.
However, moving into the future status process entails a risk that attention will be
focused on status to the detriment of standards. It will require great effort to keep the
standards implementation process on track. During the future status process, the
international community will have a strong leverage to move standards
implementation forward. That leverage must be fully exploited. Provided the future
status process is properly handled, it can bring about further progress in standards
implementation.

4

S/2005/635

There is now a shared expectation in Kosovo and in Belgrade, as well as in the
region, that the future status process will start. During this comprehensive review,
there has been a gradual shift in the preparedness for such a process among the
interlocutors. Furthermore, all sides need clarity with regard to the future status of
Kosovo. It is of great importance that the future status process takes place at a time
when the international community is still present in Kosovo in sufficient strength.
The future status process must be moved forward with caution. All the parties
must be brought together — and kept together — throughout the status process. The
end result must be stable and sustainable. Artificial deadlines should not be set.
Once the process has started, it cannot be blocked and must be brought to a
conclusion.
The international community will need strength to carry the future status
process forward. The United Nations has done a credible and impressive job in
fulfilling its mandate in difficult circumstances. But its leverage in Kosovo is
diminishing. Kosovo is located in Europe, where strong regional organizations exist.
In the future, they — and in particular the European Union (EU) — will have to play
the most prominent role in Kosovo. They will have the leverage required and will be
able to offer prospects in the framework of the European integration process.
A future status process should be accompanied by a clear expression by the
international community that it is determined to stay and support this process as well
as its outcome. The EU should, in the near term, consider stepping up its presence on
the ground. When status has been determined, the EU will be expected to play a
more prominent role, in particular with regard to the police and justice and in
monitoring and supporting the standards process. The North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) will also have to continue its presence. A United States
contribution to the Kosovo Force (KFOR) is essential in order to provide a visible
expression of continued engagement. The Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) has a valuable asset in its field experience and expertise. This
presence will continue to be required. A high representative or a similar arrangement
should be considered, firmly anchored in the EU and with the continued involvement
of the broader international community. A “Bonn Powers” arrangement could be
envisaged in areas related to inter-ethnic issues.
A road map for integration into international structures would provide Kosovo
with real prospects for the future. Belgrade will also need incentives for integration
into Euro-Atlantic frameworks of cooperation. The EU decision to start negotiations
with Serbia and Montenegro for a stabilization and association agreement represents
a milestone in this respect.
Determining the future status of Kosovo will in itself be a demanding
challenge. The international community must do the utmost to ensure that, whatever
the eventual status, it does not become a failed status. Entering the future status
process does not mean entering the last stage, but the next stage of the international
presence.

5

S/2005/635

Introduction
1.
Following your report on the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) of 23 May 2005 (S/2005/335 and Corr.1), you asked me to
undertake a comprehensive review of the situation in Kosovo based on the attached
terms of reference. The review had a broad scope, with particular attention paid to
whether the conditions were now in place for initiating and conducting the future
status process. I also sought to use the leverage provided by the comprehensive
review to promote progress on the ground and to contribute to an environment
conducive to taking the political process forward.
2.
Among all our experiences, I would in particular highlight the 10 days spent
travelling all around Kosovo meeting with as many people as possible in numerous
towns, villages and hamlets. This trip showed us what meetings in Pristina could
not: how people live throughout Kosovo, the hardships they face and the hopes and
fears they have for their future. In order to obtain an adequate understanding of the
situation on the ground and the complex political environment, my team and I held
extensive consultations with political leaders in Belgrade and Pristina; leaders of all
communities in Kosovo; high-level representatives of Security Council members,
key Member States, particularly those of the Contact Group and regional
neighbours, and with regional organizations (EU, OSCE, NATO and the Council of
Europe); UNMIK and other United Nations representatives in the field; and United
Nations Headquarters. I would like to express my great appreciation for the
openness and generosity with which we were received by all our interlocutors and
the support provided to us by UNMIK.
3.
The considerations and recommendations below represent my best judgement
of where we stand and how we should now proceed in accordance with Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999).

The context
4.
The current political landscape must, of course, be seen in the light of the
dramatic changes which took place following the end of the conflict in 1999. At that
time, hundreds of thousands of Kosovo Albanians had returned to Kosovo and
started to rebuild their lives. Most of the Kosovo Serbs had fled their homes.
Kosovo was a society of widespread suffering and destruction for all communities.
The economy lay in ruins. No democratic institutions existed. The province was
placed under international administration, in accordance with resolution 1244
(1999).
5.
Since then, a comprehensive process of rebuilding has taken place. Homes
have been reconstructed. New institutions have been established covering all aspects
of the society. Under difficult circumstances, the rebuilding of the economy has
started. A new democracy is being built from the ground in a province without solid
democratic traditions. The fledgling Kosovo institutions are struggling with the
challenges of developing a sound legal framework and of providing services and
security to the entire population. In order to guide and assist the rebuilding and
development of Kosovo, the standards review mechanism was launched in 2003.
This initiative was intended to help Kosovo achieve progress, which would allow a
future status process to begin. However, the international community was

6

S/2005/635

increasingly being seen as engaged in a holding operation, unwilling to address this
crucial issue. There was a growing sense of frustration and stagnation.
6.
The ending of the conflict in 1999 had profound implications for the
relationship between the various communities in Kosovo, and in particular between
the Kosovo Albanians and the Kosovo Serbs. From 1989, the authorities in Belgrade
had controlled the instruments of power. The Kosovo Serbs had lived under the
umbrella of Belgrade’s rule over the province. Following the end of the conflict in
1999, the Kosovo Serbs saw the instruments of power gradually transferred to the
majority-dominated Provisional Institutions of Self-Government. This dramatic
change has had a strong impact — psychologically and politically — on the
majority as well as the minority communities.
7.
Today, the Kosovo Albanians demonstrate stronger self-confidence and
assertiveness. They are — understandably — shaping their identity as a ruling
majority population. This identity is — to a large extent — built on controversial
events, personalities and symbols, often in opposition to the identities of Kosovo
Serbs and other communities. Of course, this is a phenomenon seen in many
societies in post-conflict situations. Mixed with this new assertiveness of the
Kosovo Albanians is a lingering feeling of uncertainty over what Belgrade may do
to prevent them from fulfilling their political aspirations. They see the Kosovo Serbs
as instruments of Belgrade and therefore as part of a remaining threat to their future.
8.
In contrast, the Kosovo Serbs are struggling to preserve their identity. They are
experiencing pressure against important elements of this identity, such as their
language, culture and religious heritage, as well as their economic survival. Other
smaller communities are being further marginalized — politically, economically and
culturally. In some cases, they are being assimilated.
9.
The sense of stagnation and the tense relationship between the Kosovo
Albanians and Kosovo Serbs led to the outbreak of violence in March 2004. It
reflected the fact that inter-ethnic relations had to be seriously addressed and that a
stronger sense of political perspective was urgently required. The international
community could not live with a policy which was perceived as a policy of status
quo.
10. In the report submitted to you on 6 August 2004 (S/2004/932 of 30 November
2004), a road map was presented in order to move out of a period of political
stagnation and into a more dynamic political process. This road map contained an
outline of a comprehensive strategy aimed at gaining political momentum leading to
the opening of a future status process. It was based on the conviction that addressing
the question of the future status of Kosovo should not be delayed much longer. The
risks that would follow from a continued “wait and see” policy — in terms of
increasing political, economic and social frustration — could soon be far greater
than the risks related to a future status process.
11. This report seeks to provide a comprehensive assessment of the political
situation one year later and looks closely at the prospects for a future status process.
In order to determine whether the time has come to launch this process, a broad
assessment of the situation in Kosovo must be made — going much beyond the
implementation of standards. It must include considerations relating to more general
developments in Kosovo, to the region as such and to the work of the international
community. The key question is whether sufficient political maturity and

7

S/2005/635

preparedness exist to initiate this process or whether such a decision is still
premature.
12. There are today new and dynamic developments in Kosovo. The process of
implementing standards is an important part of this dynamic. It has provided a sense
of momentum, which for years had been lacking. But the goals of the standards
process are ambitious. They cannot be met over a short period of time. This was
emphasized in the report of 6 August 2004 referred to above. The standards process
will require constant and determined efforts, stretching into and beyond the process
of defining the future status of Kosovo. Rather than producing progress, unrealistic
expectations could reinforce a sense of stagnation in the society. They could
enhance the temptation to turn the standards process into a “window dressing”
exercise, to the detriment of results on the ground.
13. At the same time, a future status process without adequate progress on
standards could damage efforts to enhance respect for the rule of law, which would
affect all the people of Kosovo — irrespective of ethnic belonging. Such a process
could put Kosovo minority communities at greater risk and endanger the multiethnic character of Kosovo. An internally unstable Kosovo would make it even
more difficult to define and implement a viable future status.
14. The international community has put tremendous energy into the process of
implementing standards. It has engaged the leaders of Kosovo in a broadly based
and common effort. Structures have been set up in the Kosovo government to
facilitate the standards process, which has become a centrepiece of its activities and
has led to an improved bureaucratic culture. The process has itself been a major
achievement.
15. Many of those involved — from all communities — are committed to the
success of the standards process. They have the ambition to create a society with a
European perspective, based on good governance and the rule of law. The Kosovo
Albanians are also generally motivated by the desire to enter the future status
process. However, among Kosovo Albanians there is also a tendency to see
standards implementation as an exercise imposed from outside and one that they
have to go through in order to reach the status process. Genuine support for its
underlying principles and objectives is often lacking. The strong verbal support for
the standards process has therefore not been adequately translated into a profound
commitment to concrete results. This applies to political leaders both inside and
outside of government. The lack of unambiguous impulses from Pristina is reflected
at the municipal level. Progress has often been a result of international pressure
rather than local engagement.
16. Standards implementation is complex and multifaceted. In last year’s report, it
was underlined that it must become not a technical and bureaucratic process, but a
political and impact-oriented exercise. This is still a concern. It is important to
ensure that the process itself does not absorb so much attention and energy that it
diverts attention from the impact it should have on people where they live. It must
also permit attention to be directed to critical areas where bottlenecks may exist at
any stage of the process. An overarching approach is required, where each standard
supports the others and where they are all measured in this broader context.

8

S/2005/635

The challenges
Building the institutional foundation
17. Well-functioning institutions are a prerequisite for the development of a
democratic society, a healthy economy and respect for the rule of law. After the end
of the conflict in 1999, there was a total institutional vacuum in Kosovo. Today, a
comprehensive set of new institutions has been established. This represents a
tremendous achievement. Executive, legislative, judicial and other institutions have
been set up at the central as well as the local levels. New ministries are planned for
later this year. A civil service is gradually taking shape. Over the recent period, a
significant transfer of competences has taken place. The local leaders are gradually
taking ownership of their own institutions. The level of democracy has improved
over a short period of time. Furthermore, much progress has been achieved in the
development of a sustainable legal framework. The legislative work of the
Assembly, the Government and UNMIK has been ambitious and covered essential
areas of public life and the economy.
18. The Assembly elections in October 2004 were also a significant success. They
were free, fair and transparent and the first to be largely organized by Kosovo
authorities. Following the elections, the maturity of the Assembly was faced with
the new test of a strong opposition confronting the governing coalition. Both sides,
as well as the Assembly leadership, had to learn their new roles, an exercise which
has proven to be difficult. A parliamentary culture has not yet firmly taken root.
Nevertheless, the work of the Kosovo Assembly has steadily improved.
19. The development of new institutions is undermined by a strong tendency
among politicians to see themselves as accountable to their political parties rather
than to the public they serve. The political parties tend to consider new institutions
and the civil service as “their” domains. Appointments are, therefore, regularly
made on the basis of political or clan affiliation rather than competence. Many civil
servants are concerned about this inability to distinguish between the political
authorities and the civil service and the hampering effect it has on the development
of a durable and stable administration. Accountability mechanisms have largely
been put in place to address irregularities and to ensure that established legislation
and procedures are followed. However, they do not offer adequate protection. There
is also ample evidence of insufficient respect for the Serbian language as the second
official language of the provisional institutions.
20. Over the past five years, Kosovo has also established comprehensive
educational and health-care systems as well as other public services. There are
serious shortcomings in the quality of the services provided. The level of medical
services is low and in some cases close to the standards of developing countries. In
the educational system, modernization and de-politicization are urgently needed.
However, the fact that services are now provided across most of Kosovo represents
a significant achievement.
21. The Kosovo Serbs have chosen to stay outside of the central political
institutions and maintain parallel structures for health and educational services.
Many appeals have — without results — been directed to Kosovo Serb
representatives to re-enter central political institutions. This relates first and
foremost to the Assembly, since participation in a government formed by two

9

S/2005/635

Kosovo Albanian parties, with the declared objective of independence for Kosovo,
would be even more controversial. The Kosovo Serbs fear that they would become a
decoration to any central-level political institution, with little ability to yield
tangible results. This fear is understandable and the Kosovo Albanians have done
little to dispel it. However, the overall interests of the Kosovo Serbs would be better
served if their representatives returned to the Assembly. The Kosovo Albanian
parties could stimulate such a process by making it clear that they will respect the
Kosovo Serbs and other minority communities as voices with legitimate concerns
rather than considering them as a limited number of votes that can easily be
outnumbered. The negative attitude of the authorities in Belgrade — including
failure to support Kosovo Serb participation in the 2004 elections — has contributed
significantly to the absence of Kosovo Serbs from central political institutions. The
time has come for Belgrade to abandon this position. In fact, had the Kosovo Serbs
participated in those elections, they would — with reserved and elected seats
together — have been able to influence the debates of the Assembly and even the
formation of a government.
22. The numbers of Kosovo Serbs and members of other minority communities in
the bureaucratic structures of the provisional institutions are also low. That is
particularly the case in senior management positions. The recruitment of minorities
has too often been seen as a question of filling a quota rather than one of providing
meaningful participation. Clearly, the Kosovo Albanians should increase their
efforts to create a multi-ethnic civil service. However, the Kosovo Serbs and other
minorities must also demonstrate an interest in applying for positions in the
governmental structures and be prepared to take active part.
23. The parallel structures for health and educational services located in Kosovo
Serb populated areas are mainly financed by the Serbian government. The continued
existence of these structures is a political demonstration as well as a reflection of
the mistrust between the two communities. For Belgrade, it is an element of political
influence. The current problem with regard to parallel structures is in many ways
similar to the Kosovo Albanian parallel structures prior to 1999. Today, the parallel
structures are probably the only realistic way to ensure the provision of adequate
services to Kosovo Serbs. Solving the problem of parallel structures would require
serious and practical incentives from the Government and a de-politicization of the
issue by all sides. It is a problem which can most likely only be solved during a
future status process.
24. The functioning of the new Kosovo institutions is very uneven. There is a
significant lack of experience and expertise. Building new institutions and transferring
competences must therefore go hand-in-hand with a focused international support to
capacity-building. International efforts have — as so often in post-conflict
situations — been sporadic and driven by short-term initiatives from the outside
rather than long-term requirements inside the institutions. The government has now
elaborated its own programme for capacity-building, in an effort to take greater
ownership of this process. Nevertheless, an emerging sense of local ownership will
not reduce the need for international support. Capacity-building will require a
longer-term perspective. A better run and de-politicized university would also make
a valuable and long-term contribution to capacity-building.
25. During the course of its evolution from a controversial past, the Kosovo
Protection Corps (KPC) has continued to improve in the performance of its mandate

10

S/2005/635

as a civil emergency organization. The efforts of the KPC towards fulfilling its
standard are to a large extent due to its leadership. Recently, the KPC has become
more professional. It provides assistance in reconstruction efforts and has started to
recruit minority members, which is a difficult undertaking. There remains a deep
mistrust of the KPC, particularly on the part of the Kosovo Serbs. The underlying
issue relating to the KPC is its origins and the aspirations among many of a possible
future role. Given the sensitivity of this issue, it will need to be addressed in
connection with the future status process and in the light of the future requirements
of Kosovo.

The economic challenge
26. The development of viable institutions and the quality of services are strongly
and negatively affected by the current economic situation in Kosovo. Today, this
economic situation remains precarious. In spite of some progress, many live in
poverty and the unemployment rate is high. The situation is felt by most of the
population, but minority communities and especially vulnerable groups are affected
in a disproportionate way.
27. One of the most worrying aspects of the economic situation is the forecast for
public income for 2006. According to current estimates, public income will be far
from adequate to cover recurrent costs and the need for investments. A serious
budget deficit can be expected. The Government must now take action to develop an
improved system for the collection of taxes and utility bills and to bring the grey
economy into legality. Such efforts would increase public income and reduce
dependence on international assistance.
28. The energy sector is one of the most promising long-term assets of Kosovo. It
is also one of its most troubling challenges. The Kosovo electricity company (KEK)
suffers from antiquated technology, power outages and a dramatic lack of income
from its customers. Last winter, a number of villages were disconnected owing to
lack of payment by customers. This winter, there could be similar disconnections.
However, they should not be portrayed as an inter-ethnic problem. All communities
are affected.
29. There are also important positive developments. When the armed conflict
ended in 1999, there was an almost complete lack of economic structures and
legislation. Today, such structures have been established and modern legislation
exists in many essential areas. The establishment of regulatory bodies and the
continuing development of the banking sector are among the achievements
contributing to potential economic development. The well-functioning Ministry of
Finance and Economy has — with the cooperation of international and local
experts — developed a framework for the management of a modern economy. The
Kosovo Development Plan will also — when it is ready — give the province a
valuable instrument to guide its economic future.
30. Today, the privatization process is well under way after long delays. The
Kosovo Trust Agency expects that 90 per cent of the value of the socially owned
enterprises will be privatized by next spring. This process could have a direct and
positive impact on the economy in Kosovo, as many of the socially owned
enterprises have been idle. Most of the privatized enterprises are taken over by
Kosovo Albanians in Kosovo or residing abroad. High-level government officials

11

S/2005/635

are concerned that many of the investments will not lead to productive business
activity. There is a potential for using the privatization process for moneylaundering purposes. Furthermore, it is important to take into account the effects of
this process on the different ethnic groups. The privatization process could lead to
discrimination in employment along ethnic lines and affect the economic
sustainability of minority communities. This process must move forward, but in a
way which safeguards the interests of the minority population during and after
privatization. A more constructive engagement of Belgrade in the privatization
process would promote this aim.
31. Kosovo also has valuable and unexploited natural resources, in particular
lignite and other mining reserves, as well as important agricultural potential. With
improved technologies and infrastructure, the lignite reserves could turn Kosovo
into an energy exporter in an energy-hungry region. Solving questions related to
property rights would facilitate the productive use of uncultivated land, enabling
Kosovo to reduce its current unacceptably high imports of agricultural products.
32. Altogether, the economic situation is characterized by serious short-term
problems, but also positive longer-term prospects. If a future status process is
launched, this will certainly have a positive effect on the Kosovo economy. It would
create new optimism and confidence in the future. With future status determined, a
firmer basis for investments, loans and cooperation with international actors will be
in place. The Kosovo authorities should, however, understand that they cannot
depend on the international community to solve their problems. They must
themselves take steps to ensure that shortcomings are addressed, for instance with
regard to strengthening public income. Furthermore, investments and integration
will not only depend on status. They will also depend on a predictable and stable
Kosovo, which respects the rule of law.

Enhancing respect for the rule of law
33. The rule of law is affected by the strength of institutions and the viability of
the economy. It also depends on the development of a legal framework, where
significant progress has been made. The main challenge today is the lack of ability
and readiness to enforce legislation at all levels. Respect for the rule of law is
inadequately entrenched and the mechanisms to enforce it are not sufficiently
developed.
34. The Kosovo Police Service (KPS) — the most multi-ethnic of the Kosovo
institutions — is gradually taking on new and more demanding tasks, including riot
control. Across Kosovo, the responsibility for its operations has been transferred to
the KPS, with the international police in a monitoring role. The work the KPS has
undertaken in relation to common offences within one ethnic community is
increasingly respected by the population. Crimes of a more severe nature or with
ethnic dimensions remain difficult for the KPS to address.
35. The Kosovo justice system is generally regarded as the weakest of the Kosovo
institutions. The civil justice system is of particular concern; its increasing backlog
of cases now stands at several tens of thousands. This affects everyone in Kosovo,
lowering respect for the rule of law and contributing to a climate of impunity. Many
of the cases pending are property claims by minorities.

12

S/2005/635

36. Combating serious crime, including organized crime and corruption, has
proven to be difficult for the KPS and the justice system. It is hindered by family or
clan solidarity and by the intimidation of witnesses as well as of law enforcement
and judicial officials. For serious inter-ethnic crime, the law enforcement record is
also weak. Far too few perpetrators of serious crimes are ever brought to justice.
Other crimes — such as theft of livestock and agricultural equipment belonging to
minorities and illegal use of agricultural land — are also rarely prosecuted. This
reinforces the sense that criminals can operate with impunity.
37. Organized crime and corruption have been characterized as the biggest threats
to the stability of Kosovo and to the sustainability of its institutions. Some highprofile cases related to organized crime, including human and drug trafficking, have
been properly investigated by the international community and the perpetrators have
been brought to justice. These individual cases confirm that organized crime
represents a serious threat to Kosovo.
38. Corruption is a widespread phenomenon in Kosovo, but the level is difficult to
assess. In selected areas, such as the customs service, serious efforts have been
made to combat institutional corruption by putting effective systems of
accountability in place. The government has not taken the necessary administrative
and legislative action to fight and prevent corruption in the provisional institutions.
An anti-corruption law is in place, but the establishment of the anti-corruption
agency has been delayed. The process is slow and without a convincing sense of
commitment. Over the past six years, international police, prosecutors and
intelligence officials have tried to address corruption, but have failed to go much
beyond the surface of the problem. Clan solidarity, codes of silence, language
problems and inexperienced local law enforcement institutions have all contributed
to this failure. A joint effort by the international community and fully committed
Kosovo authorities could bring progress in this area. Such an effort could certainly
have a significant impact and demonstrate a readiness to address such crimes.
39. The Kosovo police and judiciary are fragile institutions. Further transfer of
competences in these areas should, therefore, be considered with great caution. New
ministries of justice and the interior should be placed under the leadership of
individuals enjoying a high degree of confidence in all communities and in all
political parties. Such individuals will be hard to find. In a deeply divided society,
which is still recovering from the post-conflict trauma, these two ministries could
easily be regarded as having fallen under the control of one political party or one
ethnic group. Transfer of competences in such sensitive areas cannot work without a
firm oversight, intervention and sanctioning policy. The multi-ethnic composition of
the KPS and the trust it enjoys is fragile. Transfer of competences in this area could
have a centrifugal effect on the KPS, making it difficult to maintain its multi-ethnic
composition. This challenge will be even greater in a period in which possible future
status talks would place its multi-ethnic character under pressure.
40. In the light of the limitations of the police and judicial system, there will be a
need for a continued presence of international police with executive powers in
sensitive areas. A continued presence of international judges and prosecutors will
also be required to handle cases related to war crimes, organized crime and
corruption as well as difficult inter-ethnic cases. The currently ongoing reduction in
the number of international judges and prosecutors is premature and should urgently
be reconsidered. The result of such reductions would be a further loss of credibility

13

S/2005/635

of the justice system and of confidence in it among the population in general and the
minority communities in particular. There is little reason to believe that local judges
and prosecutors will be able to fulfil in the near future the functions now being
carried out by international personnel.
41. Caution is also required with regard to the future of the Kosovo Police Service
School. This is one of the most successful endeavours of the international
community in Kosovo. The time has not yet come to replace the international
management of this school. The police force must be, and must seem to be, trained
in a politically neutral environment. Only then will the multi-ethnic composition of
the KPS be ensured and the level of its acceptance by all communities be enhanced.
42. Improving respect for the rule of law will also require a strengthening of
human rights instruments. The current plan to establish a Human Rights Advisory
Panel could contribute to a greater protection of human rights. The creation of a
Special Panel on Human Rights of the Supreme Court should also be considered.
43. The Ombudsperson Institution is one of the main human rights instruments in
Kosovo today. In the current human rights climate, it will be important to avoid a
weakening of this Institution when it is transferred to local ownership. The
international community must ensure that the current powers and competences of
the office are not diluted and that its credibility is ensured.

The inter-ethnic challenge
44. In Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), emphasis is placed on maintaining
Kosovo as a multi-ethnic society. The inter-ethnic challenge has a number of
components — providing security, ensuring property rights, promoting return and
protecting the identity of minority communities. Regrettably, little has been
achieved to create the foundation for a multi-ethnic society. The Kosovo leaders and
the international community should take urgent steps to correct this grim picture.
Security
45. With regard to security, the overall situation is stable. The level of reported
crime — including inter-ethnic crime — is low. In general, the political leaders
attach great importance to maintaining stability and security. They understand that
any outbreak of violence would seriously damage the international reputation of
Kosovo and their political ambitions. In its task of providing overall security, KFOR
has become more efficient and able to react quickly throughout Kosovo. The KPS is
now better trained and equipped. Nevertheless, the situation remains fragile — as
has been illustrated by events over the past weeks.
46. On the ground, the situation is complex and troubling — especially for the
minority communities. Statistics can easily be misleading. While the level of
reported inter-ethnic crime is low, there are frequent unreported cases of low-level,
inter-ethnic violence and incidents. They do not appear in the statistics. Harassment,
looting, stealing of cattle and other similar incidents occur very frequently. This is
in addition to the widespread illegal occupancy of property, especially agricultural
land, which makes it impossible to gain access to such property and to use or
cultivate it without a security risk. Moreover, Kosovo is a small place, where
incidents in one part become rapidly known in others. In this situation, the minority

14

S/2005/635

communities — and especially the Kosovo Serbs — suffer from more than a
perceived insecurity. It is indeed a mixture of reality and perception. To combat this
situation, it will be important to prosecute crime more vigorously. When
perpetrators remain at large, a sense of impunity prevails. Where there is freedom of
movement for the perpetrators, it is hard to convince the victim that he or she enjoys
the same freedom.
47. The low number of reported inter-ethnic incidents partly also stems from the
fact that the minorities tend to avoid or reduce to a minimum their contacts with the
majority population. It is difficult to expect that people from minority communities
should take risks in order to verify whether freedom of movement and security are
perceptions or facts. That being said, the authorities in Belgrade should abstain from
inflammatory comments or premature reactions to incidents of violence when they
occur. Statements of this nature also contribute to an insecure environment.
Property rights
48. Ensuring property rights is one of the most urgent challenges with regard to
ensuring a truly multi-ethnic society. It is a general rule-of-law question affecting all
communities. However, it is crucial for the minority communities — particularly the
Kosovo Serbs — and for their prospects for return and survival. At present, property
rights are neither respected nor ensured. Illegal construction and occupation of
homes and agricultural and commercial property are widespread phenomena.
49. A great number of agricultural and commercial properties remain illegally
occupied. This represents a serious obstacle to returns and sustainable livelihood.
Although most residential property claims have been adjudicated, less than half of
the decisions have been implemented. Local courts have a serious backlog of
property-related cases amounting to tens of thousands. It is a situation that cannot be
allowed to continue. The Government and the international community must
urgently address this issue and find alternative ways to solve outstanding cases and
to implement the decisions which have been made.
The return process
50. Lack of security and respect for property rights as well as uncertainty about
the future contribute heavily to the fact that the overall return process has virtually
come to a halt. There is a strong feeling that those who commit crimes enjoy
impunity and that the possibility for establishing viable livelihoods is very limited.
The great majority of the people who left Kosovo after June 1999 have not come
back. Most of those who left after the violence of March 2004 have returned,
although a number of them have again abandoned their homes. Even if houses and
many of the secondary buildings have now been reconstructed, returnees find the
start-up compensation of €2,000 insufficient to cover the loss of movable property.
A viable return process will require support and attention over a longer period of
time, in particular to facilitate access to services and repossession of land. Greater
attention will also be needed to those who have remained. The sustainability of the
existing communities must become an integral part of the return strategy. For every
family leaving, the prospect of returns to their village or town will diminish.
51. Kosovo Albanian leaders have committed themselves to the return process.
However, this is the “Pristina reality”. The reality on the ground is different. The
security situation, insufficient access to justice, lack of protection of property rights,

15

S/2005/635

and uncertain political and economic prospects discourage return. Furthermore, the
general atmosphere in many places is not conducive for return. Multi-ethnicity is
often not seen as a goal. With some exceptions, Kosovo Serbs will therefore only
return to places where they can find safety in numbers, with access to their own
services. Few Kosovo Serbs still live in urban areas with the Kosovo Albanian
population and return there is more difficult as the pressure from the majority
community is greater and the means of economic survival are limited.
52. While reliable overall statistics are hard to find, there is a widespread view —
including in the international community — that currently as many or more Kosovo
Serbs are leaving Kosovo than are returning. There are reports that an increasing
number of returnees are selling their property and leaving again.
53. The return process is also hampered by the fact that assistance is only provided
to those who return to their home of origin. It is, for instance, unlikely that those
who fled Pristina in 1999 will return to their home of origin in the foreseeable
future. They may, however, wish to establish a home elsewhere in Kosovo. A more
flexible policy of assistance that would enable returnees to resettle in the area of
their choice should be considered. This would allow returnees to create more viable
communities in Kosovo. Support would thereby be provided to people where they
can live and not only where they have lived. This is a complex matter, since a more
flexible policy could also be misused for political manipulation and for pursuing
political goals. It cannot mean giving up commitments to those who wish to return
to their homes and who need support to fulfil their aspirations. It cannot be a
substitute for current policies, but should be a supplement to them.
54. The situation of internally displaced persons inside Kosovo is frequently
neglected. The continued existence of camps inside Kosovo is a disgrace for the
governing structures and for the international community. The Roma camps in
Plementina and Zitkovac are particularly distressing and made worse by serious
health hazards. They should be dealt with on an emergency basis.
Serbian Orthodox religious sites and institutions
55. The Serbian Orthodox religious sites and institutions represent a critical
element of the spiritual fabric of Kosovo Serb society. The sustainability of the
Kosovo Serb community in Kosovo is related to the preservation of its cultural and
religious heritage. However, the Serbian Orthodox sites also represent more than an
important part of Serb identity. They are a part of the world cultural heritage. Many
of these sites have been seriously damaged or destroyed since 1999. Finally, the
reconstruction is now about to start. However, they will continue to need protection.
While the readiness of KFOR to maintain its protection of religious sites is
essential, a durable solution cannot be built on military forces.
56. There is a need to create a “protective space” around these sites in order to
make them less vulnerable to political manipulation. Arrangements should be found
that would place Serbian Orthodox sites in Kosovo under a form of international
protection. This would need to include guarantees of access, property rights, and
community sustainability. It is important not only to protect individual sites as
cultural and religious monuments, but also as living communities. The Council of
Europe and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO) have particular expertise in this area and should be invited to play a role
in such arrangements.

16

S/2005/635

57. The Serbian Orthodox Church is experiencing pressure against its identity. In
addition to intimidation and threats, there are attempts to rewrite the history and
origin of Serbian Orthodox heritage. They see uncontroversial and neutral names of
streets in the vicinity of their sites being changed and “albanized”. The Kosovo
Albanian leaders should react and bring a halt to these activities.
Decentralization
58. To achieve sustainable return and viable minority communities, a process of
decentralization will be required. It will improve the ability of non-Albanian
communities in Kosovo to protect their identity and livelihood, build their
confidence in the future and encourage them to take a more active part in the
governing institutions of Kosovo.
59. Already in 2002, decentralization was promised to the Kosovo Serbs in return
for their participation in the elections and the provisional institutions. However,
until recently, real efforts and political will have been lacking. During the summer
of 2005, a desire to achieve quick results led to a less ambitious approach and
insufficient consultations with those involved. The result has been “too little, too
late”. Progress has been made on pilot projects for non-Serb areas. However, the
current stalemate with regard to those in Kosovo Serb majority areas is unlikely to
be resolved.
60. Decentralization should now be seriously addressed in a wider framework,
which would result in a meaningful devolution of powers and enhanced
competences at the local level. Such a framework could include a number of new
municipalities where the Kosovo Serbs, in particular, would have a comfortable
majority. It could envisage enhanced competences in areas such as the police,
justice, education, culture, the media and the economy, including the appointment of
key officials. It could allow for horizontal links between Kosovo Serb majority
municipalities. Arrangements could also be considered for special ties to Belgrade,
without giving Belgrade any authority in such communities. An ambitious
decentralization plan, with special competences going beyond those given to all
other municipalities, should not endanger central institutions in Kosovo or weaken
Pristina’s authority. It would establish effective institutional guarantees for the
minorities, increase confidence in the central institutions of Kosovo and contribute
to a situation where such municipalities would be under the authority of Pristina.
Furthermore, it would facilitate the absorption of parallel structures into legitimate
entities.
61. The international community must stand ready to assist in the establishment of
arrangements for wider decentralization. Lessons should be drawn from similar —
albeit not identical — processes in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and
in southern Serbia. In both cases, the international community contributed a
significant effort to give the local Albanian populations the breathing space required
to protect their interests and maintain their identity in a multi-ethnic environment.
The international community should now be prepared to act with the same
determination to protect the interests of Kosovo Serb and other minority
communities.

17

S/2005/635

The way forward
The future status process
62. There will — as stated in last year’s report — not be any good moment for
addressing the future status of Kosovo. Determining Kosovo’s future status
remains — and will continue to be — a highly sensitive political issue with serious
regional and wider international implications. Nevertheless, an overall assessment
leads to the conclusion that the time has come to commence this process.
63. Since last year, a political process has been under way in Kosovo, driven by a
more dynamic international engagement. It has been based on a comprehensive
strategy that has provided Kosovo with a political perspective. This process should
continue. It cannot be interrupted or brought to a halt. Kosovo will either move
forward or slide backwards — having moved from stagnation to expectation,
stagnation cannot again be allowed to take hold there.
64. Progress with regard to standards implementation is very mixed. Further
progress is urgently required. However, it is unlikely that postponing the future
status process will lead to further and tangible results in the implementation of
standards. Progress can only be achieved if the sense of a political perspective is
maintained and if the international community is ready and able to mobilize greater
energy and pressure than it is today. Provided the future status process is properly
handled, this framework can be used to make further progress.
65. There is now a shared expectation in Kosovo and in Belgrade, as well as in the
region, that the future status process will start. During this comprehensive review,
there has been a gradual shift in the preparedness of the interlocutors for a future
status process. There had been a tendency among the leaders in Pristina to fight each
other rather than to prepare for the next steps. Recently, a negotiating team
consisting of the five most prominent Kosovo Albanian leaders was appointed,
under the leadership of the Kosovo President. There had been a strong tendency
among leaders in Belgrade to look at each other rather than to look forward. Today,
there is a greater sense of preparedness and unity. There had been reluctance among
the Kosovo Serbs to come together and discuss the challenges facing them. Kosovo
Serbs of all factions have now been brought together around one table. The work on
this comprehensive review has stimulated these developments. However, all these
trends are fragile. Great efforts will be required in Pristina and in Belgrade — as
well as among the Kosovo Serbs — to prepare for a future status process in a
coherent and unified manner.
66. Furthermore, all sides need clarity with regard to the future status of Kosovo.
The Kosovo Albanians have expectations that the political process will move
forward and that determining Kosovo’s future status will bring greater clarity with
regard to Kosovo’s political and economic development. Kosovo Serbs need such
clarity in order to make informed decisions about their future lives. For Belgrade,
determining the future status of Kosovo will remove an important source of internal
political instability and facilitate the realization of Serbia’s European perspective.
The region also is better served by putting the question of the future of Kosovo on
the agenda. Clarity will stimulate regional political and economic cooperation and
remove an element of instability which today hampers the development of the
region.

18

S/2005/635

67. It is of great importance that the future status process take place at a time when
the international community is still present in Kosovo in sufficient strength. There is
today a growing “Kosovo fatigue” in the international community. Postponing the
future status process will reinforce this fatigue and weaken the ability of the
international community to conduct this process. Commencing the future status
process will create a basis for a re-energized international engagement, requiring
countries and organizations to place Kosovo squarely back on the agenda.
68. The international community is committed to ensuring that the future Kosovo
respects the political, social and economic rights of all ethnic groups, in accordance
with Security Council resolution 1244 (1999). This must also be reflected in an
effort to bring the minority communities into the process. In addition to Belgrade
and Pristina, the Kosovo Serbs will have to be addressed as a party to this process.
Mechanisms must also be found to involve the smaller communities. They often
declare their readiness to contribute towards the future status of Kosovo. But, they also
expect that this process will address their own rights and role in the future Kosovo.
69. The future status process for Kosovo will be very different from peace
processes in other parts of the former Yugoslavia. In contrast to those processes,
there is in Kosovo little to build on in terms of previous peace plans. Little
preparation by the international community and the parties has taken place.
Furthermore, the negotiations concern a territory which is still part of a sovereign
State but is temporarily administered by the United Nations through provisional
self-governing institutions.
70. Hence, the importance of moving forward with caution. Every effort must be
made to bring all the parties together — and keep them together — throughout the
status process. This broad participation must be respected by all. The process must
not be rushed forward but must be brought forward with a clear and common picture
of the agenda and the implications. This clear picture of the agenda is still lacking.
The end result must be stable and sustainable. Artificial deadlines should therefore
not be set. However, once the process has started, it cannot be blocked and must be
brought to a conclusion.
71. As already mentioned, much energy has been spent — as part of the consultations
for the comprehensive review — to build an environment conducive to possible future
status discussions. An important element in this respect has been to bring Belgrade
and Pristina together in direct informal talks at the ministerial level. These meetings,
between the Ministers of Local Government and the Ministers of Culture, respectively,
were the first direct talks at a political level for two years. Decentralization and
cultural and religious matters constitute essential elements of any future status
process. Continuing these discussions into the early stages of the process would
serve as a confidence-building measure and as a signal of readiness by all to contribute
to a stable and multi-ethnic Kosovo — irrespective of the outcome of the future status
process. They should form building blocks for subsequent phases of the process.
72. The future status process must also seek to involve the neighbouring States in
a meaningful way. They will need to understand the process, support it and be
reassured by the way in which it is conducted. This will be important to ensure that
stability is maintained throughout the process and that the end result contributes to
regional stability. The demarcation of the border with the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia will be of particular significance and should be resolved before this
process ends.

19

S/2005/635

Keeping standards implementation on track
73. It will require great effort to keep the standards implementation process on
track. There will be a risk that attention will be focused on status to the detriment of
standards. However, it is of crucial importance that sufficient resources be
mobilized to ensure that the implementation of standards continues with
undiminished energy and with a stronger sense of commitment. During the future
status process, the international community will have a stronger leverage to move
standards implementation forward. That leverage must be fully exploited. Enhanced
implementation of standards will be essential to foster the confidence of the Kosovo
Serbs and other minorities during a period of increased political tension. It will also
be essential in order to achieve the confidence of the region and the international
community.
74. In order to stimulate the standards process, the international community should
intensify its efforts in critical areas and review some current practices. There is a
need to speed up work with regard to property rights, strengthen return policies,
improve human rights instruments, enhance law enforcement efforts in general and
ensure that privatization does not affect minorities in a discriminatory way. Progress
in these areas would provide a more solid basis for the future status process to
unfold and would enhance the likelihood of a sustainable and stable status.

The challenge of reconciliation
75. Reconciliation must now get under way. The main burden will fall on the
shoulders of the leaders of the majority population. Those who are eager to obtain
recognition, integration and investment must also demonstrate generosity. The
Kosovo Albanians must seek to define their identity in a way which is not at the
expense of others. They must understand the pressure felt by minorities against their
identity, their culture and their livelihood. The Kosovo Serbs and Belgrade must
also acknowledge such initiatives and take active part in a reconciliation process.
They must accept that remaining outside the Kosovo institutions will not in the end
bring them the protection they seek. The Kosovo Albanians must start looking
towards the other Kosovo communities and the Kosovo Serbs must in return start
looking towards Pristina. All the communities must make an effort to base their
future on inclusiveness, modernization and democracy, rather than on separation and
ethnic belonging.
76. Further progress in finding and identifying missing persons would be an
important contribution to a process of reconciliation. Those who have lost their
loved ones need and deserve clarity. Enhanced political efforts must be undertaken
to meet their legitimate demands. The possibility of dedicating greater resources to
resolving outstanding cases of identification should also be urgently considered.
77. Kosovo will not in the foreseeable future become a place where Kosovo
Albanians and Kosovo Serbs are integrated. They probably never were.
Nevertheless, the reconciliation process should start. It must come from inside
Kosovo and be embraced by all communities. The international community must
encourage reconciliation and provide active support.

20

S/2005/635

The roles and responsibilities of the international community
78. A decision to start the future status process will take Kosovo — and the region—
into a new and difficult phase. The international community will need strength to carry
the status process forward. Once the future status has been determined, an international
presence — military and civilian — will require the resources necessary to manage
the implementation of the settlement in a stable and orderly way.
79. The United Nations has done a credible and impressive job in fulfilling its
mandate in difficult circumstances. But its leverage in Kosovo is diminishing.
Kosovo is located in Europe, where strong regional organizations exist. In the
future, these regional organizations — and in particular the EU — will have to play
the most prominent role in Kosovo. They will have the leverage and will be able to
offer prospects in the framework of the European integration process. However, any
reconfiguration of the international presence in Kosovo must take place in a
coordinated manner in order to ensure that current and future requirements are met
and the credibility of the international community is maintained.
80. A future status process should be accompanied by a clear expression by the
international community that it is determined to stay and support this process as
well as its outcome. The EU should in the near term consider stepping up its
presence on the ground in order to play an enhanced role in the standards process,
prepare for a longer-term engagement and provide visible evidence of Europe’s
commitment to Kosovo. When status has been determined, the EU will be expected
to take on a more prominent role. This relates to the police and justice, where a
continued presence will be required, albeit smaller and more specialized; to
monitoring and supporting the standards process, which will gradually be merged
with established EU processes; and to a focused capacity-building effort.
81. NATO will also have to continue its presence. A restructuring is taking place
which will allow the NATO-led KFOR to maintain its credibility and efficiency,
while reducing the overall number of its personnel. No other organization can
currently provide the same basis of stability. A United States contribution to KFOR
is essential. This will provide a visible expression of continued United States
engagement.
82. The OSCE has a valuable asset in its field experience and expertise. This
presence will be required to enable the international community to monitor and
support standards implementation, promote confidence between ethnic communities
and identify needs for capacity-building.
83. With the United Nations eventually stepping down from its current role, the
lead role should also be taken over by others. A High Representative — or a similar
arrangement — will have to be considered. Such an arrangement should be firmly
anchored in the EU, while at the same time ensuring continued commitment by the
broader international community, in particular the United States. However, the
international presence must be developed in a spirit of partnership and local
ownership. Each post-conflict situation has its own specific character. To copy the
experience of Bosnia and Herzegovina would therefore be a simplistic approach.
However, a “Bonn Powers” arrangement could be envisaged in areas relating to
inter-ethnic issues, in order to promote confidence and reconciliation.

21

S/2005/635

84. A road map for integration into international structures would provide Kosovo
with real prospects for the future. The incentives must be clear and visible. An
enhanced EU presence in Kosovo would provide tangible evidence of a stronger
European commitment.
85. Belgrade will also need clear incentives for integration into Euro-Atlantic
frameworks for cooperation. The EU decision to open negotiations for a
stabilization and association agreement represents a milestone in this respect. The
most important incentive for Belgrade, however, will not be outside the context of
Kosovo, but inside it. Arrangements for wider decentralization will be the most
essential part.
86. Determining the future status of Kosovo will in itself be a demanding
challenge. The international community must do the utmost to ensure that, whatever
the eventual status, it does not become a “failed” status. Kosovo cannot remain
indefinitely under international administration. However, it will continue to depend
on a significant international presence on the ground. The support needed in so
many areas cannot be provided by remote control. The international community
must have the stamina required. Entering the future status process does not mean
entering the last stage, but the next stage of the international presence.

22

S/2005/635

Appendix
Terms of reference of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for the comprehensive review of the situation in Kosovo
Purpose. The comprehensive review is in furtherance of the United Nation’s
responsibility in Kosovo according to Security Council resolution 1244 (1999),
which includes facilitating a political process designed to determine the future status
of Kosovo. The review will provide a basis for the Secretary-General’s political
judgement on whether the situation is conducive to the initiation of the future status
process.
Framework for the review. The review will be carried out in the context of
resolution 1244 (1999) and the relevant Presidential Statements of the Security
Council.
Methodology and scope. The comprehensive review will consist of consultations
with the parties and with the major actors on the ground, as well as with the
international community, with a broad scope in order to assess the current situation
and the conditions for the possible next steps in the process. It will look at the actual
political realities as well as the formal preconditions for launching the future status
process on the basis of continued and effective progress towards implementation of
the standards. The review will also take into account issues related to the
sustainability of governance, including the rule of law and security. The review will
include an exploration of modalities for initiating and conducting the future status
process.
The Special Envoy will consult closely with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in Kosovo. He will, furthermore, consult with, inter alia, Security
Council members, the Contact Group, relevant regional organizations, the parties,
relevant regional actors and other key players. Upon the request of the Special
Envoy, UNMIK will provide necessary support and access to information and
analyses in its possession.
Time frame. The initiation, pace and duration of the comprehensive review will be
determined by the Secretary-General on the basis of consultations held by the
Special Envoy, taking into account the situation on the ground. It is hoped that the
review can be completed in September.
Findings and reporting. The Special Envoy will report directly to the SecretaryGeneral. The Special Envoy will provide the Secretary-General with a
comprehensive report on the implementation of standards as well as on the overall
situation in and relating to Kosovo.
New York, 13 June 2005

23
