V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

of the whole to draw up a constitution for the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization,
Bearing in mind the urgent need to complete the work
required for the conversion of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization into a specialized
agency,
Taking note of the report of the Committee to Draw
Up a Constitution for the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization as a Specialized Agency, 72
Noting with concern that it has not been possible
to convene the conference of plenipotentiaries, originally scheduled to take place in the last quarter of 1976,
because the Committee has not been able to complete
its work,
I. Decides to extend the mandate of the Committee to Draw Up a Constitution for the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization as a Specialized
Agency;
2. Calls upon the Committee to accelerate its work
so as to enable the conference of plenipotentiaries on
the constitution of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization to convene during the second
half of 1977;
3. Emphasizes the need for all Governments to
participate fully in the elaboration of the draft constitution, bearing in mind the need for continuity of representation, since such participation would contribute
positively towards facilitating agreement and adoption
of such a constitution at the conference of plenipotentiaries;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to make the
arrangements necessary for convening the conference of
plenipotentiaries during the second half of 1977 at
United Nations Headquarters.
l 06th plenary meeting
21 December 1976
31/162.

Strengthening of operational activities
in the field of industrial development

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2152 (XXI) of 17 November 1966 on the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, in particular the purpose of
the organization as defined by that resolution,
Recalling the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order contained in its resolution 3202 (S-VI) of 1 May 1974,
Recalling the Lima Declaration and Plan of Action
on Industrial Development and Co-operation, 73 adopted
by the United Nations Industrial Development Organization at its Second General Conference,
Recalling also its resolution 3362 (S-VII) of 16
September 1975, in which it, inter alia, endorsed the
Lima Declaration and Plan of Action and requested all
Governments to take individually and/or collectively
the necessary measures and decisions required to implement effectively their undertakings in terms of the
Lima Declaration and Plan of Action,
Bearing in mind the programme of studies and research envisaged in the revised programme budget
72 See A/31/405, annex.
73 See A/10112, chap. IV.

71

proposals of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization for the biennium 1976-1977,74
Considering that the resources available to the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization
should, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 215 2 ( XXI), be devoted to assisting the developing countries in meeting their requirements in the field
of industrial development,
Considering further that these resources should be
deployed by the United Nations Industrial Development Organization in accordance with the needs of developing countries as identified by the Governments
of these countries themselves,
Bearing in mind the spirit of its resolutions 2688
(XXV) of 11 December 1970 and 31/171 of 21
December 1976,
1. Requests the Executive Director of the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization to
strengthen the operational activities of the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization, in particular at the national and subregional levels, with a
view to enabling it, through an enhanced knowledge
of the actual problems in the field of industrialization
faced by the developing countries, to provide the Governments of those countries with the types of assistance
they most urgently need and thereby to help focus its
programmes more effectively on the specific requirements of the developing countries;
2. Also requests the Executive Director of the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization,
in developing the programme of studies and research,
to take into account the results of research and other
studies carried out by government agencies, universities and other institutions in the developing countries,
thereby permitting the allocation of a larger proportion of resources to strengthening units within the
secretariat concerned with the delivery of assistance
to the developing countries, according to their requirements, and with operational field work;
3. Further requests the Executive Director of the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization
to submit an interim report to the Industrial Development Board and an up-dated report through the Economic and Social Council to the General Assembly at
its thirty-second session on the measures taken in accordance with the provisions of the present resolution.
I 06th plenary meeting
21 December 1976
31/163.

Industrial redeployment in favour of
developing- countries

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the objectives set forth in section IV of
its resolution 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975,
Reaffirming the target contained in the Lima Declaration and Plan of Action on Industrial Development
and Co-operation,7~ adopted at the Second General
Conference of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, namely, that the share of developing countries in total world industrial production should
be increased to the maximum possible extent and, as
far as possible, to at least 25 per cent by the year 2000,
H See A/C.5/31 / 1! and Corr. I.
"'See A/10112, chap. IV.

72

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

Concerned about the need in this connexion to accelerate substantially the rate of growth of the percentage share of the developing countries in total world
industrial production,
1. Urges developed countries to implement fully
section IV, paragraph 2, of resolution 3362 (S-VII);
2. Requests the Executive Director of the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization in this
context, in collaboration with the pertinent international organizations of the United Nations system and
taking into account national and international sources,
to prepare studies which would include:
(a) Recommendations concerning an interrelated
set of policies, taking into account environmental and
labour market conditions and including financial and
trade measures for promoting redeployment, as well as
the economic structure and the economic, social and
security objectives of the developed countries and the
principle of permanent sovereignty of States over their
natural resources;
( b) The identification of specific industries and
sectors of industries which would be amenable to accelerated redeployment to developing countries in the
context of section IV, paragraph 2, of resolution 3362
(S-VII);
( c) Submission to the Industrial Development
Board of the results of the above studies for its review
and recommendations for appropriate action;
3. Requests the Industrial Development Board to
include in its agenda as a regular item the redeployment of industries from developed to developing countries;
4. Further requests the Executive Director of the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization to
submit to the General Assembly at its thirty-third session, through the Industrial Development Board, a
report on the implementation of the present resolution.
106th plenary meeting
21 December 1976
31/164.

Report of the Industrial Development
Board

The General Assembly
l. Takes note of the report of the Industrial D..;velopment Board on the work of its tenth session; 76
2. Decides in principle, in accordance with the recommendation contained in the report of the Industrial
Development Board on the second part of its tenth session, 77 to convene the Third General Conference of
the United Nations Industrial Development Organization in 1979 on the basis of the mandate proposed in
paragraph 70 of the Lima Declaration and Plan of
Action on Industrial Development and Co-operation; 78
3. Requests the Industrial Development Board to
act as an intergovernmental preparatory committee for
the Conference, beginning with its eleventh session;
4. Decides to take a final decision on the matter
at its thirty-second session.
106th plenary meeting
21 December 1976
76 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first
Session, Supplement No. 16 (A/31/16).
77 Ibid., part two, paras. 20-22.
78 See A/10112, chap. IV.

31/165.

Borrowing authority of the Administrator of the United Nations Development
Programme

The General Assembly,
Having considered the part of the report of the Governing Council of the United Nations Development
Programme on its twenty-second session relating to
the granting of short-term borrowing authority to the
Administrator of the Programme, 79
Recognizing the urgent need for the United Nations Development Programme to replenish its Operational Reserve on a funded basis, fully mobilizable at
sight or on short notice, to a level sufficient to ensure
the financial integrity of the Programme,
Recognizing the urgent need for participating Governments to pay promptly outstanding pledges and
obligations to the United Nations Development Programme and to co-operate fully in measures undertaken by the Administrator of the Programme in conjunction with the executing agencies to use accumulated
currencies,
Recognizing that, in the meantime, it may prove
necessary to assist the United Nations Development
Programme to meet short-term cash requirements, arising exclusively out of unavoidable fluctuations between
the payment of announced voluntary contributions and
the immediate cash requirements of the Programme in
any one year, which might jeopardize its approved
programme,
1. Authorizes the Governing Council of the United
Nations Development Programme to grant to the Administrator of the Programme, until the end of 1977
and on a case-by-case basis, authority to borrow moneys
for the purpose stated above and subject to the conditions and specifications indicated below:
(a)
In order to borrow, the Administrator shall
in each case seek the prior approval of the Governing
Council at a regular or special session;
( b) The sources from which such funds can be
borrowed are limited to voluntary-funded trust funds
of organizations within the United Nations system,
provided that the borrowing of such moneys shall be
made with the agreement, where appropriate, of the
executive directors of the voluntary funds and shall in
no way adversely affect the operations of the trust
funds to which the moneys have been contributed or
the speedy implementation of the programmes concerned, it being understood that borrowings shall be
made, in the first instance, from trust funds under the
aegis of the Governing Council;
( c) The Governing Council shall only grant borrowing authority to the Administrator as an exceptional
measure, if, after a thorough examination of the
financial situation of the Programme on the basis of
comprehensive information provided by the Administrator, it is satisfied of the need to borrow and is satisfied also regarding the repayment schedules of the
anticipated borrowings; such comprehensive information shall include particulars of the status of assessed
programme costs, of voluntary contributions, including
the status of accumulated currencies and shared programme costs, of accounts payable and of cash require79 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Sixtv-first Session, Supplement No. 2A (E/5846/Rev.1 ), paras.
46-51.
