111.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

4.1

be a substantial contribution to the strengthening of intemational peace and security,
Noting the resolution adopted at the Fifth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned
Countries on the subject of the Indian Ocean Peace
Zone Proposal, 35
Deeply concerned that there has been an escalation
of the military presence of the great Powers conceived
in the context of great Power rivalry in the Indian
Ocean, and believing therefore that the implementation
of the purposes and objectives of the Declaration of
the lndian Ocean as a Zone of Peace has acquired a
new urgency,
Regretting that, despite repeated invitations, certain
great Powers as well as certain major maritime users
of the Indian Ocean have not so far found it possible
to co-operate with the Ad Hoc Committee on the lndian Ocean and the littoral and hinterland States of
the Indian Ocean,
1. Takes note of the report of the Ad Hoc Committee on the Indian Ocean, 36 in particular section II
thereof concerning the consultations entered into by
the littoral and hinterland States of the Indian Ocean
in pursuance of paragraphs 3 and 4 of General Assembly resolution 3468 (XXX);
2. Requests the Ad Hoc Committee and the littoral
and hinterland States of the Indian Ocean to continue
their consultations with a view to formulating a programme of action leading to the convening of a conference on the Indian Ocean;
3. Invites once again all States, in particular the
great Powers and the major maritime users of the Indian Ocean, to co-operate in a practica! manner with
the Ad Hoc Committee in the discharge of its functions;
4. Requests the Ad Hoc Committce to continue its
work and consultations in accordance with its mandate
and to submit to the General Assembly at its thirtysecond session a report on its work;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
render all necessary assistance to the Ad Hoc Committee, including the provision of summary records.
98th plenary meeting
14 December 1976

everyone, would contribute to the reduction of the
nuclear-arms race and to the further relaxation of international tension,
Also convinced of the need for again exerting every
effort to achieve an international agreement on the
cessation of ali types of nuclear-weapon tests,
N oting that during the thirty-first session of the General Assembly proposals have been made and relevant
documents submitted with a view to finding a compromise basis for a generally acceptable understanding regarding the supervision of compliance with such an
agreement,
Believing that the conclusion between the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of
America of treaties on the limitation of underground
nuclear-weapon tests and on underground nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes contributes to the creation of favourable conditions for the cessation of ali
nuclear-weapon tests,
Taking note of the note by the Secretary-General31
stating that twenty-six non-nuclear-weapon States are
ready to participate in the negotiations with a view to
reaching agreement on the complete and general prohibition of nuclear-weapon tests,
1. Again calls upon all nuclear-weapon States, in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 3478
(XXX), to procecd as soon as possible with negotiations on the conclusion of a treaty on the complete
and general prohibition of nuclear-weapon tests with
the participation of non-nuclear-weapon States;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to render such
assistance as may be necessary for the negotiations and
to transmit to the group referred to in paragraph 1
above all documents relating to the consideration by
the General Assembly at its thirty-first session of the
itcm entitled "Conclusion of a treaty on the complete
and general prohibition of nuclear-weapon tests";
3. Decides to in elude in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-second session the ítem entitled "Conclusion
of a treaty on the complete and general prohibition
of nuclear-weapon tests".
98th plenary meeting
14 December 1976

31/89.

31/90.

Conclusion of a treaty on the complete
and general prohihition of nuclearweapon tests

Strengthening of the role of the United
Nations in the field of disarmament

The General Assembly,
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3478 (XXX) of 11 December 1975, in which it called upon all nuclear-weapon
States to enter into negotiations, not later than 31
March 1976, with a view to reaching agreement on
the complete and general prohibition of nuclear-weapon
tests, with twenty-five to thirty non-nuclear-weapon
States participating in such negotiations,
Deploring the fact that such negotiations have not
yet begun,
Convinced that the early cessation of nuclear-weapon
tests, including underground tests, everywhere and by
35 A/31/197, annex, p. 124.
36 O/jicia/ Records of the General Assemb/y,

Thirty-first Session, Supp/ement No. 29 (A/31/29 and Corr.1 and 2).

Recalling its resolution 3484 B (XXX) of 12 December 1975, in which it decided to carry out a review
of the role of the United Nations in the field of disarmament,
Noting that the Ad Hoc Committee on the Review
of the Role of thc United Nations in the Field of Disarmament has carried out the task entrusted to it by
the General Assembly in the aforementioned resolution,
Having considered thc report of the Ad Hoc Committee, which contains, ínter alia, a set of agreed proposals with regard to the following subjects: 38
ar A/31/228.
38 O/ficial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first Session, Supplement No. 36 (A/31/36), para. 18.

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

42

Improved methods of work of the First Committee in disarmament matters,
( b) Relationship between the General Assembly
and other United Nations bodies in the field of disarmament,
(e) Role of the United Nations Disarmament
Commission,
(d) Role of the United Nations in providing assistance on request in multilateral and regional disarmament negotiations,
(e)
Relationship between the General Assembly
and the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament,
(f) Increased use of in-depth studies of the arms
race, disarmament and related matters,
(g) Improvement of existing United Nations facilities for the collection, compilation and dissemination
of information on disarmament issues, in order to keep
all Governments, as well as world public opinion, properly informed on progress achieved in the field of disarmament,
(h) Assistance by the Secretariat, on request, to
States parties to multilateral disarmament agreements
in their duty to ensure the effective functioning of
such agreements, including appropriate reviews,
(i) Strengthening of the resources of the Secretariat,
Recognizing the vital interest of ali States of the
world, including developing States, in contributing to
the cause of disarmament,
l. Endorses the agreed proposals made by the Ad
Hoc Committee on the Review of the Role of the
United Nations in the Field of Disarmament as a step
towards the strengthening of the role of the United
Nations in the field of disarmament;
2. Decides to keep the question of the strengthening of the role of the United Nations in the field of
disarmament under continued review;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to implement as
soon as possible the measures recommended by the
Ad Hoc Committee falling within his area of responsibilities, bearing in mind the importance of recruiting
the staff for the proposed Centre for Disarmament on
as wide a geographical basis as possible, and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its thirty-second
session;
4. Urges Member States to make every effort to
realize the objectives set out m the report of the Ad
Hoc Committee.
98th plenary meeting
14 December 1976
(a)

31/91.

Non-interference in the interna! affairs
of States

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2734 (XXV) of 16 December 1970 containing the Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security,
Recalling its resolution 2131 (XX) of 21 December
1965 containing the Declaration on the Inadmissibility

of lntervention in the Domestic Affairs of States and
the Protection of Their Independence and Sovereignty,
Recalling further its resolution 2625 (XXV) of
24 October 1970 containing the Declaration on Principies of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations,
Reaffirming the right to self-determination, freedom
and independence of peoples under colonial ar other
forros of alien domination as well as their right to struggle to that end and to seek and receive support in accordance with the principies of the Charter,
Reaffirming the right of each State to choose its own
economic, cultural and social system in accordance
with the will of its people, free from outside interference,
coercion or threat in any forro,
Noting with great concern that severa! Member States
have been subjected to various forros of interference,
pressure and organized campaigns of vilification and
intimidation designed to deter them from pursuing their
united and independent role in international relations,
A ware that a wide range of direct and indirect techniques, including withholding assistance and the threat
of withholding assistance, subtle and sophisticated forms
of economic coercion, subversion and defamation with
a view to destabilization, are being mobilized against
Governments which seek to free their economies from
forcign control and manipulation, to restructure their
societies and to exercise permanent sovereignty over
their natural resources,
Conscious that the use of such techniques of destabilization can produce distrust and cause unrest and disorder within and between States, adversely affecting
thereby the maintenance of international peace and
security,
Mindful of the provisions of Article 2, paragraph 4,
of the Charter, which requires ali Member States to
refrain in their international relations from the threat
ar use of force against the territorial integrity or political
independence of any State, or in any other manner inconsistent with the purposes of the United Nations,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable sovereign right of every
State to determine freely, and without any form of
foreign interference, its political, social and economic
system and its relations with other States and international organizations;
2. Declares that the use of force to deprive peoples
of their national identity constitutes a violation of their
inali~nable rights and of the principie of non-intervent10n;
3. Denounces any form of interference, overt or
covert, direct or indirect, including recruiting and sending mercenaries, by one State ar group of States and
any act of military, political, economic or other form of
intervention in the interna} or externa! affairs of other
States, regardless of the character of their mutual relations or their social and economic systems;
4. Accordingly condemns ali forms of overt, subtle
and _highly sophisticated techniques of coercion, subver~10n and defa1~1ation aimed at disrupting the political,
social or econom1c arder of other States or destabilizing
the Governments seeking to free their economies from
externa! control or manipulation;
5. Calls upon all Sta tes, in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
