UNITED NATIONS

ITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2554). . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoptionoftheagenda

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 24 August 1984from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16713). . ,......,...*.........I......,...,....,~..,,.............

1

SIPV.2554

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol SI. , .) are normally published in
quarterIy Supplements of the Ofjcia2 Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2554th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 31 August 1984, at 11 a.m.
president: Mr, Ldandre BASSOLE

(Burkina Faso).

I have received a letter from the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the agenda. In conformity with the usual practice,
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the discussion, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.

present: The representatives of the following States:
Burkina Faso, China, Egypt, France, India, Malta,
Netherlands, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru, Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics,
United Kingdom
of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zimbabwe.
Provisional agenda (SIAgendal2554)

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Damavandi
Kamali (Islamic Republic of Iran) took the place reserved for him at the side of the Council chamber.

1. Adoption of the agenda
2.

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 24 August 1984 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16713)

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
The first speaker is the representative of Qatar. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
4. Mr. AL-KAWARI
(Qatar) [interpretation from
Arabic]: I wish to thank the members of the Council for

The meeting was called to order at 11.45 p.m.

allowing me to participate in the debate on a question
that is of general concern to all peace-loving States
whose policies are based on justice-in
particular to my
country and to other Arab countries, because this question is linked to the rights of a fraternal Arab country,
Lebanon, Lebanon has been suffering since 1982 from
the repercussions of Israel’s brutal invasion and belligerent occupation of a large part of its national soil, in
complete disregard of the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and the rules of international law,
which prohibit the use of force against the territorial
integrity and national independence of any State.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The Situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 24 August 1984 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16713)
1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfrom French): In
accordance with decisions taken at previous meetings
on this item [2552nd and 255.3rdmeetings], I invite the
representative of Lebanon and the representative of
Israel to take places at the Council table; I invite
the representatives of Kuwait, Qatar, the Sudan, the
Syrian Arab Republic, the United Arab Emirates and
Yemen to take the places reserved for them at the side
of the Council chamber.

5. The United Nations should seek to bring about the
termination of the Israeli occupation of southern Lebanon and the full and immediate withdrawal of the
invading Israeli forces from the occupied territories. An
end must be put to the aggression perpetrated against
a Member State; the provisions of the Charter and of
international law must be applied to those who have
departed from international law and flouted the principles of the Charter.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Fakhoury
(Lebanon) and Mr. Blum (Israel) took places at the
Council table: Mr, Abulhassan (Kuwait), Mr. AlKatijari (Qatar), Mr. Birido (Sudan), Mr. El-Fattal
(Syrian Arab Republic), Mr. Al-MO&r (United Arab
Emirates) and Mr. Noman (Yemen) took the places
reservedfor them at the side of the Council chamber.

6. Therefore, the discussion of the practices of the
Israeli occupation forces in southern Lebanon goes
beyond those practices. Even if Israel were to put an
end to those practices, the Israeli occupation itself
would still stand rejected by the international
community. Indeed, the core of the, issue is the continued aggressive Israeli occupation of southern Lebanon.
Hence, the only acceptable solution is to put an end

2, The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
I should like to inform members of the Council that
1

is no possibility of trade with the rest of the country;
there is no security and no safety for the civilians, who
are constantly subject to detention and inspection, and
deprived of legal protection.

to that occupation and to bring about respect for the
sovereignty of Lebanon within its internationally
recognized boundaries. That course has been clearly
and unequivocally established by the Council in paragraph 1 of resolution 509 (1982) in which the Council “demands that Israel withdraw all its military
forces forthwith and unconditionally
to the internatio:nally recognized boundaries of Lebanon.”

13. No doubt, we will continue to hear the same
flimsy excuse: that those measures and practices are
necessary for the protection of the safety and security
of the occupying forces. That is a travesty oflogic and it
is totally unacceptable: the right to safety and security
is an element of the right of presence. If one is in illegal
possession of property, he cannot claim that his safety
and security are threatened by the victim of his crime.

7. Consistent with its usual practice, Israel has disregarded that resolution and has ridden roughshod over
it. Therefort, the primary duty of the Council now is to
reaffirm that resolution and to compel Israel to implement it without delay.

14. The Israeli occupying forces have put themselves
in a situation where they are subjected to predictable
and natural reactions from a people whose t.erritories
have been violated and whose national sovereignty has
been undermined. They have no right to invoke that as a
pretext to oppress the civilians, to deny their human
rights and to destroy their lives.

8. The Council has listened to the statement made
by my brother, the representative
of Lebanon
[2552nd meeting], containing the details of the illegal
Israeli practices which weigh heavily on the civilians
living in southern Lebanon. To mention just a few, he
cited the following: the breaking into houses; detention
and torture of innocent people; the seizing of villages
and the cutting off of supplies; desecration of places of
worship; harassment of religious leaders; the prevention of Lebanese officials from carrying out their duties;
the taking of hostages, the burning of orchards; limitation of the freedom of transportation, to the extent of
cutting off the south of Lebanon from the rest of the
country in an attempt to cause the people to leave.
Israel has thus paved the way towards fulfilling its
expansionist plans and has already embarked on a plan
for the seizure by force of the water resources of the
region,

15. The first link in this endless chain of violence was
the Israeli invasion of Lebanon and the violation of its
territorial integrity. That chain will have no end unless
the forces of occupation withdraw, forthwith and unconditionalIy,
from all the Lebanese territories.
16. My delegation calls upon the Council to adopt a
resolution affirming the first part of its resolution 509
(1982), and to call once more upon Israel to withdraw all
its military forces forthwith and unconditionally to the
internationally
recognized boundaries of Lebanon.

9. There is no doubt that all those practices constitute
a breach of the provisions of the Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War, of 12 August 1949.’ That Convention and its piovisions set forth the minimum required of the occupying
authorities during military operations, which means in
time of war.

17. The Council should affirm both resolutions 512
(1982) and 513 (1982) concerning respect for the rights
of civilian populations and put an end to the acts of
violence against them. The Council must compel Israel
to respect the Charter, the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights and other relevant international conventions; it must also reaffirm Lebanon’s historic water
rights and countenance none of the flimsy attempts to
violate them.

10. Nobody can claim that a formal state of war exists
in Lebanon: military operations have ceased. What we
see now is an aggressive occupation resulting from a
previous illegal state of war. It follows that, in the
absence of war, a higher level of compliance with the
law should be expected of those military forces.

18. My delegation is confident that the Council will
live up to its responsibility and respond favourably to
Lebanon’s legitimate complaint,
19. Mr. KRAVETS
(Ukrainian Soviet SociaUst Republic) [interpretationfranz
Russian]:
The tense situation in Lebanon, occupied by the Israeli military clique,
and in other seized Arab lands, has caused serious
alarm and concern throughout the whole world and, of
course, in the United Nations, too. The recent appeal
by the Government of Lebanon to the Council, and the
statement made in this chamber by its representative,
once again reaffirm the escalation of the criminal policy
pursued by the Israeli aggressors in southern Lebanon.

11. The Israeli occupation forces are called upon, at
least, to respect the principles of international
law
which prohibit the harassment of civilians, so that the
occupation itself will not serve as a pretext to violate
the rights of the citizens and to impair their living conditions. This means that the life of the civilians could
continue as if there were no occupation,
12. Does the Israeli conduct in southern Lebanon
fulfil that criterion? Of course not, The occupation
forces have embarked on cutting off southern Lebanon
from the rest of the country, making its isolation almost
complete. There is no freedom of transportation;
there

20. Having undertaken a large-scale invasion of Lebanon more than two years ago, Israel, flouting the
resolutions of the Council, continues to occupy about a
2

third of the territory of that country. The history of
this Israeli military adventure, which is part of a general policy of aggression-territorial, political and
economic expansion against the Arab peoples-pursued by Tel Aviv, with the protection and support of
Washington, has been written in the blood of the defencelessLebanese and Palestinians.

ever, those resolutions, like many others, have not yet
been implemented and are being brazenly disregarded
by Tel Aviv. Furthermore, recently Israel committed
another crime against Lebanon by bombing Mejdel
Anjar. The result was further destruction and further
civilian casualties. As has been stressedso many times
in the Council and the General Assembly, Israel has
been openly and grossly flouting the obligations it assumed when it became a Member of the United Nations; and yet Israel is the only country which acquired
statehood as the result of a United Nations decision.

21. Starting in June 1982, in the southern part of Lebanon, Israel established a regime of ruthless terror and
violence against the local people. All norms of international humanitarian law have been trampled under
foot and human rights are being grossly and massively
violated.

28. It is quite clear that Israel could not behave in such
a defiant and brazen manner in Lebanon and other
occupied Arab territories were it not for the patronage
and all-round support given it by its strategic ally from
across the ocean. In fact, the United States has not
concealed its concern that Lebanon should be bled
white, weakened and turned into a United StatesIsraeli protectorate.

22, Each day brings news of fresh instancesof wanton
actsby the Israeli military clique. The incarceration of
hundredsof people, including women and old people, in
concentration camps, outrageous acts of torture, the
taking of hostages,massive raids and arrests have become the daily practices of the occupiers.

29. As has been noted in the Council, by arming and
protecting the aggressor, the United States, together
with Israel, bears direct responsibility for the dangerous situation that has evolved not only in Lebanon but
in the whole of the Middle East, a situation which is a
threat to international peace. Furthermore, in an attempt to expand its military presence in this region
by any means, the United States has been following
an openly hostile policy towards the Arab peoples and
has been encouraging the aggressor to commit further
expansionist acts. As recently as a few days ago, the
President of the United States again reaffirmed the
pro-Israeli stance of the United States Middle East
policy and said: “We shall always maintain our pledge
never to sell out one of our closest friends, the State of
Israel.“* As they say, “no comment”,

Repression of the local people and acts of terror
againstthem are accompanied by economic aggression
against southern Lebanon and the Israeli authorities’
illegal and predatory domination of the occupied territory. Seriousdamagehas been done to agriculture, and
the covetous gazeof Israeli expansionistshas turned to
Lebanon’s water resources.
23.

24. Having recently undertaken measuresfurther to
exacerbate the occupation regime in southern Lebanon, the Israeli occupiers are obviously seeking to
fragment Lebanon, to isolate the seizedregions from
the rest of the country and to entrench themselves
there.
25, From the very beginning of this recent military
adventure,the Israeli leaders said that their goal was to
guaranteethe “security” of the northern borders of
Israel, and for this they needed to “establish some
order” in the 45kilometre zone on the Lebanese bor.der. This alone makes it quite clear what Tel Aviv’s
attitude is to the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Arab countries, to international law and the Charter
of the United Nations,

30, The continuing Israeli occupation of southern
Lebanon and the gross interference by Israel and the
United Statesin the affairs of that long-suffering country are the fundamental causesfor the crisis situation in
and around Lebanon, The Ukrainian SSR believes that
it is the true duty of the Council to call for the unconditional withdrawal of the armed forces of Israel from
Lebanon, on the basis of resolutions 508(1982) and 509
(1982), in order to ensure respect for the territorial
integrity and political independence of Lebanon and an
end forthwith to the arbitrary rule and acts of violence
of the occupying Israeli forces in Lebanon.

26. The Israeli leaders have not hidden the fact that
theinvasion of Lebanon was an action planned aheadof
time,Typically, even the former Israeli Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Mr. Eban, recognized, according to
The New York Times of 4 June 1984,that “it cost more
humanlives than terrorists in the whole world over a
period of decades could have caused”.

31. The grim experience of recent decadeshas shown
that neither military adventures nor separate deals have
brought-or can bring-peace to the peoples of the
Middle East, Peacecan only be secured as a result of
international efforts on a collective basis with the participation of all parties concerned. It is precisely tha.t
approach to the solution of the Middle East problem
that is advocated by the overwhelming majority of
States Members of the United Nations.

27, At the very beginning of Israel’s aggression, the
international community decisively condemned Tel
Aviv’s
criminal act. Security Council resolutions 508
(1982)and 509 (1982) called on Israel to cease immediatelyall military activities and to withdraw all its
military forces forthwith and unconditionally to the
internationally recognized borders of Lebanon. How-

* Quoted

3

in English

by the speaker.

32. A recent example of this constructive approach
was the proposals of the Soviet Union on a Middle East
settlement, dated 29 July 1984[see S/16685, annex].

stung by the German occupation of their capital; and
the Soviet people as well suffered from occupation,
40. The non-permanent members of the Council are
all aware of the severe injustice-the theft and the
plunder of the resources and wealth of peoples-inflicted by occupation. In the light of that injustice from
which they themselves have all suffered in the past,
Arab Lebanon has come here to appeal for help to
remove the injustice inflicted upon it, to rid its territory
of the Israeli occupation forces and to achieve the implementation of Council resolutions 508(1982) and 509
(1982).

33. The situation in the Middle East must be decisively channelled towards finding a comprehensive just
settlement guaranteeing the restitution of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people and the right to
peace and security of all States and peoples of the
region.
34, The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
The next speaker is the representative of the United
Arab Emirates. I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.

41. International law, in particular the humanitarian
aspects of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Personsin Time of War, of 12August
1949,’ seeks the protection of civilian populations in
areas under military occupation by any State in the
following three categories:the populations themselves,
their resources and their institutions. Those are the
three humanitarian aspects that should be fully protected under international law.

35. Mr. AL-MOSFIR (United Arab Emirates) [interprstutionfrorn Arabic]: On behalf of the delegation of
the United Arab Emirates, I am pleased to convey to
you, Sir, our warm congratulations on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council for this month. Your
well-known skills and ability in the various posts you
have held previously, as well as your objectivity demonstrated during your presidency of the Council, are a
source of pride for you personally, the country you
represent, the African continent to which you belong
and the third world as a whole.

42. With regard to persons, internationallaw provides
the necessary guaranteesfor protecting the life, health,
freedom and wealth of civilian populations; it also forbids subjecting them to persecution, discrimination,
torture, imprisonment or detention, In his statement
before the Council, the Lebanese representative gave
a long list of crimes perpetrated by Israel against
the civilian population .in occupied southern Lebanon.
Those crimes include detention, imprisonment, torture, exile, deportation and even murder directly or by
proxy-all of which runs counter to and is in contravention of several provisions of the fourth Geneva Convention.

36. I should also like to convey our thanks and appreciation to your predecessor, the representative of
the United States, for the able manner in which she
conducted the businessof the Council during the past
month.
37. Under yourpresidency this month, Sir, the Council has been convened twice. The first time it was to
deal with an African issue: the injustice and suffering
inflicted upon the peoples of southern Africa by the
Fascist Pretoria rbgime, which emanated from the
European continent and occupied part of the African
continent, plundering its natural resources and persecuting and deporting its indigenous population. And
now the Council is meeting again to take up a matter
similar to that considered by the Council in the first half
of this month. But this time it is not the situation in
southern Africa but in the Middle East-in Lebanon,
Lebanon has had recourse to the Council as a small
country pinning all its hopes on this body to help it rid
itself of the injustice of the Zionist-Israeli occupation
and the plundering of its people and natural resources.

43. With regard to resources, international law guarantees the protection of resources and financial institutions; also, occupation forces are not entitled to plunder that wealth or harassinvestment institutions. In his
statement before the Council, the representative of
Lebanon pointed out the following acts committed by
the Israeli occupation authorities: destruction of
agricultural fields, setting fire to harvests, uprooting
citrus trees, destroying fences around orchards, cod%eating buildings, stealing water, hampering the production sectors and plundering the cultural monuments Of
his country-all of which runs counter to and is in
contravention of several provisions of the fourth Geneva Convention,

38. Lebanon has come to the Council to complain
against the oppression and the usurpation of the water
rights to which this Arab people is being subjected,
particularly in the south, which is being occupied by the
settler Fascist force called the State of Israel.

44. With regard to institutions, international law
stipulates the necessity of protecting education, government, constitutional and religious institutions, as
well as the continued carrying out of their mission; of
course, occupation forces are not entitled to alter any of
these institutions. In his statement before the Council,
the representative of Lebanon told of the actions taken
by the Israeli occupation authorities; including the scizure of Lebanese government buildings, confiscation

39. As we are all aware, the overwhelming majority of
the members of the Council have at one time or another
suffered from occupation and its injustice. For example, the American people suffered from the injustice
inflicted by occupation; the French people’s pride was
4

of archives, expulsion of officials and preventing governors from contacting official authorities in Beirut,
He also pointed out that special permission must be
obtained to gain access to and from. occupied territories, that villagers needed to obtain Israeli identification cards and that students were being prevented from
taking examinations. Israel has gone further and interfered with religious practices, not respecting the inviolability of mosques. Again, all that runs counter to and
is in contravention of several of the provisions of the
fourth Geneva Convention.

“No aggressive action by the armed forces-land
sea or air-of
either Party shall be undertaken:
planned, or threatened against the people or the
armed forces of the other.“*
Paragraph I of that article prohibits Israel from carrying
out acts of aggression against Lebanon. Israel falsely
claims that it has attacked Lebanon to eradicate the
Palestinians living there, and in particular the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) which would enable Israel to impose a settlement of the question of
Palestine. The paragraph stipulates:

45. From what I have said, it can be seen that Israel
has violated the letter and the spirit of the provisions
of that Convention, which embodies the international
community’s concern to protect civilian populations
from the scourge and injustice that can be inflicted by
occupation forces, following upon the bitter experiences of civilians during the Second World War.

“The itiunction of the Security Council against
resort to military force in the settlement of the Palestine question shall henceforth be scrupulously respected by both Parties. “*
51. The Council adopted resolutions 508 (1982) and
509 (1982) on the question; in the latter, it categorically
and unequivocally affirmed the necessity of the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of Israeli forces
to the internationally recognized boundaries of Lebanon-the boundaries between Lebanon and occupied
Palestine.

46, Arab Lebanon has been a State Party to that Convention since 10 April 1951. The so-called State of
Israel is also a Party, having ratified it on 6 July 1961.
Israel’s obligation to implement that Convention fully is
based on article 2 of the Convention, which stipulates
that the Convention applies in all cases of declared war
or of any armed conflict between two contracting parties; and that it also applies to all cases of partial or total
occupation of the territory of a contracting State,

52, More than two years have elapsed since the adoption of those two resolutions, and Israel has not yet
withdrawn. On the contrary, it is consolidating its occupation and presence in southern Lebanon.

47, Israel’s obligation fully to respect the Convention
is based on its article I, which stipulates that the Contracting States undertake to respect and ensure respect
for the Convention in all circumstances.

53. Faced with such a situation, the Council, if it is to
protect its dignity and prestige, has no choice but to
make sure those two resolutions are implemented, and
thus to force the so-called State of Israel to withdraw.
We say this because, like all others, we are aware that
Israel will continue its practices and its violations of the
rights of the civilian population in occupied southern
Lebanon and even escalate them as long as the occupation continues.

48, It is crystal clear that Israel-exactly
as in the case
ofSouth Africa-does not implement the Convention in
occupied southern Lebanon. Israel has violated its undertaking to respect it by invading Lebanon and occupying its territory. Faced with that situation, the States
members of the Council in their capacity as Parties to
that Convention must, in accordance with article 1,
take all necessary measures to compel Israel to respect
the Convention. The responsibility of members of the
Council stems from the Charter of the United Nations,
which has entrusted this body with the primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and
security, It is clear that the continued Israeli occupation of southern Lebanon and the persistence of the
inhuman practices and violations by the Israeli authorities are threatening international peace and security.

54. A case in point is what has been happening on
the West Bank of occupied Palestine and in the Israelioccupied Gaza Strip and Golan Heights.
55, At the outset I said that the Council was meeting
to consider yet another aspect of Israel’s aggressive
policy, its racist, Fascist practices and its violations of
the Charter and other international norms. If the Council deals with this complaint as it has dealt with other
similar aspects of Israeli policy, I am afraid that this will
not be its last meeting on the subject and that the vicious
circle will remain unbroken.

49. The crux of the problem in southern Lebanon is
Israel’s act of aggression against Lebanon and its occupation of part of Lebanon’s territory, as well as its
refusal to withdraw its occupying forces.

56. Israel’s policies, in their to&y and in their particulars, give rise to three basic requirements: first,
settlement of the question of Palestine in a manner that
would enable the Palestinian people to exercise its inalienable right to return to its homeland, Palestine, and
the right to self-determination and establishment of an

50. This act of aggression constitutes a flagrant violation of the Charter and the rules of international law. It
is also a violation of article 1 (2) of the Israeli-Lebanese
General Armistice Agreement concluded on 23 March
1949,’ which stipulates the following:

* Quoted

5

in English by the speaker.

--

Council. This question contains two elements: the firs1
is national: Israel’s continued occupation of Lebanese
territories and the repressive practices of the Israeli
occupation forces against the peaceable inhabitants of
southern Lebanon; the second is international:
the
world’s indifference to the continued occupation of
territories of a Member State, in clear violation of the
Charter of the United Nations and the principles of
international
law, not to mention the world’s silence
over the inhuman practices against civilian inhabitants
and the plundering of resources in flagrant violation of
the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949,’
and of The Hague Conventions II of 1899 and IV of 1907
respecting the Laws and Customs of War on Land.”

independent Palestinian State on the Palestinian soil
now occupied; secondly, t.he ending of Israeli aggression and expansion; thirdly, implementation
by all
members of the Council of its resolutions pertaining to
the question of Palestine and the Middle East as a
whole. ~If the Council fails to deal with those three
requirements in an integrated manner, Lebanon will
time and again have to come to the Council to complain
against Israel, Other Arab States willundoubtedly
have
to lodge similar complaints-different,
perhaps, in form
and detail but all having the same essence and origin:
Israeli aggression and expansion and the denial of
legitimate Palestinian rights.
57. Finally, we sincerely hope that the Council will
pursue a new course commensurate with the magnitude
of the problem, a just course based on the Council’s
great responsibility under the Charter.

63. I need not, I think, remind the Council-mandated to maintain international peace and security-or
the international community of the danger inherent in
Israel’s conduct, not only as regards the situation in
southern Lebanon but as a serious precedent in a world
replete with other examples of occupation, the use of
force, the torturing of civilians and all manner of violations of international law. Therefore Lebanon’s resort
to the Council concerns not only Lebanon but all members of the international community, which must, along
with the Council, protect Lebanon and other victims of
aggression and occupation and assist them in recovering their land and punishing the aggressor in accordance with the Charter.

58. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
The next speaker is the representative of the Sudan.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
59. Mr. BIRIDO (Sudan) [interpretation
from Arabic]: Mr. President, at the outset I should like to thank
you and the other members for allowing me to participate in the discussion of the question before the
Council. I should like personally and on behalf of my
country to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for this month. We are
confident that your well-known wisdom, expertise and
knowledge will help the Council fulfil its role in the best
manner possible.

64. The Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Sudan, governed by the principles and tenets of its
foreign policy, denounces the use of force in intemational relations, condemns occupation and interference in the internal affairs of other States and reaffirms
its condemnation
of the Israeli occupation of southern
Lebanon, the western Bekaa Valley and the Rashaya
district. Furthermore,
it calls for the immediate and
unconditional
withdrawal of Israeli occupation forces
from all Lebanese territories to enable fraternal Lebanon to regain independence and national sovereignty
and to embark on the task of internal reconstruction0

60. It is,also our pleasure to express appreciation to
the representative of the United States for the able
manner in which she conducted the work of the Council
last month.
61. At the outset of the Council’s deliberations, Wednesday afternoon, the representative of Lebanon said
that his Government had come before the Council on
behalf of its people-in
particular those in the southwho for many years had suffered Israeli attacks and
aggression and, since June 1982, the continued Israeli
occupation of large parts of their land, as well as repressive practices aimed at depopulating those areas,
plundering the natural resources, cutting them off from
the rest of Lebanon and ultimately annexing them, This
is consistent with the Israeli expansionist policies
which have characterized Israel since its establishment. He also mentioned that his Government had
resorted to the Council on behalf of the whole world,
which has adopted legal instruments and codes governing international relations and the peaceful conduct
of States-norms
prohibiting aggression, occupation
and the use of force.

66. On 6 June 1982, immediately after the ruthless
Israeli invasion of Lebanon, the Council unanimously
adopted resolution 509 (1982), demanding, in paragraph 1, that Israel withdraw all its military forces
forthwith and unconditionally
to the internationally
recognized boundaries of Lebanon. That resolution reaffirmed the need for strict respect for the territorial
integrity,
sovereignty and political independence of
Lebanon within its internationally
recognized boundaries.

62. MY delegation can find no better, more eloquent
evidence than that adduced by the representative of
Lebanon in presenting his country’s case before the

67. Resolution
509 (1982) follows numerous resolutions adopted by the Council in the face of Israeli
harassment and attacks on Lebanon-to
mention but a

65. We also appeal for assistance to the Government
of National Unity in its efforts to achieve peace and
unity in Lebanon.

6

.-

few, resolutions 425 (1978) and 501 (1982), which were
adopted after similar attacks on Lebanon. The records
of the Security Council and of the General Assembly
are replete with other resolutions on Israeli violations,
aggression, occupation and practices in the occupied
Palestinian territories and other occupied Arab territories, In most of those resolutions the Council has
condemned and denounced Israel, calling for an end to
its repeated violations and for respect for the Charter,
the principles of international law and the resolutions of
the Council.

73. Thus, Israel’s aggression against southern Lebanon was motivated by nothing but Israel’s fervent
desire to expand, to occupy Arab territory, and to
plunder the resources of that territory. Israel’s northern
borders were calm for a full year before its 1982 aggression against Lebanon. As a result of that aggression
we are witnessing a general uprising by the population
of southern Lebanon, despite the terrorism and oppression afflicting it. The Lebanese people are inflicting
losses on the Israeli army of occupation which has
imposed a state of siegein an attempt to defend itself.

68. What was Israel’s response?More aggression and
more blatant violations-despite the Council’s resolutions and the international outrage triggered by Israel’s
scorn and by its defiance and violation of all internationally agreed principles and laws.

74. We are confident that the people of Lebanon will
persist in its legitimate struggle to liberate its land and
achieve unity through that struggle and with the support
of the Council.
75. In the light of what I have said, and because of our
concern to re-establish and strengthen the Council’s
authority in the maintenanceof international peace and
security, and to compel Israel to respect the Charter,
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the
principles of international law and of international conventions governing the conduct of Statesboth in peace
and in war, the Council is duty-bound to shoulder its
obligations as set out in the Charter in order finally to
put an end to Israel’s stubbornness and aggression.

69. This time the Council is considering the Lebanese
complaint concerning the outrageous Israeli practices
in the occupied Lebanese territories. We believe that
the Council’s consideration of those practices is part
and parcel of its quest for the speedy implementation of
its previous resolutions on full and unconditional Israeli
withdrawal from Lebanese territory. We hope it will
have an effect on whatever draft resolution the Council
adopts on the subject.

76. In that connection, my delegation fully and unequivocally supports the demands of Lebanon, as stated
here by its representative when he called on the Council
to effect the implementation of previous relevant resolutions regarding complete and unconditional Israeli
withdrawal from Lebanese territory to the internationally recognized border, to put an end to Israeli practices
against the people of the occupied Lebanese territories,
to force Israel immediately to lift its siege from the
territories under occupation, and to reaffirm the established inalienable right of Lebanon to its own waters
and other natural resources.

70. As for Israel’s practices in southern Lebanon,
which are an extension of its practices in the West
Bank, the Gaza Strip, the Holy City of Jerusalem and
the Golan Heights, the representative of Lebanon has
presented a detailed account of them and of Israel’s
violations of the rules of the fourth Geneva Convention
:of 1949and of The Hague Conventions of 1899 and
1907,We do not believe that the Council and the international community need more details or more persuasion.Israel’s record in southern Lebanon and in the
occupied Arab and Palestinian territories has been before the world for more than 30 years.

77. We are confident that the Council will meet these
legitimate Lebanese demands, for if it fails to discharge
its tasks not only will the Israeli occupation of southern
Lebanon and the suffering of the people of that area
continue, but the aggressorand occupier will have been
rewarded, the policy of aggression and the use of force
in international relations will have been encouraged,
and the international foundations and principles that
have made the Council the guardian of international
peace and security will have been undermined.
78. In conclusion, we should like to affirm that, in our
view, just and lasting peace in the Middle East will be
achieved only through a complete Israeli withdrawal
from the occupied Arab territories and through the
establishment of an independent Palestinian State
under the leadership of the PLO, the sole authentic
representative of the Palestinian people.

71. Israel’s arbitrary practices in southern Lebanon
againstpeaceful civilians and againstproperty; its plans
to isolate the south in order to engulf it; its activities
aimed at plundering Lebanon’s natural resources, its
water in the first place, especially the waters of the
Litani, Hasbani and WazzaniRivers, which constitute
the primary resource of the south and the principal
source for irrigation and energy production: none of
this is new. It has long been the custom for Israel to
engagein these practices, as we have said.
72. There is no doubt that we cannot remain silent on
this; nor can the Council, The would permit the continuation of the policy offait accompli which forms the
basisfor Israel’s gradual swallowing up of the occupied
territories in Palestine and the Golan Heights, either
through direct annexation or through the establishment
of settlementspopulated by armed settlers and the intimidation of the inhabitants, causing them to flee their
land and paving the way for final annexation to Israel,

79. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
The next speaker is the representative of the Islamic
7

tident that the path they have chosenis the path ofAllah
and it is only this path that is going to lead themto
victory, with his blessing.

Republic of Iran. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
80. Mr. DAMAVANDI KAMALI (Islamic Republic
of Iran): I wish to thank you, Mr. President, and,
through you, the other members of the Council, for
allowing us to participate in today’s debate.

88. Mr. LOUET (France) [interpretation from
French]: The Council has met to consider the situation
in the part of the Lebanese territory which is today
occupied by Israeli armed forces. The deterioration
noted there is of serious concern to my Government,
The civilian population of that area has already suffered
far too much and we cannot be indifferent to that suf.
fering. In the circumstances, my delegation wishesto
stressthat Israel must respect the international conven.
tions on humanitarian law applicable to armed con.
flicts. I am referring in particular to the Geneva Con.
vention on the Protection of CivilianPersons in Timeof
War, of 12 August 1949.’ Of course those texts give
certain rights to the occupying Power, but that Power
cannot rid itself of all-1 repeat, all-the obligations
imposed on it by the provisions of that Convention,
How can we be sure of that inasmuch as the Israeli
armed forces periodically challenge the missionwhich
the Council has entrusted to the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNFIL). I should like to remind
members that the Council, in resolution 523 (1982),
authorized:

81. Once again the Council is debating the ongoing
Israeli aggression against the Islamic nations of the
Middle East, in this caseagainst the south of Lebanon.
This debate, like all others before it, has served one
major purpose: to remind the international community
of Israeli arrogance in blatantly violating the basic and
inalienable rights of the peoples of the region, with
the direct assistanceand encouragement of the United
States.
82. Everyone in this chamber-as well as every
peace-loving human being in the world-is well aware
of the aggressive nature of Israel and of its voracious
appetite for expansion. The pattern that international
Zionism and its great supporter, the United States, have
developed for the expansionist objectives of Israel has
become a very familiar scenario, a scenario of occupation through the use of force and persistent harassment
of the local population, to force them to abandon their
homes and their lands and to take refuge elsewhere,
thus paving the way for annexation.

“the Force during that period to carry out . . , interim
tasks in the humanitarian and administrative fields
* . . and to assist the Government of Lebanon in
ensuring the security of all the inhabitants of the area
without any discrimination”,

83. The details of the behaviour of Israeli forces
of occupation in southern Lebanon, presented to the
Council by the representative of Lebanon, clearly
demonstrate United States-Israeli objectives in the
Middle East; no amount of misinformation by the
American media can distort the truth.

89. We must note that UNFIL has had to deal ona
number of occasions with obstacles raised by the occupying Power to the accomplishment of its mission,
That is behaviour on the part of Israel which the Council cannot accept, especially now when the Lebanese
Government is making every effort to move towards
national reconciliation. Lebanon has already beenfar
too much a theatre of many actsof violence which have
caused numerous casualties.We must help Lebanonto
regain its sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity. France, for its part, will always work
along those lines.

84. The Council has so far been impotent vis-d-vis this
conspiracy, becausea crime of this magnitude extends
far beyond the range of the Council’s capabilities,
When a permanent member of the Council, holding the
power of veto, is a primary partner in aconspiracy, then
the international community cannot expect the Council
to be a defender of justice for the victims of that conspiracy.
85. Fortunately, the Council is not the only means
available for the establishment of justice.

90. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
I call on the representative of Israel, who has askedta
speak in exercise of the right of reply.

86. It is the position of the Islamic Republic of Iran
that the victims of Zionist aggressionshould not fall into
the trap set by the American-Zionist alliance and wait
passively for the Council to gain their rights for them.

91. Mr. BLUM (Israel): In his statement today, the
representative of the United Arab Emirates has seenfit
to invoke the Israel-Lebanon General Armistice
Agreement of 1949,2defunct since 1967. As has heen
stated by the Government of Israel on numerous OCcasions-see for instancemy statementsin the Councjl
of 12 June 1979 [see 2147th meeting] and 6 June 19fi2
[see2375th meeting], as well as my letters addressedto
the Secretary-General dated 27 May 1982 [S/15132],
and 26 June 1984 [S/16645]-that Agreement was terminated in June 1967asa result of Lebanon’s participation in the June 1967Arab-Israel hostilities.

87. It gives us great satisfaction to seethat the Muslim
people of southern Lebanon are we11aware of the various consequences of the ongoing Zionist aggression
against them and are prepared to make the necessary
sacrifices in order to abort that aggression. They have
our support in their heroic struggIe to regain their freedom and their dignity with the limited resources and
capabilities that they actually have. They must be con-.
8

I

,:
!
1

92. Moreover, subsequent to June 1967, the Government of Lebanon also repeatedly demonstrated that it
no longer considered the General Armistice Agreement
in force by concluding a series of agreements with the
terrorist PLO, starting with the Cairo Agreement of
November 1969. Those agreements, by enabling the
PLO terrorists to commit acts of murder and violence
against Israel and its civilian population from within
Lebanese territory, were totally incompatible with its
basic obligations under the General Armistice Agreement, May I remind the Council of the provisions of
article III, paragraph 3 of that Agreement, which provided that: “No warlike act or act of hostilities shall be
conducted from territory controlled by one of the Parties to this Agreement against the other Party.”
93. The conduct of the Government of Lebanon in
I967-and since-constituted
a material breach of the
Israel-Lebanon General Armistice Agreement of 1949
and-thus brought about its termination. It is therefore
not possible for anyone now to try to exhume and
resuscitate an Agreement which Lebanon itself through
its declarations and actions terminated many years ago.
94. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation fiorn French):
I now call on the representative of Lebanon, who has
asked to speak.
95. Mr. FAKHOURY
(Lebanon) [interpretation
from Arabic]: There is no doubt that the members
of the Council must have noticed that the Lebanese
delegation thus far has avoided dealing with the subject of the Agreement of 17 May 1983. However, the
representative of Israel insists on talking about that
Agreement whenever he speaks, particularly about the
breach of that Agreement by Lebanon. That Agreement
was never in force under the Lebanese constitutional
provisions, which require the signature of the Lebanese
President on any bill submitted to him by the Lebanese
Parliament. That Agreement was never in force under
the international rules which concern an exchange of
instruments,
96, Therefore, alleging that Lebanon has breached
this Agreement is contrary to fact. The fact, as just
stated by the representative of Israel, and repeated
by him quite often, is that Israel considers the 1949
Israeti-Lebanese General Armistice Agreement* between Lebanon and Israel null and void. It is Israel that

has violated that Agreement-one
which had been in
force for many years and is registered with the United
Nations. It is an agreement which Lebanon considers to
be still in force, notwithstanding the Israeli representative’s claims to the contrary.
97. Lebanon alone has the right to speak on behalf of
Lebanon. That Agreement is still valid; we still recognize it and call for its respect. The United Nations itself
has recognized this Agreement up until the present
time.
98. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
I call on the representative of Israel, who has asked to
speak.
99. Mr, BLUM (Israel): The Israel-Lebanon
Agreement of 17 May 1983 was signed by the Government
of Lebanon and ratified subsequently, virtually unanimously, by the Lebanese Parliament. The Government
of Lebanon went back on its signature and on the ratification of the Lebanese Parliament. Lebanon was not
permitted to implement the provisions of that Agreement, and we all know the reason: it was heavy outside
pressure, primarily pressure by the Syrian subjugators
of Lebanon.
100. With regard to the General Armistice Agreement
of 1949, obviously I do not pretend to speak for Lebanon, but I do have to point out that it was Lebanon that
violated the Armistice Agreement in 1967 in a material
and fundamental manner; and also its subsequent conduct constituted a material breach of that Agreement,
thus bringing about its termination.
101. It is not in the power of the representative of
Lebanon to try and revive and resuscitate an Agreement which was killed by Lebanon itself.
The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.

NOTES
I United Nations, Treary Series, vol. 75, No. 973.
z Ibid., vol. 42, No, 655.
3 Carnegie Endowment for Internatiaaal Peace, The Hague Conventions and Declarations of 1899 and 1907 (New York, Oxford
University Press, 1915).

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

UNITED

publications
your bookstore
SE

NATIONS

PROCURER

in United

Nations,

New

LES

PUBLICATIONS

DES

NATIONS

et les agences
A : Nations

COMO

UNIDAS

CONSECUIR

PUBLICACIONES

York

DE

LAS

NACIONES

Unidns
estan en vertta en libren’as
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Nacioncs

00300

throughout
the
York or Geneva.

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dam les librairies
monde entier. Mormez-vous
auprtsde
votre lihraire
ou adressez-vous
des ventes. New York ou Get-&e.

Las publicaciones
dc Ias Naciones
todas partes del mundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Litho

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
ltom bookstorcs
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales Section.
New

depositaims
du
Unies, Section

v casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas,
Section
de Yentas.

90-61313-Fcbnury

199%2,050
