-----··-·-·· ......

Reeolutiom adopted on the reporta of the Third Committee
789 (VID). Development of the work of the
United Natiom for wider observance of, and
reepeet for, human rights and fundamental
f reedom1 throughout the world
The General Assembly,
Considering that, under Articles 55 and ?6 of the
Charter the Members of the United Nations have
pledgetl' themselves to take joint and separate action
to promote universal respect for, and observance _of,
human rights and fundamental freedoms for '.'-1! without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion,
Desiring to advance as rapidly as possible respect for,
and observance of, human rights and fundamental freedoms and to stimulate Member States to press forward
toward attaining the goals set forth in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights,
Noting that the Commission on Human Rights, at
its ninth ses.sion, considered three draft resolutio!ls 9
concerning the development of the work of the United
Nations for wider observance of, and respect for,
human rights and fundamental freedoms throughout
the world,
Noting that the Economic and Social Council, in
resolution 501 C (XVI) of 3 August 1953, requested
Member States and specialized agencies to submit their
comments on the draft resolutions and the amendments thereto to the Secretary-General in so far as
possible by 1 October 1953,
Requests the Economic and Social Council to ask
the Commission on Human Rights:
(a) To consider, at its tenth session, the three draft
resolutions concerning the development of the work of
the United Nations for wider observance of, and respect for, human rights and fundamental fr~edoms
throughout the world, and to prepare, if possible, to
supplement the provisions of the Covenants on Human
Rights, recommendations thereon, in order that these
recommendations may be considered by the Economic
and Social Council at its eighteenth session;
( b) To take account, at its tenth session, of the
comments made by Member States and specialized
agencies and of the views expressed on this subject
at the eighth session of the General Assembly.
460th plenary meeting,
28 November 1953.
740 (VIII).

Evidence of existence of forced

labour
The General Assembly,
Recalling the determination of the peoples of the
United Nations under the Charter to reaffirm faith in
fundamental human rights and in the dignity and
worth of the human person,
Regretting that the Economic and Social Council at
its sixteenth session was unable to consider the conclusions contained in the report 10 of the Ad H oc Committee on Forced Labour,
Considering that systems of forced labour constitute
a serious threat to fundamental human rights and
jeopardize the freedom and status of workers in contravention of the obligations and provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations,
9

See documents E/CN.4/L.266/Rev.2, E/CN.4/L.267/Rev.l
and E/CN.4/L.268.
1 0 See document E/2431.

19

Observing that the report of the Ad H oc Committee
on Forced Labour has now been placed on the agenda
of the seventeenth session of the Economic and Social
Council and of the 123rd session of the Governing
Body of the International Labour Office,
Considering that in view of this delay there is still
time for certain governments which have not yet done
so to provide information in response to the Ad ljoc
Committee's request for comments and observations
on the allegations concerning them,
l. Affirms the importance which it attaches to the
abolition of all systems of forced or "corrective" labour, whether employed as a means o~ politi~a! coer_cion
or punishment for holding or expressmg political views
or on such a scale as to constitute an important element
in the economy of a country ;
2. Invites the Economic and Social Council and
the International Labour Organisation, as a matter of
urgency, to give early consideration to the report_ of the
Ad H oc Committee on Forced Labour at their next
sessions with this aim in view ;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to consult with
governments which have not yet found it possible to
provide information in response to the Ad Ho~ Committee's request to the effect that they submit such
information before the seventeenth session of the Economic and Social Council so that these replies may
be brought to the attention of the Council;
4. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
report on forced labour to the General Assembly at
its ninth session.
468th plenary meeting,
7 December 1953.
741 (VIIl). Measures for the peaceful solution
of the problem of prisoners of war
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 427 (V) of 14 December
1950 on measures for the peaceful solution of the
problem of prisoners of war,
Reaffirming its belief that all prisoners having originally come within the control of the Allied Powers
as a consequence of the Second World War should
either have been repatriated long since or have been
otherwise accounted for as required both by recognized standards of international conduct and the Geneva Convention 11 of 1949 relative to the treatment
of prisoners of war, and by specific agreements between
the Allied Powers,
Having examined the progress report 12 to the Secretary-General on the work of the Ad Hoe Commission on Prisoners of \Var,
l. N ates with satisfaction that some progress has
taken place in the repatriation of prisoners of war in
the course of the last two years, and expresses the
hope that those governments and Red Cross Societies
which have contributed to that progress will continue
their efforts;
2. Reiterates its grave and continuing concern at
the evidence that large numbers of prisoners taken in
the course of the Second ·world \Var have not yet been
repatriated or otherwise accounted for;
11 See Treaty Series, Treaties and internatio11al agre,·111ents
registered or filed and recordrd ,('ifh thr Sc:'rrtariat ,, f the
L·nitcd Nations, \'olurnc 75, 19.50, '.\'o. l)72, page 13.i.

12

Sec clocnrncnt A/2-t~2.

20

General AHembly-Eighth Session

3. Urgently appeals to all governments and authorities which continue to hold prisoners of the Second
World War to act in conformity with the recognized
standards of international conduct and with the abovementioned international agreements and the Geneva
Convention of 1949 which require that, upon the cessation of active hostilities, all prisoners should, with
the least possible delay, be given an unrestricted opportunity of repatriation;
4. Expresses its sincere appreciation to the Ad H oc
Commission on Prisoners of War for its efforts to
assist in a solution of the problem of prisoners of war;
and requests the Commission to continue its efforts to
assist in a solution of the problem of prisoners of war
under the terms of reference contained in General Assembly resolution 427 (V) of 14 December 1950;
5. N ates 'With satisfaction that a large amount of
valuable information was made available to the Ad
H oc Commission concerning prisoners of war; but
notes with concern that certain governments and authorities mentioned in the report of the Commission
have so far refused to co-operate with the Commission,

which refusal represents the main obstacle by which
the best efforts of the Commission have been frustrated;
6. Urgently appeals to all governments and authorities which have not already done so to give their full
co-operation to the Ad Ji oc Commission to supply the
information requested by it on all prisoners of the
Second World War who are still under their control
and on such prisoners who have died while under their
control ; and to grant the Commission access to areas
in which such prisoners are detained;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
furnish the Ad H oc Commission with the staff and
facilities necessary for the effective accomplishment
of its task;
8. Requests the Ad H oc Commission to report as
soon as practicable the results of its further work and
possible suggestions to the Secretary-General for transmission to the Members of the United Nations.
468th plenary meeting,
7 December 1953.
