A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/S-20/2*
21 October 1998

Twentieth special session
Agenda items 9, 10 and 11
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/S-20/11)]
S-20/2. Political Declaration
The General Assembly
Adopts the Political Declaration annexed to the present resolution.
9th plenary meeting
10 June 1998
ANNEX
Political Declaration
Drugs destroy lives and communities, undermine sustainable human development and generate crime.
Drugs affect all sectors of society in all countries; in particular, drug abuse affects the freedom and
development of young people, the world’s most valuable asset. Drugs are a grave threat to the health and
well-being of all mankind, the independence of States, democracy, the stability of nations, the structure
of all societies, and the dignity and hope of millions of people and their families; therefore:

_________________
* Reissued for technical reasons.

98-77509

/...

A/RES/S-20/2
Page 2

We the States Members of the United Nations,
Concerned about the serious world drug problem,1 and having assembled at the twentieth special
session of the General Assembly to consider enhanced action to tackle it in a spirit of trust and
cooperation,
1. Reaffirm our unwavering determination and commitment to overcoming the world drug problem
through domestic and international strategies to reduce both the illicit supply of and the demand for drugs;
2. Recognize that action against the world drug problem is a common and shared responsibility
requiring an integrated and balanced approach in full conformity with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and international law, and particularly with full respect for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of States, non-intervention in the internal affairs of States and all human rights and
fundamental freedoms. Convinced that the world drug problem must be addressed in a multilateral setting,
we call upon States which have not already done so to become party to and implement fully the three
international drug control conventions.2 Also, we renew our commitment to adopting and reinforcing
comprehensive national legislation and strategies to give effect to the provisions of those conventions,
ensuring through periodic reviews that the strategies are effective;
3. Reaffirm our support for the United Nations and its drug control organs,3 especially the
Commission on Narcotic Drugs, as the global forum for international cooperation against the world drug
problem, and resolve to strengthen the functioning and governance of these organs;
4. Undertake to ensure that women and men benefit equally, and without any discrimination, from
strategies directed against the world drug problem, through their involvement in all stages of programmes
and policy-making;
5. Recognize with satisfaction the progress achieved by States, both individually and working in
concert, and express deep concern about the new social contexts in which the consumption of illicit drugs,
particularly of amphetamine-type stimulants, is taking place;
6. Welcome the efforts of the wide range of people working in various fields against drug abuse
and, encouraged by the behaviour of the vast majority of youth who do not consume illegal drugs, decide

1

The illicit cultivation, production, manufacture, sale, demand, trafficking and distribution of narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances, including amphetamine-type stimulants, the diversion of precursors and related criminal
activities.
2

The Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961 as amended by the 1972 Protocol (United Nations, Treaty Series,
vol. 976, No. 14152), the Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971 (ibid., vol. 1019, No. 14956) and the
United Nations Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances of 1988 (see Official
Records of the United Nations Conference for the Adoption of a Convention Against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs
and Psychotropic Substances, Vienna, 25 November-20 December 1988, vol. I (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.94.XI.5)).

3

The international drug control organs as defined in the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961 are the
Commission on Narcotic Drugs of the Economic and Social Council and the International Narcotics Control Board.

/...

A/RES/S-20/2
Page 3

to give particular attention to demand reduction, notably by investing in and working with youth through
formal and informal education, information activities and other preventive measures;
7. Affirm our determination to provide the necessary resources for treatment and rehabilitation and
to enable social reintegration to restore dignity and hope to children, youth, women and men who have
become drug abusers and to fight against all aspects of the world drug problem;
8. Call upon the United Nations system, and invite the international financial institutions, such as
the World Bank and the regional development banks, to include action against the world drug problem
in their programmes, taking into account the priorities of States;
9. Call for the establishment or strengthening of regional or subregional mechanisms, as needed,
with the assistance of the United Nations International Drug Control Programme and the International
Narcotics Control Board, and invite those mechanisms to share experiences and conclusions resulting from
the implementation of national strategies and to report on their activities to the Commission on Narcotic
Drugs;
10. Express deep concern about links between illicit drug production, trafficking and involvement
of terrorist groups, criminals and transnational organized crime, and are resolved to strengthen our
cooperation in response to those threats;
11. Are alarmed by the growing violence resulting from links between illicit production of and illicit
trafficking in arms and drugs, and resolve to increase our cooperation in stemming illegal arms trafficking
and to achieve concrete results in this field through appropriate measures;
12. Call upon our communities, especially families, and their political, religious, educational,
cultural, sports, business and union leadership, non-governmental organizations and the media worldwide
actively to promote a society free of drug abuse, especially by emphasizing and facilitating healthy,
productive and fulfilling alternatives to the consumption of illicit drugs, which must not become accepted
as a way of life;
13. Decide to devote particular attention to the emerging trends in the illicit manufacture, trafficking
and consumption of synthetic drugs, and call for the establishment or strengthening by the year 2003 of
national legislation and programmes giving effect to the Action Plan against Illicit Manufacture,
Trafficking and Abuse of Amphetamine-type Stimulants and Their Precursors, adopted at the present
session;4
14. Also decide to devote particular attention to the measures for the control of precursors, adopted
at the present session,5 and further decide to establish the year 2008 as a target date for States, with a
view to eliminating or reducing significantly the illicit manufacture, marketing and trafficking of
psychotropic substances, including synthetic drugs, and the diversion of precursors;

4

See resolution S-20/4 A.

5

See resolution S-20/4 B.

/...

A/RES/S-20/2
Page 4

15. Undertake to make special efforts against the laundering of money linked to drug trafficking and,
in that context, emphasize the importance of strengthening international, regional and subregional
cooperation, and recommend that States that have not yet done so adopt by the year 2003 national moneylaundering legislation and programmes in accordance with relevant provisions of the United Nations
Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances of 1988, as well as the
measures for countering money-laundering, adopted at the present session;6
16. Also undertake to promote multilateral, regional, subregional and bilateral cooperation among
judicial and law enforcement authorities to deal with criminal organizations involved in drug offences and
related criminal activities, in accordance with the measures to promote judicial cooperation, adopted at the
present session,7 and encourage States to review and, where appropriate, to strengthen by the year 2003
the implementation of those measures;
17. Recognize that demand reduction is an indispensable pillar in the global approach to countering
the world drug problem, commit ourselves to introducing into our national programmes and strategies the
provisions set out in the Declaration on the Guiding Principles of Drug Demand Reduction,8 to working
closely with the United Nations International Drug Control Programme to develop action-oriented
strategies to assist in the implementation of the Declaration, and to establishing the year 2003 as a target
date for new or enhanced drug demand reduction strategies and programmes set up in close collaboration
with public health, social welfare and law enforcement authorities, and also commit ourselves to achieving
significant and measurable results in the field of demand reduction by the year 2008;
18. Reaffirm the need for a comprehensive approach to the elimination of illicit narcotic crops in line
with the Action Plan on International Cooperation on the Eradication of Illicit Drug Crops and on
Alternative Development, adopted at the present session,9 stress the special importance of cooperation in
alternative development, including the better integration of the most vulnerable sectors involved in the
illicit drug market into legal and viable economic activities, emphasize the need for eradication
programmes and law enforcement measures to counter illicit cultivation, production, manufacture and
trafficking, paying special attention to the protection of the environment, and, in this regard, strongly
support the work of the United Nations International Drug Control Programme in the field of alternative
development;
19. Welcome the global approach by the United Nations International Drug Control Programme to
the elimination of illicit crops, and commit ourselves to working closely with the Programme to develop
strategies with a view to eliminating or reducing significantly the illicit cultivation of the coca bush, the
cannabis plant and the opium poppy by the year 2008. We affirm our determination to mobilize
international support for our efforts to achieve these goals;
20. Call upon all States to take into account the outcome of the present session when formulating
national strategies and programmes and to report biennially to the Commission on Narcotic Drugs on their

6

See resolution S-20/4 D.

7

See resolution S-20/4 C.

8

See resolution S-20/3.

9

See resolution S-20/4 E.

/...

A/RES/S-20/2
Page 5

efforts to meet the above-mentioned goals and targets for the years 2003 and 2008, and request the
Commission to analyse these reports in order to enhance the cooperative effort to combat the world drug
problem.
These are new and serious promises which will be difficult to achieve, but we are resolved that such
commitments will be met by practical action and the resources needed to ensure real and measurable
results;
Together we can meet this challenge.
