UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-NINTH

YEAR

JAN 2 'ii 1993

2531”

MEETING:

3 MAY

ppg-j,‘\
19 4

;I;(jLL’r-I)-r[Qt?J

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/253 1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Expression of thanks to the retiring President . . . . . ..*.....................

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 30 April 1984 from the representative of Cyprus to the President
of the Security Council (S/16514) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1

SIPV.253 1

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Oflcial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the .Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2531st MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 3 May 1984, at 11 a.m.
Mr. Oleg A. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure.

Presidenr:

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, Egypt, France, India, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru, Ukrainian Soviet Sdcialist
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Upper Volta, Zimbabwe.
Provisional

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Moushoutas
,(Cyprus), &fr. Dountas (Greece), atid Mr. Kirca
(Turkey) took places at the Council table; Mr. Jacobs
(Antigua and Barbuda) and Mr. Golob (Yugoslavia)
took the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber.

agenda (S/Agenda/2531)

3.

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 30 April 1984 from the representative of Cyprus to the President of the Security Council (S/16514)
The meeting

was called to order at 11.35 a.m.

Expression of thanks to the retiring

[interpretation

from Russian]:

4. The Security Council will now begin its consideration of the item on the agenda. The Council is meeting
today in response to the request contained in the letter
dated 30 April 1984from the representative of Cyprus
to the President of the Security Council [S/16514].

President

1. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
fram Russian]:
As this is the first meeting of the Security Council for
the month of May, I should like to pay tribute on behalf
of the Council to Vladimir A. Kravets, representative
of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, for his service as President of the Security Council for the month
of April. I am sure I speak for all members of the
Council in expressing deep appreciation to Mr. Kravets
for the great diplomatic skill with which he conducted
the Council’s business last month.
Adoption

The PRESIDENT

I should like to remind members that in the course of
consultations members bf the Council agreed that an
invitation should be extended to Mr. Rauf Denktag in
his personal capacity, in accordance with rule 39 of the
provisional rules of procedure. Unless I hear any objection, I shall take it that the Council decides to invite
Mr. Denktas, in accordance with rule 39. At the appropriate moment I shall invite Mr. Denktag to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.

5. Members of the Council have before them document S/16519,which is the report of the Secretary-General in pursuance of paragraph 2 of resolution 544
(1983).
6. The Council will now hear a statement by the President of the Republic of Cyprus, Mr. Spyros Kyprianou. I request the Chief of Protocol to escort the
President into the Council chamber and to the place
reserved for Cyprus at the Council table.

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 30 April 1984 from the representative
of Cyprus to the President of the Security CounciI
(S/16514)

7. It is my honour and pleasure on behalf the Security
Council to extend a warm welcome to Mr. Spyros Kyprianou, President of the.Republic of Cyprus, and to
invite him to address the Council.

2. The PRESIDENT Cintermetation from Russianl:
I should like to inform-menibers of &e Council that
I have received letters from the representatives of
Antigua and Barbuda, Cyprus, Greece, Turkey and
Yugoslavia in which they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the Council’s
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite the,
representatives of those countries tq participate in the

8. President -KYPRIANOU (Cyprus): First of all,
Mr. President, I thank you very much for giving me this
opportunity to address the Council today. I also thank
you and the members. of the Council for meeting to
discuss once again the situation in Cyprus.
9. The Council has been seizedof the Cyprus problem
for the last 20 years. I am sure that many members
recollect the various deliberations in the Council and
1

the repeated warnings we have made to the intemationalcommunity
wsh regard to the real threat to the
independence, unity and territorial integrity of Cyprus
-to its very survival as an independent country.

14. What has happened throughout these 20 years?
Negotiation, mediation, compromise after compromise
-no result. I am not talking, as I said before, in detail,
but look at the 10 years before 1974. They were quite
the same and they resulted, in July and August 1974 and
since then, after the invasion, in 37 per cent of the
territory of Cyprus being under the occupation of Turkish troops. The Prime Minister at the time of the invasion, the socialist Mr. Ecevit, said that he was invading
Cyprus under the Treaty of Guarantee for the purpose
of restoring constitutional order which had been undermined by the coup that had taken place.

10: I will not go into many details regarding the past. It
might be useful, however, to quote from two documents alone. The first document is a letter addressed to
the then Prime Minister of Turkey, Ismet Iniinii, by
the then President of the United States, President Johnson, 20 years ago, on 5 June 1964. President Johnson
stated:

15. Well, it took Turkey 10 years to restore constitutional order. But in fact, that was not the purpose. It
was never the purpose. I do not think the invasion
would have taken place if it were not the plan of Turkey
to impose partition. I do not think that any of these
things that have happened-before
and since 1974 and
up to this moment-would
have taken place unless the
plan was to impose partition. What was the reason for
trying to change the demographic
character of the
occupied area by uprooting almost 200,000 people from
their homes and installing settlers from Turkey in their
place? What was the purpose? Was it to restore constitutional order? Or was the purpose to set up separate
institutions in the occupied area and introduce various other measures clearly aimed-as
we repeatedly
warned the Security Council, the General Assembly
and the international community as a whole-at implementing a plan which had already existed for a long
time? So to take the attitude that we can still have
doubts today about the plans and intentions of Turkey
and the Turkish Cypriots is, I submit, quite unjustifiable.

“It is my expression that you believe that such
intervention by Turkey*‘-at
that time there were the
repeated threats of intervention--“is
permissible
under the provisions of the Treaty of Guarantee of
1960.’ I must call your attention, however, to our
understanding
that the proposed intervention
by
Turkey would be for the purpose of effecting a form
of partition of the island.*’
The intention of Turkey at that time, even before then,
was more than obvious, more than clear.
Il.
Now I am going to quote from another document,
which showed the complete connivance between Turkey and the Turkish Cypriot leadership, which is the
same as the leadership today. It is a United Nations
document, a report submitted by the then SecretaryGeneral 19 years ago, in June 1965-well before 1974,
before the invasion and the occupation.
The late
U Thant stated:
“The Turkish Cypriot leaders have adhered to a
rigid stand against any measures which might involve
having members of the two communities
live and
work together. . . . Indeed, since the Turkish Cypriot
leadership is committed”-this
is 1965-“to
physical and geographic separation of the communities
as a political goal, it is not likely to encourage activities by Turkish Cypriots which may be interpreted as
demonstrating
the merits of an alternative policy.
The result has been a seemingly deliberate policy
of self-segregation by the Turkish Cypriots.”
[see
Sl6426, para. 106.1

16. Why are we here today? After 15 November 1983,
the date of the so-called unilateral declaration of independence-that
secessionist act which was condemned
by the international
community as a whole-we were
promised that some effort would be made to reverse
this train of events, that the international
community
would take steps to stop this catastrophe for Cyprus
and reverse what had happened at the expense of the
territorial integrity and the very existence of a small
Member of the United Nations.
17. What was the outcome? The Secretary-General
made a proposal to the Turkish side to freeze that
process, despite the fact that the resolution of the Security Council called for reversal. The Secretary-General
asked the Turkish side for a freeze, and their answer,
apart from documents-let
us not be overly concerned
with documents today-to
the Secretary-General,
to
us, to the Security Council, to the international
community, was: “We do not care what you say. We will
exchange ambassadors.” Indeed,theyhaveexchanged
ambassadors and in the most ceremonial way dismissed
whatever the Security Council said and whatever the
Security Council stands for. Any lack of action on the
part of the Security Council from now on, or anything
which may again be regarded as tolerance will not make
the situation any better: it will make it much worse.

12. There are many documents from which I could
quote, but I do not think it is necessary. Ifnecessary, of
course, in the course of the debate my delegation can
provide many other documents, with similar evidence.
13. I submit that despite the fact that there may have
been in the past some doubts regarding the real intentions of Turkey, by now there should be no doubts at
all. The doubts of the past, I submit, were unfounded;
yet today no doubt can bejustified. Actually, now is the
moment of truth for all of us-for us who are quite
aware and conscious of our historic responsibility
towards our country and its very survival. But with all
due respect I submit this for the Security Council as
well.
2

Cyprus, had been unthinkable in the past and excluded
by all British constitutional
expens during the colonial
period. What else can we do?

18. On this occasion the warning is slightly different
from that of previous occasions. The warning here is
that we as Cypriots and as members of the Government
of Cyprus-and
I as President of the Republic of Cyprus fully aware of my responsibility-see
coming the
end of Cyprus as an independent State unless the Security Council acts quickly and effectively.

24. Recently, even after the s&ed
unilateral declaration of independence, I made another proposal for
an overall solution to the Cyprus problem embodying a
completely new framework, which I submitted to the
Secretary-General
[S/16549, annox]. I did not do it for
propaganda purposes; that is why I did not make it
public, as others might have done-although
I do not
think there is now any reason not to make it public. I say
this not because I entertain any hopes in that connection-and
I shall come to this, together with other
statements we have made in the past-but
so that the
international
community
may see to what extent we
have gone in our sincere desire to ensure a peaceful
solution to the Cyprus problem. I shall request our
delegation to ask the Secretary-General
to distribute
that proposal to the members of the Council and of the
United Nations.

19. If this situation is allowed to continue, the very
ruison d’e^tre of the United Nations will not only be
undermined but will ultimately be destroyed. We have
come here because we need the Council’s assistance. If
we maintain the attitude that still prevails in the world
today, so many years after the Second World War and
despite the Charter of the United Nations, the Declaration on Human Rights, resolutions of the United Nations, the Helsinki Final Act and so many other declarations, I am afraid that solutions will be imposed by force
and not arrived at through common sense, logic and
principle.
20. I admit that we are weak, that we cannot fight-at
least not without assistance-to
restore our rights. On
the other hand, we long for a peaceful solution; we do
not want further violence and fighting. Why are we
weak? Because we are militarily weak. But are we to be
punished for that and to disappear as an independent
country? What will be the future of many other countries in the world if the Council supports efforts to
dispose of Cyprus? What will happen then?

25.. We are convinced that the good will we have
shown and all the concessions we have made-compromise after compromis&given
the lack of effective
action on the part of the international community, have
not done any good; they have done much harm. They
have strengthened the intransigence of the other side,
which has found negotiations,
intercommunal
talks,
good offices and initiatives very convenient. “Let us
get engaged in these things but, at the same time, pursue
our plan.” That is what the other side has been doing; it
has been pursuing its plan.

21. Naturally,
the international
community
and the
United Nations through its organs have repeatedly
called for negotiations-originally
for mediation, later
on for negotiations; since 1975 for intercommunal
talks;
then for the good offices of the Secretary-General,
and
so on. What has been the result? What has happened?

26. Of course, I realize that it is normal practice in
bodies like the Security Council, from time to time, to
hear counsel and advice to be calm and moderate. But
I am afraid that Cyprus could be finished and would still
be asked to be calm and moderate. There is no longer
any room for that.

22. In 1975-after the invasion and the occupationbeing weak in every respect, we would have been entitled to take the line of refusing to negotiate unless and
until the occupation troops had been withdrawn. The
international
community
agreed that the occupation
troops must be withdrawn but declared that in the
meantime we should try to negotiate. We did just that
-on and off for 10 long years. While we were negotiating-through
intercommunal
talks, good offices and
other initiatives-the
other side, pretending that they
were interested in such initiatives, proceeded with the
implementation
of their plan.

27. The signs are quite clear. The Security Council
in its resolution 541 (1983) of 18 November
1983
called upon the Turkish side to reverse their 15 November declaration. Did they do so? They announced the
holding of a referendum in August for the purpose of
approving a new constitution for the so-called separate
independent entity, the occupied part of Cyprus; they
decided to hold elections in November to elect the new
president and organs of the so-called independent Cyprus. On the eve of the visit of the Secretary-General’s
representative to Cyprus to assess what was happening
with regard to his efforts, Ankara and the illegal rdgime
in the occupied part of Cyprus proceeded to a formal
exchange of ambassadors. What else does the Council
need by way of a message from these people? Is there
anything else to be added? They made it clear to us a
long time ago, and I am sure that by now they have
made it clear to everyone.

23. As the Council knows, in addition to the good will
we showed throughout those 10 years, we accepted
positions that had been unthinkable in the past. In the
course of this process, we repeatedly advanced proposals concerning an overall solution to the Cyprus
problem. We arrived at two high-level agreements
within Cyprus, the purpose of which, by the way, was,
inter alia, to exclude secession and division. We
accepted federation as a solution to the internal structure of the Cyprus problem, something which, because
of the realities in Cyprus and because of the size of

28. They have now started talking again about highlevel meetings, about talks and initiatives.
What do
3

,

they want to achieve? Obviously, they want some kind
of machinery which would mean recognition of some
sort. And then they would perhaps want other kinds of
initiatives to pursue the same plan: “Let us keep the
international community asleep, pretend we are interested in this and the other, but pursue our plan.”

seized, but I believe-and I stand to be corrected; I may
be wrong; I am not absolutely certain-that this is the
first time that a Government has been threatened with
retaliation if it comes to express its views to the Security Council. That is the stage we have reached.
35. There is a question about who is more to blame:
Turkey or the Turkish Cypriot leaders. I do not think
there is any difference. I believe, in fact, that the answer is Turkey, because the actions of the Turkish Cypriot leadership have all along been in conformity with
the policy of Turkey. Let us also be practical: none of
this would ever have happened without the occupation
of 37 per cent of the territory of Cyprus by Turkish
troops. That is the reality, and if we are going to find a
way out of this situation the reality must be seen, and
the action that should be taken must be taken in the light
of that reality.

29. The Cyprus problem is not an East-West dispute.
Quite frankly and realistically, I feel that in that senseit
is not a complicated issue; it is something on which the
international community agrees.
30. The problem is whether this agreement by the
international community can be implemented; for what
will happen to Cyprus ifit is not implemented, and what
will happen to other countries that might find themselves in similar circumstances sometime in the future?
31. Not only are they trying to ridicule the Security
Council-I am sorry to say this, but the Council really is
being ridiculed, having taken a decision in November
providing for a course of action, when they do exactly
the opposite. They presume that they can dictate their
terms not only to us but to the entire international
community.

36. The Council may ask us again to be calm and
moderate-to do what? It may ask the Secretary-General to continue with his good of&es. It is obvious from
the Secretary-General’s remarks in his report of 1May
[S/26529] that when, in diplomatic language, he cites
the need to “revitalize” those good offices and calls for
“political support” he means, in my view, much more
than that; he means action by the Security Council.

32. I am going to convey to the Council another message they are sending to us and to the ‘Council. I am
going to quote a spokesman of the so&lied Govemment in the occupied area; I am sure that members will
get the message. He said, “We will make the Greek
Cypriots” -meaning the Cyprus Government-“pay
for appealing to the Security Council.*’ We are not even
allowed to appeal to the Council any more. Do you
realize what point we have come to? This meeting of the
Security Council is in no sense a formality; it is of a
decisive, determining character. The spokesman went
on to say that ‘!The cost of their action”-our action
is to come to the Council, here, today-“will be the
opening of a part of Varosha to the benefit of the Turkish Cypriots within a short time”-in other words, to
coionize another occupied part. By the way, they have
in mind not only Turkish Cypriots; they already have
quite a few thousand from Turkey over there.

37. But, once again speaking frankly and thinking
aloud, I ask: in the present circumstances, what would
anyone expect the Secretary-General to do? Should he
make other proposals less acceptable to us, other proposals that would be contrary to the resolutions of the
United Nations? That would be unfair to him.
38. Therefore, we have nothing against the good offices of the Secretary-General, but if there is going to be
any result, we must bear in mind that simply saying
“good offices of the Secretary-General” really contributes to the plan of the other side to try again to use
those good offices-as indeed they have done with all
other procedures-as a means to pursue their plans
while pretending to co-operate. There is no room any
more for any repetition of these developments.
-.
39. We want a peaceful evolution. But how can one
hope that-there will be a reasonable arrangement which
would ensure, on a lasting basis, peace and security in
Cyprus and in the area in general unless the Turkish
side-that is to say; aTurkey primarily, and, of course,
the leadership of the Turkish Cypriots-is made to
accept in practice the revocation of what they have
done, to abandon the planfor partition? Let-us face the
truth; let us face the .reaIity: if there is no abandonment, of the partitionist plan there can be no peaceful
solution to the Cyprus problem. It is as simple as that,
and I am sure that members realize it. What do some
people expect us to do? Just to slide along ‘with.events
and allow the situation to. continue until partition is
final and, perhaps, until other measures are taken, until
everything is irreversible? For our part, we shall do
whatever we can ,not to ‘make it irreversible, but

33. This spokesman of the so-called. independent
Turkish Cypriot State goes on: “Each time that
the Greek Cypriots”~meaning the Government of Cyprus-“have appealed to the United Nations Security
Council or the General Assembly they have paid a price
for it. Here is the declaration of our republic; here is our
flag;“-they have made a flag--‘&here is the declaration
of the dates for the presidential and parliamentary elections; and here is the latest move to open Varosha to the
Turks.”
34. In all humility 1ask, are we entitled to come to the
Council and appeal to it? It seems that we should be
afraid to do so, that we are not entitled to do so. There
may be many other violations of the Charter and resolutions of the United Nations of which the Security Council and the General Assembly have been and still are
4

not meet with him unless he reverses what he has done.
The least we, for our part, can do is show some political resistancesto this attempt to destroy Cyprus in
broad daylight and before the eyes of the international
community. But there is still nothing difficult about
communicating. That is not our problem. Our problem is, what do we do in order to stop this trend of
events and to reverse what has happened if we are
really and sincerely interested inensuring the independence, unity, territorial integrity, sovereignty and nonalignment of the Republic of Cyprus?

I submit that it is tbt responsibility of the Security
Council to see to it that its own resolutions are implemented.
40. Mr. President, as I said before in the course of the
debate, our delegatim will be at your disposal to provide whatever other v&s are necessary, both in terms
of further evidence -ding
the expansionist and partitionist plans of T&y,
and in terms of other matters pertaining to the Cyprus problem, especially as it
stands today,
41. Butagain, with zdIdue respect, I should like to put
before you this question: is there any doubt in the minds
of anyone as to the real intentions of Turkey? If there is
doubt, let us continue with the debate and establish
whether doubt is justified or not. We are ready to do
that for as many days as are necessary, for as many
weeks as are necessary, because, as I said before, it is
not out of formality that we are here today. The second
very pertinent question which arises is, will the Security Council allow, in violation of the Charter of the
United Nations and of its own resolutions, the gradual
disappearance of Cyprus as an independent country?
These are the issues.before the Security Council.

45. I do not want to take up more of the Council’s
time. I would simply like to conclude by once again
drawing to the attention of all the Council members the
real-the very real-danger to Cyprus and to its very
existence. If you now allow the impression to be given
that the Security Council will continue to be tolerant,
that it will just adopt a resolution and then wait and see,
nothing positive will happen and we shall, at the same
time, have additional negative developments. It may
even be that we may reach a time when it may be too
late for the Security Council to act. And ifit is too late,
then for us, of course, Cyprus will be lost. But the
Council will, through its condoning, its tolerance, its
lack of action, become-whether we like it or not, and
we do not like it-an accomplice to what has been
happening at the expense of Cyprus.

42. It is not a question of details. We are not disagreeing with the other side on certain minor constitutional problems. We do not have any dispute with
regard to secondary matters. It must be understood that
we are working at cross purposes: we are working for
the unity of the country in conformity with the resolutions of the United Nations, and they are working for
the destruction of the Republic of Cyprus, with parti-.
tion perhaps as a first step. It is not a question of
disagreeing here and there; it is not a question of lack of
modalities or of lack ofprocedures or of any differences
of opinion on matters which are not so essential or basic
to the survival of a country.

46. It was not my intention to use harsh language, but,
instead of reading from notes, I wanted to tell you
exactly how I feel, how I see the situation. I appeal to
you, Mr. President, and to members of the Council
urgently to put an end to the situation. Through concerted and other action the Security Council must do
whatever it can. I repeat once again: this is not a problem of East-West relations. For the Council, for the
United Nations, it is a simple issue of freedom and
peace, of justice, of the principles of the Charter. For
the Council it is a matter of its own resolutions, the
‘implementation of which is the only way to ensure a
process towards a peaceful evolution that would, in
turn, ensure the independence, unity, territorial integrity and sovereignty of Cyprus, its non-alignment and
its continuation as a Member of the United Nations.

*

43. It has been 10 years since the invasion. I remember 1977, when the then President of the United States
sent a special emissary to Cyprus to meet the late
President, Archbishop Makarios, in an effort .to persuade him to make far-reaching proposals regarding
biregional federation-which in fact he did. The understanding was that there would be a positive response
from the other side. Nothing of the sort happened.

47. The PRESIDENT [interprefutionfiom
Russian]:
The next speaker is Mr:Rauf Denktag, to whom the
Council has extended an invitation in his individual
capacity in accordance with rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

44. Let us go back a little further. Let us go back
years, to the time of the mediation by the United Nations, to Mr. Galo Plaza and his proposals, before the
invasion 10 years ago. Again, those proposals were
rejected by the -Turkish side, not because they were
unreasonable, but because they didnot serve the purpose of partition, of Turkish expansion. Since then,
how many efforts have been made either through
United Nations bodies or through the Secretariat, and
with what result? There has been no positive result
whatsoever. It is n.ot that there. is no way of communicating. It is not that I refuse to meet with Mr. Denktas-I do refuse, after what he. has done, and I will

48. Mr; DENKTAS: Mr. President, members of the
Security Council, I thank you all for giving me the
opportunity to put forward the views of my people.
I must also thank Mr. Kyprianou for having convened
this meeting, because it appears that this is the only way
for my people to have its voice heard and to have its
case put. It seemsthat every time the Turkish people of
Cyprus breathes as a political body, every time they act
as a political body-for no people can live in a vacuum,
5

munality of the country, of the State, of its Government, Cyprus would now be part of Greece. To them it
is liberty, freedom; to us it is colonization. That is
where we clashed. That is where the clash is.

and we have to act as a political body-the Security
Council will be convened and we shall face the General
Assembly.
49. It is my privilege to appear before the Council.
I feel it my duty to restate facts which I am sure the
Council knows. It is a good thing to remind Mr. Kyprianou of them also. He purposely suffers from amnesia, because his mind does not go back beyond 1974.

55: Mr. Kyprianou demands from the Council the
right for the Greek Cypriot majority to be able to decide
the destiny of Cyprus. He has no such right under the
international treaties, which they have flouted without
fear for years, trusting that misinforming the world
assembly would lead them to final victory. He now
sheds crocodile tears, because he seesthat merely misleading the world assembly takes people nowhere. He
has suggested that we are flouting the Security Council.
We are too small a people to do that. What we are
defying is the attempt by one section of a bi-national
country to deceive the world assembly, to deceive this
body, by falsehoods.

50. The Cyprus problem did not start in 1974. The
sovereignty, the independence, the territorial integrity
of Cyprus were attacked by the Greek Cypriot leadership, who had formed secret armies and had well
planned the attack in advance, in order to destroy
the b&national character of the State, with a view to
annexing the island to Greece. Greece was fully behind this conspiracy and helped the Greek Cypriots to
do what international agreements told us not to do
-namely, to destroy the bi-communal partnership of
the State and to make it aGreek State. So, if1 take some
time in looking at the facts, I ask that I be received with
patience.

56. I am a lawyer by profession. It is my duty, when
any court of law is misled into giving a wrong judgement, to appeal and to seekjustice for my client. In
this political forum there is no right of appeal, except
the decision, the courage to continue to struggle for
freedom and to tell the people all the time that the
struggle is to cherish the Charter of the United Nations
and not to become colonized by Greeks in Cyprus, until
this is understood and decisions are changed.

51. When Mr. Kyprianou pleads for the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Cyprus, he is
seeking from the Council a mandate to continue what
they tried to do between 1963and 197~namely, to end
the bi-national character of the State. That is the mandate he is seeking.

57. We are accused of dividing Cyprus because we did
not allow Greek Cypriots, with 20,000 troops from
Greece, to occupy Cyprus and to annex it to Greece.
We are accused of partitionist tendencies because there
came a moment in our history, in our struggle, when we
saw that resisting the union of Cyprus with Greece was
costing the lives of our people. So we said, “Since two
peoples live in Cyprus, let us divide it. Since you want
to be united with Greece, let Greece take you to its
bosom, but do not take us with you.” That is how
partition arose. There was no deliberate partitionist
policy. Partition was our defence, our only reasonable
civilized alternative to en&s.

52. We have done nothing against the territorial integrity of Cyprus. It was my people that was attacked in
1963 and that was forced to live in little enclaves, defending itself against the illegal administrator, called
Archbishop Makarios, while Mr. Kyprianou here, as
the Minister for Foreign Affairs, was dismissing one by
one Turkish Cypriot representatives who had to be at
foreign embassies and was Hellenising, as he said, the
administration of Cyprus. That is what he now wants to
consolidate; that is what they have tried to consolidate
for years; and that is why the struggle has continued.
53. Amnesia will not save Mr. Kyprianou from the
sting of conscience, because I am sure this Organization will not wish to be misinformed and will not
be satisfied with half the news, half the facts, but will
want to know all the facts before condemning the Turkish people of Cyprus to servitude under the Greek
Cypriots.

58. I have asked the Greek Cypriots to confirm in
words and deeds that enosis, union with Greece, is not
in their plans. What have they done? I will tell the
Council in a moment.
59. Instead we are told by the Prime Minister of
Greece, Andreas Papandreou, immediately after his
accession to power in October 1981,that the SecretaryGeneral’s “evaluation” paper, which forms the basis of
our negotiations for a bi-zonal federal republic, is an
imperialist plan, and he urges the Greek Cypriot side to
reject it. Then, in February 1982, he comes to Cyprus
and he gives a speech in which he says, “This is part of
the national territory of Greece”, and he vouches that
he will help the Greek Cypriots get rid of the Turks in
Cyprus. On 28 October 1983, Mr. Papandreou again
refers to Cyprus as part of the national territory of
Greece.

.54. We have established the independent Republic of
Cyprus as equals with the Greek Cypriots. The sovereignty of Cyprus was given to the two peoples of
Cyprus to cherish and respect, but in the course of my
appeal to the Council I shall prove that at the time they
put their signatures to the agreements they had already
decided to use them to destroy it and to further the
struggle for the union of Cyprus with Greece. We are
guilty because we defended ourselves. Had we not
defended ourselves, had we submitted to the rule of
Archbishop Makarios after he destroyed the bi-com6

1

60. In 1964, the elder Papandreou, his father, was
hand in hand with Archbishop Makarios in attacking
the international agreements that had created the binational Republic of Cyprus, a sui generis State, a partnership which could continue only as long as the
agreement which created it was honoured. But Greek
Cypriots destroyed it. We defended our rights, and in
November 1964, while.Turkish blood was flowing in
Cyprus and the union of Cyprus with Greece was the
aim of all, Andreas Papandreou said, “The union of
Cyprus with Greece will be the union of two Greeces.”
So we were living in Greece and we did not know it.
Cyprus was Greek; Cyprus was Greece. It was our
fault, it was our sin, that we did not accept that Cyprus
was Greek. We do not accept it now. We shall never
accept it. That explains the crocodile tears. “There are
two Greeces. Now we shall make them into one.” That
is why the Cyprus problem has not been settled: because we did not allow Cyprus to become part of
Greece. On 4 March 1982 The Cyprus Weekly, a Greek
Cypriot newspaper, criticizes Papandreou for having
said this.

.

final settlement or a return to & Constitution, the
authority of the present Admir&tration ought not to
be recognized by members of i& community.” [See
S/6102, para. 175.1

The writ of Makarios ceased to be a legal, judicial writ
as soon as the bi-communality oft& country was destroyed in December 1963.
65. I have watched Mr. Kyprianou very carefully. He
has done his best to dramatize the hation, and he has
told the Council that the independent Republic of Cyprus will be destroyed ifit does not act and, I suppose,
if it does not punish us. I have listened to him carefully in order to discover the grave developments or the
threat to peace on which he has based his request for
the convening of the Council. I have learned nothing,
except that we have made our unilateral declaration
of independence, that the Security Council has condemned us and that from that day on we have not
reversed our decision.
66. The last time I addressed the Council
[25OOrhmeeting] I told it that the request that we reverse our position was a request to destroy a living
political body. In that body my people has its rights and
status, which are underlined by the 1960treaties, which
Greek Cypriot arms tried to destroy and in defence of
which we lost 103villages and 107mosques and lives in
the thousands; in defence of which my community was
put to the torch for 11 years-which Mr. Kyprianou
forgets because he was busy here, trying to deceive the
whole world. He had to shut his eyes to what was
happening on the island.

61. During his recent visit to Cyprus, the Prime Minister of Greece rekindled the dormant Greek Cypriot
wish for enosis, union with Greece. This is what we are
facing. We were pushed into declaring our statehood in
order to prove to Mr. Papandreou and to Mr. Kyprianou that in Cyprus there exists a Turkish people
that will never allow Cyprus to be the second Greece in
the Mediterranean, that will never allow Cyprus to be
united with Greece and that has entrenched itselfwithin
its 1960status and rights in order to help re-establish a
bi-zonal federal republic.
62. We move from father to son. On 27 October 1964,
in a speech given at the University of Salon&a,
Mr. Papandreou says, “All Greek Cypriots are for
enosis. Cyprus must become the springboard for the
dreams of Alexander the Great in the Orient.” We have
prevented this. We are guilty. We shall never be forgiven. And the Council is asked in the name .of the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of Cyprus-by
those who have tried to destroy that sovereignty and
territorial integrity-to punish us, to condemn us and to
make us the servants of Mr. Kyprianou. That is what is
being asked of the Council, and I am sure it will not
accept it.

67. So what is the position in Cyprus? We have declared our statehood, and we have said frankly that
we have done so in order to put an end to a stalemate
that has been continuing for 21 years. For the first
time I have heard Mr. Kyprianou complain about that
stalemate, a stalemate they have created and will continue to create as long as they are treated as the legitimate Government of Cyprus.

64. When did the Government of Cyprus break down?
I shall quote from the Secretary-General’s report of
December 1964:

68. All Council members represent Governments
here, and I ask them: in whose Government is one
fourth of the community put outside the budget, outside
the administration, outside the protection of the State,
treated as a rebel-not just for a couple of months but
for 20 years-with attempts made to take away all its
political and constitutional rights? Yet this Council,
where the protection of human rights is the utmost
concern, where the sanctity of international treaties is
very important, is still asked to condone all that was
done to us.

“One basic set of obstacles stands in the way of the
solution of such problems: the claim by the Govemment” -the Greek Cypriot administration-“on the
one side, that Turkish Cypriots should submit to its
authority and to the law; the position of the Turkish
Cypriot leadership, on the other side, that, pending a

69. We are, in line with our rights and our status as cofounder partners of the b&national State of Cyprus,
living in the north as aresult of 11years of untold misery
and attack and denial ofjustice by Greek Cypriots from
1963 to 1974, having been liberated just ,in time by
Turkey, as a guaranteeing Power. We are ready to re-

63. Quotations are plentiful, and we shall come to
them one by one.

7

all of a sudden. This was all decided on the day we
declared independence, that this was the procedure to
be followed. My community is accusing me of delaying
the finishing of the constitution, of delaying the referendum and the elections. They say that I am doing this.
deliberately in order to give the Secretary-General time
to. intervene and to stop the whole process. ,I have
promised them that is not so. We are moving slowly
because we want to test the.Greek Cypriot side as to
whether they will come to their sensesand realize that
Cyprus is Greek Cypriot-Turkish. Cypriot, whether
they will accept the 1977formula [see S/12323, paru. 51,
whether they will come to the negotiating table. That is
why we are moving slowly. But it appears that each
time we take .the natural step of establishing another
missing link of our statehood, we shall be brought here
in order to defend ourselves.

establish the federalRepublic, for which there exists an
agreement, a form@ and a procedure. We have been
inviting the Greek&prior side to come to the table and
negotiate and to leave these one-sided complaints and
resorts to intema&na.l forums where, in most cases,
we are not even heard; but they do not like that table:
inter-communal talks can only lead to the re-establishment of a bi-national State. Why should they come to
the table when they are treated as being in charge of the
whole of Cyprus, its legitimate Government and its only
people? .Would you come if you were given this advantage, and the other side, which you have been trying to
destroy for years, was doing its best to save its rights
and no more? What alternative was left to us after being
treated the way we were for 20 years by the Greek
Cypriot side?
70. So I call upon him to come to the negotiating table
in order to establish a bi-national, bi-zonal federal
republic,, in accordance with my agreement with
Archbishop Makarios [see S/13369, paru. 521 and his
endorsement of it in 1979. For doing so, for his coming
to the table, I have said that I am not asking him to
recognize my State, to recognize me as the President of
that State, as I do not recognize him as the President of
the whole of Cyprus and as I do not recognize his as the
only people in Cyprus.

74.“ In Cyprus there is no crisis .Jn Cyprus there can be
no crisis, because the Greek Cypriots live, prospering
immensely, in the south. They are deriving all the benefits of their false pretence that they are the Govemment of Cyprus by getting all the international aid and
credit. They are becoming richer and richer. If they
have any financial difficulty it is because they are
spending more than they should on arms and ,armaments for a reason that we neither know nor understand, because we do not intend to settle the Cyprus
problem by arms. We have no claim and no aim on the
south of Cyprus. It is they who claim the right to come
and rule us. We have no such claim. In the north, since
liberation by Turkey, we have been living in dignity,
without fear, in freedom, having established our democratic procedure.

7.1. We met Archbishop Makarios as the representatives of two peoples, as the leaders of two peoples.
When I shook the hand of Archbishop Makarios on our
first meeting, he said, smiling, “Mr. Denktag, you
know that I do not recognize you as the President of the
Turkish administration.‘*-it
was “administration”
then. I replied “Of course, Archbishop, I do know that,
and you know that I do not recognize you as the President of Cyprus.” The man smiled, said “Yes, I do.”
We sat down and we started talking. The present Secretary-General was a witness to all these things. Then
I met Mr. Kyprianou. When we met I did not meet the
President of Cyprus and he did not meet the Pssidem
of the Turkish Cypriot administration. We met as the
two representatives of the two peoples. After the declaration of our statehood, I called for a meeting with
him in our capacities as the representatives of the two
peoples; I continue to keep the door open and he says
he will not meet me until I reverse the decision of my
statehood.

.75. We are ruling ourselves, as we have done since
December 1963, when we were thrown out of the Government, out of the organs of State. Therefore, when
Mr.. Kyprianou sheds crocodile tears for. the soveri
eignty, independence and territorial integrity of Cy..prus,I have to put on record,that morally he is not the
President of the whole of Cyprus, because he has not
been elected in accordance with the 1960Constitution.
Legally and constitutionally he is not the President of
Cyprus because that Constitution is in the dustbin. His
is not the Government that that Constitution foresees.
That Constitution foresees a Government in the organs
of which Turkish Cypriots participate fully. We were
thrown out of that b&national Government on 31 December 1963, and we have not been allowed togo back
unless we accept the Constitution as not being there,
that the amendments that they thought they should
make have been made, and Turkish tights have.been
abrogated. We have not submitted to this, and therefore
Mr. Kyprianou has no right to talk about defiance-of the
Security Council, defiance of international law or anything of that kind. He is not here with clean hands, and
he cannot blame us for ,defending ourselves, for not
submitting to him. I ‘.
_
I
..
76. The .coup .d’&~r. by Makarios against. the .binational character of the State was not-successful be-

72. That decision is not mine. I cannot reverse it. It
is a decision of my people, which has suffered for
20 years,. lacking liberty and freedom, struggling in
order not to lose itsidentity and status, dying in order to
prevent Greek Cypriots -from destroying the independence and sovereignty of Cyprus, from making it a land
attached to Greece. They have declared it; more than
83,000 signatures were there to verify,it on the day it
was declared.
73. So what is our fault now. that we have all of a
sudden decided to have a constitution, to put it to a
referendum, to have elections? We.did not decide this
8

cause we did not submit to him, because he never took
possession of Cyprus as a whole. That coup d’&at has
been simmering until today, and the same pretense
continues.

trust? Is it we who create difficulties for him? Or is it the
Greek Cypriot side, which never wants intercommunal
talks, taking full advantage even d our right to make
counter-proposals when somete is put before us?

77. What I regretted most about Mr. Kyprianou’s
statement was the part where he said that he was not
ready to meet me and that he saw no purpose in meeting
me. I repeat, the Cyprus problem will be settled by
the two peoples. I met the Greek Cypriot leaders only
twice in the last 20 years, in the presence of the Secretary-General. On those two occasions we succeeded
in coming to a conclusion and in finding a formula for
settling the Cyprus problem. I want to meet Mr. Kyprianou again because they have been running away
from that formula for the reasons I have explained, and
I believe that if we face each, if I can prove to him why
we have been pushed into this comer after 20 years and
what we expect of Cyprus in the future-if1 cyanconvince him-we can come to an agreement. This offer is
there, but he sayshe cannot accept it unless I withdraw
the declaration of statehood.

80. I have been talking to the Secretary-General. He
had never given me anything on a take-it-or-leave-it
basis, because he knows that that is not part of his good
ofices function. He is not a mediator. He has always
said, “May I have your views on it?” I have given my
views on it, after consulting with my people. But I must
not do so. Why? Because the moment I see the Secretary-General Mr. Kyprianou makes a statement in Cyprus: ,“This is on a take-it-or-leave-it basis. If
Mr. Denktag makes counter-offers he has destroyed
the initiatives of the Secretary-General.” That is what
he says, but it does not accord with the facts of life.
81. So why are we here taking up the Council’s time?
On 18December 1983Mr. Kyprianou stated his policy:
“In order to make the Turkish Cypriots retract
their illegal attempts, we are not only going to continue our intemationalization of the question, but we
are going to increase our attempts. World public
opinion has to be convinced that the Cyprus question
does not need a theoretical solution to the problem,
but a practical, decisive and just solution must be
found. That is why we are here. Not because there is
a crisis, not because there is a grave situation.‘*

78. Has he stopped any of his activities under the
assumed title of Government of Cyprus? He has not.
‘He is all over Europe trying to punish my community,
trying to impose an illegal embargo on economic activity, accusing us falsely, the way he has accused us
today, of trying to partition the island just because we
did not allow him to take it all. We have asked him to
stop these activities in order to show some good will to
my people. No. He is the Government of Cyprus and he
will continue as such until the end.

Part of the intemationalization programme is being put
into effect, and they will come again and again to the
United Nations in order to get resolutions which, if
implemented, would do to my people what their guns
and economic embargoes have failed to do. That is what
they want; they will not be satisfied with less.

79. I understand why he is reluctant to meet me. He is
reluctant because Mr. Papandreou, the Prime Minister
of Greece, has told them and keeps on telling them that
intercommunal negotiations will not bring justice to
Cyprus. On 24 November 1983 Mr. ‘Papandreou said:
“We can hold negotiations only for a-unitary Cyprus.
For us, neither federation nor confederation is an
acceptable solution.” During the last four months
Mr. Kyprianou visited Athens 14times for instructions,
the last time with all the party leaders. Had we acted
similarly they would have circulated letters saying,
“Look at Denktag, the tool of Ankara”. No, we do not
do this; they do. But what is the direction theyset from
Athens? Is it not clear? I repeat the same quotation:
“We can hold negotiations only for a unitary Cyprus.
For us, neither federation nor confederation is an
acceptable solution.” And the Secretary-General is
asked to use his good offtces within the agreed context,
namely for a federal republic, to help the parties, and
we are supposed to defy the Secretary-General and
place his efforts in difXculty,when all that we are doing
is trying to be helpful to him and show him that Greek
Cypriots are not on that track and that therefore this
train will not go to the federal republic station. I repeat:
during the last four months, 14 visits.for aligning the
Cyprus policy-and this is what they call the Hellenic
Centre’s view-on the talks. Is it we who do not want
the Secretary-General, in whom we have the utmost

82. I’must thank the Secretary-General for giving full
publicity to all my letters in his latest report [S/26529].
In them the Council will find comprehensive suggestions and transitional suggestions for the settlement of
the prob+m. This is not disrespect for the of&e of the
Secretary-General or for the Security Council; this is
not evidence that we do not want to negotiate. It is clear
evidence that we are fully in the negotiating process,
that we want the negotiations to continue under the
agreed terms and that we are not running away from
negotiations.
83.’ It is therefore my objective to try and be helpful to
the Council and to the Secretary-General with regard to
his call for the reactivation of the negotiating process.
In his report the Secretary-General says:
“The Security Council entrusted the mission of
good offices to the Secretary-General in 1975and has
regularly extended it since then. It is for the Council
now to assess the present situation and to decide
what action needs to be taken to revitalize the search
for a peaceful settlement and to provide it with the
necessary political support. I am convinced that this
9

search is vital to the interests of all the people of
Cyprus as well as to the wider peace.” [Ibid.,
para. 24.1

send Galo Plaza to Beirut
liking.

for entertainment

to his

88. We respect the Security Council. We have the
highest respect for the Secretary-General,
and we want
his good offices to continue. But please allow us to
defend our rights as best we can.

84. I have tried to tell the Council why the negotiating
process has not been successful. It cannot be successful
as long as the Council continues to treat one of the
parties to the problem as the legitimate Government of
Cyprus when that party lacks all the fundamentals of
legitimate government. A government in a bi-national
State 100 per cent of whose organs are Greek Cypriot
cannot claim to be the legitimate Government of that
State, especially when it has put its hands on that State
by armed force, in spite of international treaties registered with the United Nations.

89. Mr. Kyprianou said that we had threatened him
with retaliation if he came to the Security Council.
I reject what he has read. It may be a commentary by
a Greek Cypriot writer on what the spokesman said.
I have no recollection
of such a statement by the
spokesman. Mr. Kyprianou misunderstands what we
are trying to tell him when we implore him: Do not
take this matter to the Security Council; this is a matter on which we can talk and must talk; that is what
the international community wants. He takes this as a
threat. We also tell him: you have no legal feet to stand
on in that Security Council because one of your feet is
missing and that is the Turkish foot. You have to be binational in order to be there; there has to be a Turkish
Cypriot representative sitting with you so that you can
be representing the Government of Cyprus. Where is
that representative? They have dismissed all Turkish
representatives in the foreign service: in Moscow, in
London, in Washington, in New York, in Egypt. They
have dismissed them all. When did they do this. Not
after Turkey came; not after we declared independence: they did it in 1963 and 1964.

85. Hence the Council has a golden opportunity to tell
Mr. Kyprianou that he has to see me, that by seeing me
he is not going to concede that I am the president of
any State, just as I am not going to concede that he
is president of the whole of Cyprus, and that it is the
wish of the Security Council that such a meeting take
place. Dialogue is the only way to peaceful negotiation.
Picking up faults here and there and running away from
dialogue is an indication that they are satisfied with
what they have-and why should they not be satisfied,
since they have the title of Cyprus in their pockets
unjustly and can deceive the world that Turkey has
invaded Cyprus?
86. I shall briefly refer to some of the things he has
said. He referred to Galo Plaza, saying that we had
refused to accept his report. In fact, Greek Cypriots
were the first to reject Galo Plaza’s report because he
was not giving them enosis inunediately but was delaying it for some time. We rejected his report because he should not have publicized it; he should have
allowed time for the parties to look at it and enter into
negotiations. But from the memoirs of the notorious
terrorist Grivas we read years later that:

90. His assertion that everything has been planned by
Turkey for the partition of the island and that step by
step we are going in that direction is a remarkable one.
If Turkey has a plan for partitioning
the island, then
Mr. Papandreou and the Greek Cypriot leadership must
be in conspiracy with Turkey, because for the last
20 years they have constantly been giving Turkey and
us every opportunity to divide the island, by treating
us as non-existent in Cyprus, by trying to destroy us,
and by forcing us to put a line between ourselves and
their attacking forces. They must be in conspiracy with.
Turkey to bring about that partition.

“In the last days Girgotis has learned that Dimis
Dimitriou is a close friend of Galo Plaza. Following
this, Dimis Dimitriou
was requested to ask Galo
Plaza what sort of a secret proposal he would be
making for a solution of the Cyprus problem. Dimis
Dimitriou had a meeting with Girgotis on 1 October
and gave this information: Galo Plaza intends to give
a report in line with the solution envisaged by
Greece, even if his report is to be thrown into the
waste-paper basket. And he is surprised that
we”-the
Greek Cypriots-“have
not implemented
a military administration
and have not united with
Greece in the economic field.”

91. But that we were not so planning is obvious from
the records of the Secretaries-General
over the years.
In 1963, when they attacked us, all our civil servants
were ejected from the services. We tried to have them
accepted back. On 10 September 1964, in his report to
the Security Council, the Secretary-General
stated the
following:
“The UNFICYP
[United Nations Peace-keeping
Force in Cyprus] authorities, from the beginning of
their mandate in Cyprus, gave serious consideration
to this question and on several occasions raised it
with the Cyprus Government. All negotiations. on the
possible re-employment
of the Turkish Cypriot civil
servants in Nicosia and their financial compensation
from January 1964 have so far ended in adeadlock, as
the matter is considered by the Government to be
highly political and closely linked with the final set-

87. This is the mediator of the United Nations, and we
are asked to accept any mediation report, no matter
what kind of a report it is, even one which assails
our liberty and condemns us to servitude. I shall not
embarrass the United Nations by reading out further
from this report; but I recommend that it be read.
Grivas conspires with a friend of Galo Plaza and they
10

tlement of the Cyprus
para. 108.1

question.”

you not give it to me in full?” His answer was, “I knew
that you would reject it totally, and it is not my purpose
to give parties what they will reject; I try to find something that they could accept. Th& is why I did not give it
to you.”

[See S/59.50,

92. For 21 years, because there has been no final
settlement of the Cyprus question, these people have
been out of all the organs of the State, while a 100-p&-cent racist Greek administration
has been claiming the
right to be the Government of Cyprus.i Can we, therefore, accept Mr. Kyprianou’s
version: of events? He
accuses us of creating separate institutions
in all
spheres. We are proud that we did so. When we were
thrown out of our own State organs we had to survive
and live as civilized people; we had to provide for
administration
and administrative
setups; we therefore
looked after ourselves. We have learned very well how
to look after ourselves; we now want them to share the
experiment with us by establishing a federal republic.

97. How did the Secretary-G&
know that I would
reject it? Because Mr. Kypriantw’s offer, which he says
he will provide to the Council, did not fall within our
agreed solution or within our agreed procedure. It was
an offer by the “legitimate Government of Cyprus” to a
“rebellious
minority”.
Mr. Kyprianou has to come
down to earth. We are his partners. We are part of
Cyprus. We want to live in Cyprus in peace and understanding. We have not been able to do so intermingled,
because of their enosis theory and their enosis policy.
We want to live side by side and to be partners in a joint
venture in the form of federation.

93. He says, “I, as the President of Cyprus, see the
end of Cyprus as an independent country”. Well, it
is because he looks at Cyprus without constitutional
authority as its President that he sees this destruction,
and because he has amnesia and forgets 1963 to 1974 he
does not realize that the death-blow to the independence and sovereignty of Cyprus was dealt when they
attacked us in 1963 and refused to incorporate us, in
spite of repeated reports and repeated endeavours by
the Security Council and the Secretary-General.
We
were not born yesterday, and I am sure that all members know the background of the Cyprus problem.

98. I am very sorry; I see members looking at their
watches, but this opportunity is given to us very rarely.
I shall try to finish as soon as possible.
99. With regard to the exchange of ambassadors,
Mr. Gobbi was shocked because of what I did. We were
shocked when we heard that Mr. Gobbi was coming on
the day he did. We were both caught by surprise. There
was nothing deliberate in it; it was an activity of a body
politic in which we delayed what we could not stop, and
you cannot fix dates for this kind of ceremony all the
way and all the time. It had to be done, and, I repeat, it
was not deliberate; it was not a slap in the face to the
Secretary-General,
as Mr. Kyprianou has suggested.

94. “We are militarily weak,” he says. “We cannot
fight. We want a peaceful solution. Are we to be punished because we are militarily
weak?” This is an
accusation against Turkey of invasion. Turkey came to
Cyprus and drove back an invasion by Greece and its
adherents in Cyprus. That is what Turkey did, nothing
more, nothing less. And now, like the criminal who is
caught by the police, the criminal is complaining, “But
the police were fully armed; they had all their men
around us. Is this justice? Is this fair?”

100. When I had met the Secretary-General
earlier
-and he will confirm this-and he asked me about this
freezing of certain activities,
I told him frankly:
“Mr. Secretary-General,
there are activities which we
can delay and which we can stop. There are activities
which we cannot stop. I shall try to help you as much as
I can. That promise stands. But if you are going to ask
us to freeze ourselves, I must say that I have not yet
seen any frozen Government,
nor any frozen State,
except, perhaps, for Alaska. It is impossible. Please ask
us reasonable things and we will do them-and
the most
reasonable thing you can ask us is to sit at the negotiating table and to talk, and talk and talk.”

95. We have stopped them from destroying our country, a bi-national State, and we are giving them the
chance to re-establish it. And in the presence of the
Council he is refusing negotiations,
he is refusing a
dialogue, and he is asking the Council to punish us for
not submitting to violence and to the destruction of
international treaties. I hope the Council sees how he is
playing his hand.

101. How can I give a guarantee to Mr. Kyprianou
when I talk to him on the first day and the first month
that there will immediately be a solution if we have not
yet come to the same point of view that Cyprus is not
Greek; that Cyprus shall not be Greek; that there shall
be guarantees against union with any other country, in
whole or in part, and that the bi-zonal federal system
must be the aim of both sides? If we do not agree on this,
if he pretends to be the Government of Cyprus and its
President, and if he says that he sees Cyprus being
destroyed, the Cyprus he sees being destroyed is a
Greek Cyprus. That is the Cyprus he sees destroyed.
But Cyprus is not Greek; thus Cyprus is not being
destroyed.

96, He also stated something which I have to correct.
He said, “Recently I made an oral proposal to the
Secretary-General;
I did not make it public because it
was sincere.” He said that this would be distributed
later by his mission. When that proposal is distributed
I shall beg leave to tell the Council why we rejected it.
The Secretary-General,
at Casablanca, gave me the gist
of it. He could not read me the proposals in full. Later,
when I met with the Secretary-General
again I said to
him, “Mr. Secretary-General,
I have now discovered
the full text of Mr. Kyprianou’s letter to you. Why did
11

.

‘.

102. We are trying to establish a partnership. We are
ready for one, but at the table, not running around the
world spending the little money we can afford in order
to defend ourselves against imagined and imaginary
accusations. We are as good a Government as his. He is
not treated the way we are, and the more glory to him.
But please, Mr. Kyprianou, do not destroy us. We have
stood our ground and defended ourselves. We do not
ask you to reverse your decisions; we ask you to correct
them in the light of facts. We ask for your compassion
for people who have fought for their liberty for 20 years,
for people who have been buried in common graves just
because they happened to be Turks; yet they did not
submit.
103. Please understand us: we are not trying to destroy anything. We are trying to prevent our destruction as one of the peopleS of Cyprus, as one of the cofounders of the Republic of Cyprus, and we cannot
accept the fact that just because Archbishop Makarious, by force of arms, destroyed the partnership in
1963 we therefore have no right at all to claim justice
from you.
104. Mr. Kyprianou lives under the impression that
we are for partition. I assure you again that we do not

have any such intention or any such plan. I ask him to
state again publicly that the decision of the Greek Cypriot I-Iouse-adecision which is still valid, to the effect
that the struggle shall continue until the union of Cyprus
with Greece is achieved-has been wiped from the
books, that he does not want the union of Cyprus with
Greece and that he agrees that the national guarantees
against it shall continue. I invite him to do that, and
I invite him to the table once again.
105. If I have taken more of your time than I should,
I repeat, I rely on your compassion and understanding
and on the fact that we are one of the two sides in
Cyprus, one that has been silenced for years. I trustthat
you will therefore forgive my indulgence. I thank you,
Mr. Prisident, and all the members of the Council for
having allowed me to speak.
The meet&

rose at 1.30 p.m.

NOTE
’ UnitedNations,Treaty Series, vol.

382, No. 5475.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore
or write to: United Nations, Sales Sectian. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans la librairies et les agences depositaires du
monde entier. Informez-vous
auprh de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
a : Nations Unies. Section
des ventes, New York ou Get&e.
KAK

IIOXY’IHTh

U3fiAHHR

OPl-AHARAIUiZi

OIi%ELUUiEHHhIX

HAIIHR

&bAaHHSl Opramisauttn
06ae~mHeRHbls HaunR sg*aWo “Y”HTb
Is KHHXHbIX mwastinax
f4 arenrc~aax
no *cex pafionax
runpa. HaBOnHTe cnpamtn
06 n3naHHRX
B
eametd mwxxio~
marasrtae
HRH ~HIUHT~ no anpecy:
Opratnmaum
OVbennneHnbax
HaumR. C~KUHR no nponame
HaaatinH.
Hbio-MopIc HJWXeHeBa.
COMO

CONSECUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas esdn en venta en libretias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas partes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o didjase a: Naciones Unidas. Seccicin de Ventas,
Nueva York o Oinebra.

Litho in United

Nations,

New York

00300

90-61313-Jaauaty

1993-2.050
