S/PV.8301

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8301

st meeting
Friday, 29 June 2018, 10.10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Polyanskiy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Córdova Soria
Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Djédjé
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Mr. Gebrehiwot
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Alotaibi
Ms. Van Baak
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Lewicki
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Clay
Ms. Eckels-Currie

Agenda
Peacebuilding and sustaining peace
Report of the Peacebuilding Commission on its eleventh session (S/2018/83)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-20266 (E)
*1820266*

S/PV.8301

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peacebuilding and sustaining peace
Report of the peacebuilding Commission on its
eleventh session (S/2018/83)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the following briefers to participate
in this meeting: His Excellency Mr. Cho Tae-yul,
Permanent Representative of the Republic of Korea,
in his capacity as former Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission, and His Excellency Mr. Ion Jinga,
Permanent Representative of Romania, in his capacity
as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2018/83, which contains the report of the
Peacebuilding Commission on its eleventh session.
I now give the floor to Mr. Cho Tae-yul.
Mr. Cho Tae-yul: I thank you, Mr. President, for
inviting me to the Security Council, in my capacity
as former Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission,
to present the annual report of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) on its eleventh session (S/2018/83).
Since the adoption of the twin resolutions on
the review of the peacebuilding architecture in 2016
(resolutions 2282 (2016) and Generaal Assembly
resolution 70/262) and the Secretary-General’s strong
commitment to peacebuilding and sustaining peace, the
political momentum for improving the activity of the
Peacebuilding Commission has been growing. Taking
advantage of that hard-won momentum, the Commission
continued to work hard in the past year to use its
convening role to mobilize relevant stakeholders within
and outside the United Nations and to assist countries
and regions, in line with its mandate in pursuing their
peacebuilding priorities, by way of an integrated,
strategic and coherent approach to peacebuilding and
sustaining peace. I would like to highlight some of the
achievements made in the past year.
First, as an advisory body to the Security Council,
the Peacebuilding Commission continued to make
2/6

29/06/2018

efforts to improve the quality of its advice to enrich
the Council’s deliberations, when requested. For that
reason, the interaction and dynamics between the PBC
and the Council seemed to improve, as the Council
recognized the importance of the convening role of
the Commission last year on a number of regional and
country-specific issues, including the Sahel region,
the Central African Republic, Liberia and GuineaBissau. Such requests provided an opportunity for the
Commission to show that, given its role of convening
diverse actors, including host Governments, United
Nations agencies, international financial institutions,
civil society and, where relevant, private sector actors,
it can provide comprehensive advice to the Council.
For instance, in the case of Burundi, the Commission
presented to the Council the socioeconomic dimensions
of the country, while maintaining a channel of
communication with the Burundian Government.
As for Liberia, the Commission helped to develop a
peacebuilding plan for the country in preparation for
the transition ahead of the withdrawal of the United
Nations Mission in Liberia.
On the Sahel, the Council emphasised the
importance of the Commission’s convening role to
mobilize relevant stakeholders in collaboration with
the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel, with a view to advancing the implementation of
the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel.
To that end, the Commission held several meetings on
the Sahel last year and engaged with the African Union
High Representative for Mali and the Sahel, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for West
Africa and the Sahel, the Permanent Secretary of the
Group of Five for the Sahel, the European Union Special
Representative for the Sahel and the Deputy SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, among others. An
informal interactive dialogue with the Council was also
held to discuss the regional peacebuilding challenges
in the Sahel and the Lake Chad basin. In my capacity
as Chair of the PBC, I attended the meeting in Chad
of the Ministerial Coordination Platform for the Sahel,
to identify ways by which the PBC can support the
efforts of the countries in the Sahel in making progress
towards development and stability, the results of which
I shared with the Council last year (see S/PV.7976).
The PBC also held a joint meeting with the
Economic and Social Council to focus on the social and
economic dimensions of the Sahel’s multidimensional
challenges. That was also an attempt by the PBC to play
18-20266

29/06/2018

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

its bridging role among the relevant intergovernmental
United Nations principal organs and to pursue an
integrated and coherent approach to peacebuilding and
sustaining peace within its mandate.
Secondly, in addition to the good work of
the existing country-specific configurations, the
Commission expanded its work by considering, in the
Organizational Committee, other countries and regions.
Most notably, the PBC started to assist the Gambia, upon
its request, at a critical time of transition by sustaining
international attention and supporting the country,
which was not on the Commission’s formal agenda,
after the Security Council stopped deliberations on its
situation. After visiting the Gambia with the Assistant
Secretary-General of the Peacebuilding Support Office
and the Permanent Representative of the Gambia, I
convened a series of meetings on the country with PBC
members and senior officials from the United Nations,
international financial institutions and civil society
to discuss the peacebuilding priorities of the Gambia,
with the Gambian national authorities clearly in the
driver’s seat.
The Commission also for the first time deliberated
on Solomon Islands, Colombia and Sri Lanka, upon their
request. After becoming eligible to receive resources
from the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF), those countries
came to the PBC to discuss their peacebuilding priorities.
The meetings illustrated how countries eligible for the
PBF can use the PBC as a platform for securing global
political support for their peacebuilding priorities.
The PBC has also been increasingly taking on a
regional approach, as the challenges faced by certain
countries are intertwined with those of other countries
in the region, making it increasingly important to
address the issues with a regional, cross-border
approach. As I mentioned earlier, last year we discussed
the Sahel region, at the request of the Security Council,
as well as the Great Lakes region, with the consent of
the countries concerned.
To better assist countries in building and sustaining
peace, the Commission has also been strengthening its
partnerships with key stakeholders within and outside
of the United Nations, such as international financial
institutions, regional organizations, civil society and,
where relevant, the private sector. For instance, in
June last year, I led a delegation of PBC members to
the World Bank, where we met with the President and
other senior officials of the Bank and members of the

S/PV. 8301

Executive Board to discuss ways to assist the countries
and regions considered by the PBC. The PBC and World
Bank later issued a joint statement on holding a meeting
on an annual basis, and the Commission should make
use of such annual meetings to help mobilize resources
for the countries supported by the PBC.
In December, I also led a delegation of the
Commission to Addis Ababa to discuss ways to
reinforce cooperation between the Commission and the
African Union. Given that regional organizations and
subregional organizations are increasingly playing a
leading role in building and sustaining peace in their
respective regions, the Commission will continue to
strengthen its partnerships with those organizations
so as to gain a better understanding of the situation
on the ground, while enhancing the coherence and
coordination of international efforts in order to assist
countries with their peacebuilding priorities.
The convening role of the PBC has also created space
to engage with civil society organizations. Last year, in
the discussions on Colombia, Solomon Islands and Sri
Lanka, local civil society representatives contributed to
the Commission’s deliberations by sharing their views
on what peacebuilding and sustaining peace meant
in practice.
Before I conclude my remarks, I wish to make a
couple of points on how the Peacebuilding Commission
can work more closely with the Security Council.
First, the Commission’s efforts to advise the
Council can be more effective if its work is coordinated
with the activities of the Council. For that reason, the
Commission should continue to align its work with the
Council’s calendar and engage with the relevant actors
to gather diverse perspectives in the months preceding
the relevant Council meetings.
Secondly, the Security Council and the PBC can
consider working more closely during and following
transitions, especially in the transition related to the
withdrawal of a peacekeeping operation. The PBC
could also look at a country situation that is coming
off the Council’s agenda, at the request of the country.
The Commission can help to maintain the international
community’s support, while assisting the country’s
efforts to maintain stability and build and sustain
peace by helping to implement its peacebuilding plans,
mobilize resources and promote coordination and
coherence of international assistance.

18-202663/6

S/PV.8301

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

I would like to conclude by congratulating
Ambassador Jinga, Permanent Representative of
Romania and current Chair of the PBC, for the
excellent work done so far, and by thanking the
Peacebuilding Support Office for its dedicated
support to the Commission. The Republic of Korea,
in its capacity as Vice-Chair of the Commission
this year, remains committed to fully supporting the
Peacebuilding Commission.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank Mr. Cho
Tae-yul for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Jinga.
Mr. Jinga: At the outset, I wish to congratulate
the Republic of Korea, and Ambassador Cho Tae-yul
in particular, for the excellent work he did as Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) in 2017. As we
have just heard, under the leadership of the Republic
of Korea the Commission made good progress in
enhancing the effectiveness of the Peacebuilding
Commission and in improving its advisory role to
the Security Council. I wish to focus my intervention
on what the Commission has been doing this year to
continue on that positive track.
The Sahel region is a clear priority for our work
region. As was just mentioned by my predecessor, last
year the Security Council emphasized the importance
of the convening role of the PBC in mobilizing deeper
commitment and partnership among the United
Nations, the countries of Sahel and other international
and regional partners, with a view to advancing the
implementation of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel, in collaboration with the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel. In
March I attended the sixth meeting of the Ministerial
Coordination Platform for the Sahel in Chad. The
meeting stressed the need for a holistic approach
to address the multidimensional threats facing the
countries of the Sahel region and their people and
called on regional and international partners to act with
greater synergy and unity of purpose.
To further that objective, the Commission’s annual
session, which is scheduled to take place in the fall
this year, will focus exclusively on the Sahel. The PBC
will bring together Member States, representatives of
countries of the Sahel, senior officials of the United
Nations, including the Secretary-General and Deputy
Secretary-General, and representatives of regional
organizations, international financial institutions
4/6

29/06/2018

and civil society organizations. The purpose of that
important event will be to discuss ways of mobilizing
deeper commitments and partnerships in support of
efforts to build and sustain peace in the Sahel under
the umbrella of the updated Integrated Strategy for the
Sahel that the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for West Africa and the Sahel, Mr. Chambas,
will present in July.
The annual session is a good example of how the
convening role of the PBC can improve its advisory
role. It is through its engagement with all the relevant
stakeholders to discuss broad peacebuilding issues
that the PBC can provide comprehensive advice to
the relevant United Nations bodies and support their
deliberations. To do that in an effective way, the
Commission will further enhance its working methods
and strengthen cooperation with key partners. With
regard to the advisory role of the PBC to the Council,
most important — and I wish to support a point raised
earlier by my predecessor — the Commission must
better time its calendar of work based on the activities
of the Security Council. Early preparation is key if
we wish to provide strategic advice to the Council, if
requested, when possibl a couple of weeks ahead of
Security Council meetings on specific issues. At the
same time, the PBC must submit advice to the Security
that would complement advice the Council receives
from other sources.
The Commission is also working towards further
strengthening its relationship with the African Union.
On 18 July, on the margins of the Security Council
meeting with the African Union Peace and Security
Council, the PBC will convene a joint event with the
Peace and Security Council to explore opportunities
for collaboration.
Its engagement with the Gambia is another
important area of work for the Commission. Upon
the request of the Government of the Gambia, the
PBC continues to provide a forum for the country
to engage with the international community. Two
months ago we convened a high-level meeting,
chaired by the State Secretary of Romania, as Chair
of the PBC, which was attended by the President and
the Minister of Finance of the Gambia, the European
Union Commissioner for International Cooperation
and Development, the President of the Commission
of the Economic Community of West African States,
the Permanent Observer of the African Union, as
well as senior officials of the Department of Political
18-20266

29/06/2018

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Affairs, the United Nations Development Programme
and the Peacebuilding Support Office. The meeting
provided an opportunity for the Gambia to present
its peacebuilding priorities ahead of the successful
International Conference for the Gambia, which took
place in Brussels last May, and demonstrated once again
the convening role of the Peacebuilding Commission.
In addition, the existing country-specific
configurations — for Burundi, the Central African
Republic, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia and Sierra
Leone — continue to do important work in support
of longer-term peacebuilding and sustaining peace
strategies. At the beginning of this week, the PBC
held a substantive meeting at which we heard reports
from the Chairs of the country-specific configurations
and a briefing by the Assistant Secretary-General
for Peacebuilding Support on progress in enhancing
synergies between PBC and Peacebuilding Fund.
Lastly, I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing the informal interactive dialogue that will
take place today. A discussion on the advisory role
that the PBC can play when the Council is considering
the formulation, review or drawdown of peacekeeping
operations and special political mission mandates is
very timely and important. I look forward to a fruitful
discussion and to further strengthening the relationship
between Council and Commission.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank Mr. Jinga
for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): We sincerely thank His Excellency Mr. Ion
Jinga, Permanent Representative of Romania to the
United Nations and current Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission, and His Excellency Mr. Cho Tae-yul,
Permanent Representative of the Republic of Korea to
the United Nations and former Chair of the Commission,
for today’s informative briefings on the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission in 2017.
I shall deliver my statement on behalf
of the three African Member States on the
Security Council — Ethiopia, Côte d’Ivoire and
Equatorial Guinea.
Our group congratulates the Peacebuilding
Commission on its consistent efforts to maintain
peace and security, while always respecting the

S/PV. 8301

sovereignty of countries. As experience in our brother
countries of Côte d’Ivoire, Liberia and other African
countries has shown, supporting the sovereignty of
countries is the cornerstone of peacebuilding. Such
support is crucial in order to ensure an effective and
permanent transition from peacekeeping operations to
peacebuilding initiatives, which helps build resilience
and foster sustainable development in countries and
their institutions. Given the huge peace and security
challenges we now face, prioritizing conflict prevention
is not just an option, it is an obligation. The concepts
of peacekeeping and peacebuilding are perfectly in line
with that important priority, and they have certainly
caused a paradigm shift in the way we ought to address
peace and security issues. It has been underscored
time and again that peace and security, development
and human rights are inextricably linked. Closer
collaboration among the various organs of the United
Nations and other stakeholders is therefore needed to
build peaceful and inclusive societies.
Addressing institution-building and ensuring
political and operational consistency throughout the
United Nations system is therefore absolutely essential
to ensure that conflict, peacekeeping and peacebuilding
are priorities for the Organization as it conducts its
work and activities. That is basically what the reforms
of the Secretary-General seek to address, and the
African members of the Security Council fully support
the reform process under way. We also believe that the
outcome of the reform will enable the United Nations
to develop additional capacity to comprehensively
respond to today’s security challenges, including, inter
alia, maximally reducing the duplication of structures
and overlapping mandates and ensuring greater
transparency and responsibility and better planning
and budgeting. We think that it is important for the
Security Council to understand the catalysing value of
the Peacebuilding Fund.
Peacebuilding and peacekeeping are essential
to the implementation of development programmes
and sustainable peace and security on the African
continent. In that regard, we commend and encourage
the efforts that have been made on focusing on conflict
prevention and post-conflict stablization, such as those
of the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework
on Sustainable Development and Peace and Security
and the subsequent memorandum of understanding
between the African Union Commission and the
Peacebuilding Support Office. The implementation of

18-202665/6

S/PV.8301

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

the Peace Fund by the African Union demonstrates the
commitment of African countries to peace and security,
both on the African continent and internationally. Due
to the complex nature of conflicts, however, ensuring
the maintenance of peace and conflict prevention in a
sustainable manner requires international cooperation.
Similarly, the United Nations cannot address the large
number of international security challenges alone. In
order to achieve the ultimate goal of establishing solid
and lasting world peace, it is necessary to strengthen
relations among diverse stakeholders, including
regional and subregional organizations, international
financial institutions, national Governments, various
civil society groups and private organizations, in all
aspects of conflict cycles. It also entails prevention,
peacekeeking, special political missions, conflict
resolution and peacebuilding.
We take this opportunity to comend the work of the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel in

6/6

29/06/2018

supporting regional strategies in the Sahel and the Lake
Chad basin, as well as its work in the Great Lakes region.
Accordingly, we propose considering similar initiatives
in other areas of the continent that require them. Central
Africa, for example, hosts two peacekeeping missions,
and we have seen an increase in terrorist activity and
transnational organized crime by armed groups, both
on the ground and at sea, as well as incidents of violent
extremism. We believe that the Central African region
requires the same level of attention as other regions
in Africa, so as to ensure cooperation to support
peacebuilding. In that regard, we believe that one of
the added values of the Peacebuilding Commission is
to complement the reports of the Secretary-General by
identifying blind spots and gaps in the implementation
of regional strategies aimed at peacebuilding, as well
as potential risks related to dedicating resources to a
single region, country or initiative.
The meeting rose at 10.35 a.m.

18-20266
