S/PRST/2009/23

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
22 July 2009
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 6165th meeting of the Security Council, held on 22 July 2009, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Post-conflict
peacebuilding”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council recalls the Statement of its President
(PRST/2008/16), and emphasizes the critical importance of post-conflict
peacebuilding as the foundation for building sustainable peace and
development in the aftermath of conflict.
“The Security Council welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict (S/2009/304) as an
important contribution towards a more effective and coherent international
response to post-conflict peacebuilding. The Council also welcomes the
Secretary-General’s strong commitment expressed in the report to improve the
United Nations’ peacebuilding efforts, and urges him to pursue these
objectives.
“The Security Council emphasizes the importance of national ownership
and the need for national authorities to take responsibility as soon as possible
for re-establishing the institutions of Government, restoring the rule of law,
revitalizing the economy, reforming the security sector, providing basic
services and other key peacebuilding needs. The Council underscores the vital
role of the United Nations in supporting national authorities to develop an
early strategy, in close consultation with international partners, to address
these priorities; and encourages international partners to align their financial,
technical and political support behind this strategy.
“The Security Council stresses the need, in countries emerging from
conflict, to draw upon and develop existing national capacities at the earliest
possible stage, and the importance of rapidly deployable civilian expertise to
help achieve this, including, where appropriate, relevant expertise from the
region. The Council, in this regard, welcomes the recommendation of the
Secretary-General for a review to be undertaken to analyse how the United
Nations and international community can help to broaden and deepen the pool
of civilian experts, giving particular attention to mobilising capacities from
developing countries and especially women.

09-41937 (E) 220709

*0941937*

S/PRST/2009/23

“The Security Council recognizes that post-conflict situations require
from the outset experienced and skilled leadership on the ground with effective
support teams, and requests the United Nations to increase its efforts in this
regard. The Council welcomes the Secretary-General’s efforts to enhance the
authority and accountability of senior United Nations representatives in
carrying out their duties and responsibilities.
“The Security Council emphasizes the need for the United Nations
system to strengthen strategic partnerships with the World Bank and other
international financial institutions, and to complete by the end of 2009 the
clarification of roles and responsibilities for key peacebuilding needs and to
keep these under regular review, so that the appropriate expertise is generated
to achieve a timely and predictable response.
“The Security Council recalls its resolution 1645 (2005) and recognizes
the important role of the Peacebuilding Commission in promoting and
supporting an integrated and coherent approach to peacebuilding, welcomes
the progress it has achieved, calls on it to further enhance its advisory role and
support for countries on its agenda and looks forward to the recommendations
of the 2010 review of the Commission’s founding resolutions on how its role
can continue to be enhanced.
“The Security Council recognizes the critical importance of rapid,
flexible and predictable funding for post-conflict peacebuilding. The Council
urges Member States to help achieve this, building on the recommendations of
the report and in particular increasing the impact of the Peacebuilding Fund,
improving donor practices to make funding faster and more flexible and
making use of in-country multi-donor trust funds, which are designed to
accommodate the funding requirements of donors.
“The Security Council reaffirms that ending impunity is essential if a
society recovering from conflict is to come to terms with past abuses
committed against civilians affected by armed conflict and to prevent future
such abuses. The Council notes that justice and reconciliation mechanisms can
promote not only individual responsibility for serious crimes, but also peace,
truth, reconciliation and the rights of victims.
“The Security Council, in accordance with its resolutions 1325 (2000)
and 1820 (2008), underlines the key role women and young persons can play
in re-establishing the fabric of society and stresses the need for their
involvement in the development and implementation of post-conflict strategies
in order to take account of their perspectives and needs.
“The Security Council reaffirms the role of regional and sub-regional
organizations in the prevention, management, and resolution of conflicts in
accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, and the
need to strengthen their capacity in post-conflict peacebuilding.
“The Security Council recognizes the importance of launching
peacebuilding assistance at the earliest possible stage. The Council affirms the
importance of early consideration of peacebuilding in its own deliberations
and of ensuring coherence between peacemaking, peacekeeping, peacebuilding
and development to achieve an early and effective response to post-conflict

2

09-41937

S/PRST/2009/23

situations. The Council will strive to apply this integrated approach and
requests the Secretary-General to intensify his efforts in this regard.
“The Security Council invites the Secretary-General to report within
twelve months to the Security Council and the General Assembly on progress
achieved in fulfilling his agenda for action to improve the United Nations’
peacebuilding efforts, taking into consideration the views of the Peacebuilding
Commission.”

09-41937

3
