United Nations

S/PV.5086

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-ninth year

5086

th meeting
Tuesday, 23 November 2004, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Danforth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (United States of America)

Members:

Algeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Benin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Philippines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Romania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .

Mr. Katti
Mr. Lucas
Mr. Zinsou
Mr. Valle
Mr. Donoso
Mr. Guan Jian
Mr. Duclos
Mr. Trautwein
Mr. Khalid
Mr. Lacanilao
Mr. Motoc
Mr. Karev
Mr. Yáñez-Barnuevo
Sir Emyr Jones Parry

Agenda
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Pesons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the
Former Yugoslavia since 1991
International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring
States between 1 January and 31 December 1994
Letter dated 23 November 2004 from the President of the International
Tribunal for the Prosecution of Pesons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former
Yugoslavia since 1991, addresed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2004/897)
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

04-62120 (E)

*0462120*

S/PV.5086

Letter dated 19 November 2004 from the President of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide
and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in
the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and
Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States
between 1 January and 31 December 1994 addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2004/921)

2

S/PV.5086

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.

with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
the Former Yugoslavia since 1991
International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution
of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other
Serious Violations of International Humanitarian
Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and
Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and
Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory
of Neighbouring States between 1 January and
31 December 1994
Letter dated 23 November 2004 from the
President of the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former
Yugoslavia since 1991 addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2004/897)
Letter dated 19 November 2004 from the
President of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and
Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide
and Other Such Violations Committed in the
Territory of Neighbouring States between
1 January and 31 December 1994 addressed to
the President of the Security Council
(S/2004/921)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia,
Rwanda and Serbia and Montenegro, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance

There being no objection, it is so decided.
On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to His Excellency Mr. Miomir Žužul,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Croatia, and His
Excellency Mr. Zoran Loncar, Minister of Public
Administration and Local Self-Government of the
Republic of Serbia, on behalf of Serbia and
Montenegro.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kusljugić
(Bosnia and Herzegovina), Mr. Žužul (Croatia),
Mr. Ngoga (Rwanda) and Mr. Loncar (Serbia and
Montenegro) took the seats reserved for them at
the side of the Council Chamber.
The President: I shall take it that the Security
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of
its provisional rules of procedure to Judge Theodor
Meron, President of the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia
since 1991.
It is so decided.
I invite Judge Meron to take a seat at the Council
table.
I shall take it that the Security Council decides to
extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure to Judge Erik Møse, President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan
Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such
Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring
States between 1 January and 31 December 1994.
It is so decided.
I invite Judge Møse to take a seat at the Council
table.
I shall take it that the Security Council agrees to
extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure to Ms. Carla Del Ponte, Prosecutor
of the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of

3

S/PV.5086

International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991.
It is so decided.
I invite Prosecutor Del Ponte to take a seat at the
Council table.
I shall take it that the Security Council agrees to
extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure to Mr. Hassan Bubacar Jallow,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide
and Other Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the
Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January
and 31 December 1994.
It is so decided.
I invite Prosecutor Jallow to take a seat at the
Council table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
I should like to draw the attention of the members
to photocopies of letters circulated on 18 and
22 November 2004, respectively, from the President of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
and the President of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda, which will be issued as
documents of the Security Council under the symbols
S/2004/897 and S/2004/921.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by the President and the Prosecutor of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and
by the President and the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. Following those
briefings, I will give the floor to Council members who
wish to make comments or ask questions.
As there is no list of speakers for the Council
members, I would like to invite them to indicate to the
secretariat if they wish to take the floor.
I now give the floor to Judge Theodor Meron,
President of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia.

4

Judge Meron: It is a great honour to address this
body in presenting the second report of the President of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), pursuant to paragraph 6 of
Security Council resolution 1534 (2004). I am
particularly pleased, Sir, to speak here today under
your presidency.
It has now been slightly more than six months
since I delivered to the Council, as specified by
resolution 1534 (2004), assessments by me and by the
Prosecutor of the Tribunal’s progress towards the
implementation of the completion strategy.
Let me turn first to the docket statistics. Since its
establishment the Tribunal has completed trials in 18
cases involving 36 accused. A further 17 accused have
pleaded guilty, three of whom entered pleas mid-trial.
The Tribunal’s three Trial Chambers continue to
operate at full capacity, handling six cases
simultaneously. Currently, four trials are being heard.
Two other cases are currently in the judgement-writing
stage, with the first due to be rendered before the end
of December 2004, the second in January 2005. The
Brdjanin Trial Chamber rendered its judgement on
1 September 2004. The Tribunal has thus completed, or
is holding in the first instance, proceedings involving
60 accused in 24 trials and 15 separate guilty-plea
proceedings.
While many factors are important in determining
the Tribunal’s ability to adhere to the schedule detailed
in the completion strategy, several factors stand out as
particularly important: the Tribunal’s ability to refer
cases to competent national jurisdictions for trial;
improved cooperation with the Tribunal by States in
the former Yugoslavia; and a continued focus of
Tribunal resources on the most senior-level accused.
First, I will address the issue of the Tribunal’s
ability to refer cases to competent national jurisdictions
for trial. Transferring some of the docket out of The
Hague has the potential to reduce the Tribunal’s
workload in a meaningful way. Accordingly, the
adoption of rule 11 bis of the Tribunal’s Rules of
Procedure and Evidence gave Trial Chambers the
power to refer an indictment to the authorities of a
State in which the crime was committed, in which the
accused was arrested or which has jurisdiction, and
which is willing and adequately prepared to accept the
case. In determining whether to refer an indictment, a
Trial Chamber must consider the gravity of the crimes

S/PV.5086

charged and the level of responsibility of the accused,
in accordance with the Security Council’s intention that
the Tribunal retain jurisdiction over the highest level
defendants and the most serious crimes. Trial
Chambers may not, of course, refer cases to
jurisdictions in which the accused might not be
accorded a fair trial or in which the death penalty is a
possible consequence of the trial.
The Prosecutor has already begun to file motions
for the transfer of cases to domestic jurisdictions under
rule 11 bis. To date, she has filed six motions involving
10 accused, requesting that seven be transferred to the
courts of Bosnia and Herzegovina, two to Croatia and
one to the State Union of Serbia and Montenegro. A
Trial Chamber has been tasked to review those requests
for 11 bis transfer, and, when it ultimately deems some
or all of those requests to be appropriate, the resulting
transfers will be of real assistance in keeping the
Tribunal on schedule for compliance with the
completion strategy.
Using the 11 bis process to integrate Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Croatia and Serbia and Montenegro into
the process of bringing offenders to justice will have
benefits that go well beyond a reduction of the
Tribunal’s caseload and promotion of the completion
strategy. Involving those national Governments in the
process will bring reconciliation and justice to the
region, as well as promote the development of a
commitment to the rule of law. National courts can
play this role, however, only if trials are not used for
political purposes and if they meet international
standards of due process and fair trial. To that end,
other members of the international community have
begun lending support to the fledgling Sarajevo
tribunal. Substantial additional support is still required,
however, as the Security Council recognized in calling
for further financial support in paragraph 10 of
resolution 1534 (2004).
The States of the former Yugoslavia are in
varying stages of readiness to accept transfers of cases
from the Tribunal. A special chamber of Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s State Court will soon be ready to accept
transferred cases of lower and intermediate level
officials. Officials from the Tribunal have provided
substantial support to the Office of the High
Representative with respect to creating the special
chamber. The Bosnian authorities expect that the
chamber will be operational by January 2005, and the

Tribunal is prepared to begin transferring appropriate
cases as soon as practicable.
The Tribunal is engaged in a number of initiatives
designed to expedite the process of preparing for
eventual referral of cases from the ICTY to Croatia and
to Serbia and Montenegro. For example, the Tribunal
organized an extensive programme of six training
seminars for Croatian judges and prosecutors who are
likely to take part in the trial of war crimes cases. That
programme, organized on the initiative of the Minister
of Justice of Croatia, consisted of seminars conducted
by the Tribunal’s officials, held in the late spring and
the summer of 2004 and repeated in the autumn. The
seminars focused on the jurisprudence of the Tribunal
and on international humanitarian law, with the aim of
strengthening the familiarity of Croatian judges and
prosecutors with those subjects and of improving their
ability to try serious violations of international
humanitarian law.
During my first official visit to Croatia, in early
November 2004, I was impressed by the
professionalism of the Supreme Court of Croatia and of
the county court in Zagreb. I am optimistic about their
growing capability to try war crimes cases according to
international human rights and due process standards. I
have been advised by the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) mission to Croatia, in a
letter dated 12 November 2004, that a limited number
of transferred cases could likely be dealt with
adequately by a limited number of courts in Croatia,
but that the transfer of any significant number of cases
from the ICTY to Croatia could overburden the
Croatian judiciary, given its present capacity.
The Tribunal has also hosted a week-long visit,
organized by the United Nations Development
Programme, of seven judges from the newly
established Department for War Crimes of the Belgrade
district court, commonly known as the Special Court
for War Crimes. That court is developing important
capability. The aim of the visit was to facilitate the
transfer of knowledge and experience from the practice
of the Tribunal and to establish channels of
communication between the Special Court and the
Tribunal. Upon the request of the Prosecutor, a Trial
Chamber is considering the transfer of one case to
Serbia and Montenegro.
A second critical factor affecting the Tribunal’s
ability to adhere to the completion strategy is the

5

S/PV.5086

degree of cooperation from States of the former
Yugoslavia. At the moment, there is wide variation in
the several States’ willingness to cooperate with the
Tribunal. While the cooperation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina with the Tribunal remains very good in all
areas, there is no cooperation on the part of Republika
Srpska. There has been no serious effort by the
Republika Srpska authorities to locate and arrest
fugitives, and the issue of missing and possibly hidden
documentation is still not resolved. Croatia’s
cooperation with the Tribunal is good in all domains
except for the arrest of Ante Gotovina, the sole
remaining fugitive from justice from Croatia. The need
to arrest Gotovina and deliver him up to The Hague
continues to be an issue of the highest importance, and
one that should have been resolved a long time ago. As
for Serbia and Montenegro, despite the recent transfer
of Ljubisa Beara and some progress on the granting of
waivers for witnesses to be authorized to testify, the
ICTY remains gravely concerned over that
Government’s lack of cooperation, in particular its
unwillingness to arrest fugitives. I agree with the
Prosecutor that the general cooperation of that State
with the Tribunal, especially with regard to taking
measures against the intimidation of witnesses and
against the pressuring of judges and prosecutors, is
particularly important.
Thirdly, the Tribunal will need to continue to
follow Security Council resolution 1534 (2004), in
paragraph 5 of which the Council called on the
Tribunal,
“in reviewing and confirming any new
indictments, to ensure that any such indictments
concentrate on the most senior leaders suspected
of being most responsible for crimes within the
[Tribunal’s] jurisdiction”.
Rule 28 (a) of the Tribunal’s Rules of Procedure
and Evidence implements that directive by requiring
the Bureau, a body comprising the President and VicePresident of the Tribunal and the presiding judges of
the three Trial Chambers, to confirm that every new
indictment submitted by the Prosecutor concentrates on
one or more of the most senior leaders suspected of
being most responsible for crimes within the
jurisdiction of the Tribunal. Up to now, the Bureau has
determined under rule 28 (a) that recent indictments
have all satisfied the seniority criterion.

6

I turn now to the question of our current standing
vis-à-vis the completion strategy schedule. The May
2004 Tribunal estimates suggested that we could still
complete the trials of those accused who were in
custody or on provisional release at that time, as well
as the trial, in all probability, of the fugitive Ante
Gotovina, before the close of 2008. But I also reported
that if new indictees or current fugitives were to arrive
at The Hague and require new and separate trials, it
would become increasingly unlikely that all accused
within the custody of the Tribunal could be tried by the
end of 2008.
Since my last report to the Security Council, one
new indictment has been submitted and confirmed: that
of Goran Hadzic. He is accused of, inter alia,
perpetrating mass murders and mass deportations in his
role as President of the Serbian Autonomous District of
Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium. He remains at
large. Two more additions to the caseload come from
the arrests of Ljubisa Beara and Miroslav Bralo, two
fugitives who were already under indictment. Beara is
accused of playing a leadership role in acts of genocide
by the army of Republika Srpska at the Srebrinica
enclave. Bralo is accused of perpetrating a series of
war crimes including rape, murder and torture while he
was a member of the ethnic Croat HVO Jokers in the
Lasva valley region of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Both
accused have now made their first appearances before
the Tribunal.
Those new additions to the Tribunal’s docket do
not require significant revision of the estimate I
presented to the Council in May 2004. At present, we
still estimate that — assuming a reasonable rate of
granting pending and anticipated 11 bis applications —
the Tribunal can complete the trials of all accused
currently in custody, including those on provisional
release, as well as the trial of Gotovina — provided
that he is transferred to The Hague before 2006 and is
tried together with Cermak and Markac — before the
close of 2008. But any further growth in the trial
docket, including the capture of Radovan Karadzic and
Ratko Mladic, or the arrest of any of the four Serbian
generals indicted in October 2003, would make
achievement of the 2008 deadline entirely dependent
on the ability to dispose of some pending or future
cases other than by a full trial at the Tribunal, whether
by guilty pleas or by 11 bis transfers. The new
indictments anticipated in the coming weeks, which
might result in four new trials, will further diminish the

S/PV.5086

likelihood of meeting the 2008 deadline if they
culminate in new arrivals, either arrests or voluntary
surrenders. We do not expect any of these new cases to
be appropriate for rule 11 bis referral. There may or
may not be the possibility of guilty pleas in these
cases, but that is a matter between the accused and the
Prosecutor.
This prediction rests, of course, on certain
important assumptions. Following the results of the
election of permanent judges on 19 November 2004,
we can assume that trials pending in November 2005
will continue uninterrupted. However, the Security
Council might be required to extend the mandate of
one permanent judge for a few months in order to
complete his case. Moreover, it is impossible to predict
delays related to the health of the accused or counsel or
other obstacles to the orderly conduct of trials.
Various factors bear on the Tribunal’s future
ability to implement the completion strategy
successfully. First, it is absolutely essential that the
Tribunal have adequate personnel to stay abreast of its
steadily increasing workload. But that basic
prerequisite for effective and fair adjudication is
seriously threatened by the current hiring freeze, which
not only limits the Tribunal’s ability to take on new
staff to meet its increasing workload but also forbids
hiring even to replace essential personnel who leave
the Tribunal. It is difficult to overstate the danger that
this poses to the mission of the Tribunal. Without
adequate assistance from legal officers, the time
required for the judges of the Tribunal to hear and
decide cases will increase dramatically. The current
shortage of essential staff throughout the Tribunal may
make it impossible to continue courtroom hearings in
six trials simultaneously.
I have myself been involved, during the past few
months, in attempts to persuade Governments to pay
their arrears. These efforts have had considerable
success. I wish, at this point, to express my sincere
appreciation to the Russian Federation and the United
States for having paid in full, in the last few months,
their assessments for 2004. This means that all five
permanent members of the Council have paid their
2004 dues in full. That is a welcome reflection of a
strong political will to see the Tribunal succeed, and it
provides a salutary example. The freeze must be lifted
without further delay if damage to the credibility of
international justice and far greater expenses are to be
avoided.

Secondly, the Tribunal must be able to focus its
resources on trying the most senior accused suspected
of being most responsible for crimes within the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction within the time frame of the
completion strategy. That requires the development of
domestic institutions in the States of the former
Yugoslavia capable of receiving eligible cases referred
under rule 11 bis. The schedule would also be
positively affected in the event that additional accused
plead guilty. Improved cooperation by Member States
and appropriate measures to avoid interruptions due to
the expiration of the term of office of ad litem judges
in June 2005 would further assist the Tribunal’s ability
to fulfil the goals of the completion strategy. It should
also be mentioned, as I wrote to the Legal Counsel,
that it would be helpful for elections of ad litem judges
to be held as early as possible in 2005, so as to enable
the Tribunal to achieve the most timely and efficient
organization of trials possible.
I have addressed some of the difficulties in
attempting to meet the Tribunal’s completion strategy.
While taking those difficulties into account, I wish to
make clear that the Tribunal is fully committed to the
completion strategy and will not be complacent as it
makes every effort to successfully achieve the goals of
the strategy.
In this context, the Tribunal has a firm resolve to
do its utmost to conclude all trials at the first instance
by 2008. I was encouraged by the recognition by
members of the General Assembly, when the Assembly
took up the ICTY annual report on 15 November 2004,
of the measures already taken to increase efficiency
and cost-effectiveness at the Tribunal. I should like to
inform the Council that the judges have on their agenda
additional proposed reforms which, if adopted, would
have a real impact on reducing the length of trials
while at the same time respecting due process in all
respects. I will keep members of the Council and the
membership at large informed of the additional
measures to be taken.
I have a few concluding words. Despite the vast
scope and unprecedented nature of its task, the
Tribunal has gone a long way towards achieving the
Security Council’s goal of ensuring that persons
responsible for war crimes, genocide and crimes
against humanity must answer for them in public trials
that meet the highest standards of international due
process. The jurisprudence that the Tribunal has
developed in matters of international criminal law and

7

S/PV.5086

international criminal procedure has already served as
an important resource for other war crimes tribunals
established under the aegis of the United Nations and
will no doubt provide guidance to the International
Criminal Court. Our legacy will include an impressive
corpus of decisions on substantive international
criminal law, humanitarian law, human rights and, just
as important, international criminal procedure and
evidence.
As the ICTY progresses through the most active
and productive period of its history, it continues to
send a powerful message of responsibility and
accountability to the former Yugoslavia and throughout
the international community. The Tribunal has
demonstrated that international prosecutions and trials
of war criminals under human rights and due process
are possible and credible. The Tribunal is committed to
continuing to improve its methods of work, its rules
and its procedures. But the completion strategy will not
be allowed to compromise due-process rights of the
accused or to create an impunity gap.
I repeat my past call and that of my predecessors
for each and every Member State to do its full part to
assist the work of the Tribunal. Twenty fugitives
remain at large and must be arrested. That number
includes Radovan Karadzic, Ratko Mladic and Ante
Gotovina. In this regard, I urge the Security Council to
be mindful of the risks posed to international justice in
seeming to allow fugitives the false hope that they can
outrun and outlast the Tribunal. With the end of the
Tribunal’s life cycle in sight, we must together guard
against compromising the legacy of justice, the ending
of impunity and reconciliation in the former
Yugoslavia.
The President: I thank Judge Meron for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to the President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.
Judge Møse: It is a great honour to address the
members of the Security Council. I welcome this
opportunity to present the ninth annual report of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
(S/2004/601), which was presented to the General
Assembly last week at its 53rd plenary meeting, and to
provide an assessment of the implementation of our
completion strategy, in conformity with Security
Council resolution 1534 (2004).

8

Even though only five months have elapsed since
the ICTR President and Prosecutor last appeared before
the Council, at the 4999th meeting, held on 29 June,
much has been achieved. The ICTR submitted an
updated version of its completion strategy to the
Security Council last week. I understand that this
document is now available to the members of the
Council.
It may be seen from the annual report that, during
the period under review, the ICTR delivered five trial
judgements involving nine accused. Another
judgement was delivered on 15 July 2004. That brings
the total number of trial judgements rendered by the
ICTR since the first trial started in January 1997 to 17,
involving 23 persons. The next judgement is expected
in early 2005. Never before has the judicial output
been so high.
In 2003, the ICTR commenced four new trials
involving a total of 10 accused. This was due to the
arrival of five ad litem judges that year. Security
Council resolution 1512 (2003) increased their number
to nine. The remaining four ad litem judges arrived in
Arusha in September 2004 and made it possible to start
two new trials. In 2004, we started a total of four new
trials concerning seven detainees, six of them after the
period covered in the annual report. Consequently, 25
persons are currently on trial. I would like to reiterate
our appreciation to the Security Council for having
adopted resolution 1512 (2003).
This brings me to three points that are relevant to
the implementation of our completion strategy. The
first point is that the ICTR now has a total of
completed and ongoing cases involving 48 accused.
That means that we have reached the number that was
promised in our completion strategy of April this year.
Secondly, the members of the Security Council
will recall that, in that completion strategy, it was
projected that three trials would be completed in 2004.
That aim has also been achieved. In June and July, the
Trial Chambers delivered judgements in the
Gacumbitsi and the Ndindabahizi trials. The third trial,
Muhimana, has been completed and is now at the stage
of closing arguments. Judgement is expected in early
2005.
The third point is that, according to the
completion strategy of April 2004, three trials
involving six accused would commence from May to
September this year. That projection too was

S/PV.5086

accomplished. The Simba case started on 30 August;
the Seromba case and the Military II trial commenced
on 20 September 2004.
On that basis, I am pleased to confirm that the
ICTR is on schedule. We intend to complete all trials
by 2008, as required by resolutions 1503 (2003) and
1534 (2004).
Let me now provide a more detailed assessment.
The ongoing trials involving the 25 accused may be
divided into two groups: multi-accused and singleaccused cases. Five trials are multi-accused cases,
comprising a total of 22 persons. These trials are
voluminous, complex and time-consuming, because the
prosecution and the defence will call a large number of
witnesses. I am, therefore, pleased to report that there
has been considerable progress in the Butare trial,
involving six accused, and the Military I trial, with
four accused. In both trials, the prosecution recently
closed its case after having called 59 and 82 witnesses,
respectively. The defence teams will commence their
cases in January 2005. In the Government trial, with
four accused, there are only about 12 remaining
prosecution witnesses.
The achievements in these three multi-accused
trials are significant elements in the implementation of
our completion strategy. Our experience with other
multi-accused cases shows that the presentation of the
defence case usually requires less time than the
prosecution case because of less extensive crossexamination. The two remaining multi-accused cases
are at a very early stage. The Military II trial
commenced on 20 September 2004 and has been
slowed down by illness. The Karemera et al. trial,
which started in November 2003, will commence de
novo, following a recent Appeals Chamber ruling to
that effect. Those two trials will be given priority in
2005.
The single-accused cases are less complex than
multi-accused trials and require less time. The
Gacumbitsi trial started on 28 July 2003, and
judgement was delivered on 17 June 2004 after 31 trial
days. The Ndindabahizi case commenced on
1 September 2003, with judgement on 15 July 2004
after 27 trial days. In the Muhimana trial, which started
on 29 March 2004, the parties presented their evidence
in the course of 34 trial days. As already mentioned,
judgement is expected in early 2005. Those three
recent trials confirm the Tribunal’s capacity to

complete single-accused cases in less than a year even
though the judges sitting in those cases are also
conducting multi-accused trials. Two weeks ago, the
prosecution also closed its case in the Simba trial,
which started on 30 August 2004. I should add that we
are now in the process of scheduling a new singleaccused case from early 2005.
In order to ensure maximum judicial output, it is
important to find the right balance between the multiaccused and the single-accused trials. The eight trials
currently in progress are taking place in three
courtrooms only. That makes our task difficult and
requires careful long-term planning. Single-accused
trials are normally slotted in when there are breaks in
the voluminous trials — so-called twin-tracking — or
they are heard in morning or afternoon shifts
simultaneously with other trials. We are anxious to
ensure the steady progress of the five multi-accused
trials. Once they are completed, there will be only
single-accused cases left. From then on, our task will
be easier.
During our June meeting with the Security
Council I mentioned the possibility of constructing a
fourth courtroom. The shift system implies that each
morning and afternoon session is about two hours
shorter than a full day session. More courtroom
capacity would be an important element in our
completion strategy as it would make it easier to give
priority to certain multi-accused trials and thereby
reduce the total periods necessary to complete them. In
view of the present climate of budgetary constraint, the
construction of such a courtroom and its running costs
should be based on voluntary contributions. We have
therefore been exploring that possibility with two
interested Governments.
I should also reiterate that our experience with
the Trial Committee, composed of representatives of
Chambers, the Prosecution and the Registry, continues
to be very positive. The Committee is in contact with
the various defence teams and has facilitated the trial
readiness of several cases by identifying problems and
solving them in a proactive way.
Let me emphasize — as I did in the General
Assembly last week — that the ICTR can comply with
the time frames established in Security Council
resolution 1503 (2003) only if it is provided with
sufficient resources. Unfortunately, certain Member
States have failed to pay their contributions to the two

9

S/PV.5086

ad hoc Tribunals. As a consequence, the recruitment of
new staff to the Tribunals has been frozen. So far, that
has not had any significant effect on the ICTR
completion strategy. We have been able to keep the
trials going, but the situation is becoming critical.
More than 80 staff members have left the Tribunal
since the freeze was imposed. The number of vacancies
is increasing every month. Many vacant posts are
directly linked to the judicial production of the ICTR.
Let me provide some examples, mentioned in our
updated completion strategy. As of today, there are
nine vacant posts for legal officers in the three
Chambers. Their recruitment has been put on hold as a
consequence of the freeze. Those nine legal officers
would have worked under the direct supervision of the
judges. Several permanent and ad litem judges have no
associate legal officers. The judges are sharing legal
officers through ad hoc arrangements. This situation
cannot continue. The Prosecutor will inform the
Council of the serious problems that his office faces.
Also, the Registry’s ability to provide support to the
judicial process is reduced. Furthermore, the lack of
resources affects the defence teams. It is a paradox that
indispensable financial contributions are not paid when
the Tribunal is doing its utmost to complete its task.
That being said, I want to state very clearly that
the Tribunal is fully committed to the completion
strategy. We will make all efforts to achieve the goals
laid down in the completion strategy, including
completing all trials at the first instance by 2008.
I have already mentioned our results in relation to
single-accused trials. We are regularly discussing how
to increase our efficiency even further. We will
continue to improve our working methods and will
keep the members of the Security Council and the
membership at large informed of any further measures
to be taken.
The Prosecutor will reiterate that he remains
committed to the deadline for conclusion of
investigations by the end of 2004. He will also deal
with indicted and suspected persons that remain at
large, as well as his plans for transfer to national
jurisdictions. On the basis of the Prosecution’s requests
for transfer, it will be for the Trial Chambers to decide
whether a person shall be transferred. Let me only say
this: a comparison between the previous and the
present version of the completion strategy shows that
in spite of the commencement of several new trials, the

10

number of detainees awaiting trial in Arusha has
increased from 15 to 18. That is not surprising. Three
accused have been transferred to Arusha since April
2004. They were previously in the groups of indicted
or suspected persons at large. The situation is simply
that three fugitives accused of genocide have been
arrested.
The Tribunal appreciates the cooperation of the
Rwandan authorities. Last year I reported that there
had been a steady flow of witnesses from Kigali to
Arusha. I am pleased to state that the situation remains
the same. On request, we have also received
documentation from the judicial proceedings in
Rwanda in order to evaluate fully the credibility of our
witnesses. That is important to the integrity of the
proceedings in Arusha. It is also essential that both
parties, the prosecution and the defence, receive the
necessary assistance to carry out their investigations in
Rwanda.
Finally, let me add that cooperation within the
Tribunal is excellent. The President, the Prosecutor and
the Registrar meet regularly in the Coordination
Council and are in frequent contact. The ICTR staff
continue to be committed and hardworking.
Let me conclude by expressing our deep
appreciation to the Security Council for its support to
the ICTR. The Tribunal also thanks the SecretaryGeneral for his continued support.
The President: I thank the President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Del Ponte, Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia.
Ms. Del Ponte: It is a great honour to be here
again to provide an assessment of the progress made in
the implementation of the completion strategy. A
written assessment has already been distributed, and I
intend to concentrate now on the major concerns.
The completion strategy has two components: the
trial in The Hague of the most senior leaders
responsible for the most serious crimes, and the
referral of mid- and low-level perpetrators to domestic
courts. Although significant progress was achieved on
both fronts in the reporting period, it has to be stressed
that a number of obstacles which are outside of the

S/PV.5086

Tribunal’s control may still derail the completion
strategy.
The first such obstacle is the lack of cooperation
on the part of States, mainly in the arrest and transfer
of persons indicted by the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY). There are
still 20 fugitives at large, and most of them should be
tried in The Hague. A few of them, however, could be
tried by domestic jurisdictions, and the relevant
motions for their transfer have already been filed, or
will soon be filed.
Among the fugitives are three individuals
mentioned repeatedly in Security Council resolutions,
unfortunately to no avail so far: Radovan Karadzic,
Ratko Mladic and Ante Gotovina. In addition to those
three key indictees, the other most senior fugitives are
Borovcanin, Pandurevic, Popovic and Nikolic, who
have been indicted for the Srebrenica genocide, and
also the four generals — Lukic, Lazarevic, Pavkovic
and Djordjevic — indicted for their direct individual
responsibility, as well as for their command
responsibility in the crimes committed in Kosovo in
1998 and 1999.
The objectives of the Tribunal, as established by
the Security Council, will not be fulfilled until those
accused are tried in The Hague. The Ministers of the
European Union made the same assessment when they
stated, on 12 July 2004, that
“the work of the ICTY would not be completed
without the arrest and transfer to The Hague of
key indictees such as Radovan Karadzic, Ratko
Mladic and Ante Gotovina”.
Furthermore, delays in the arrest and transfer of
those fugitives make the planning of the trials more
complicated and undermine judicial efficiency, as it is
not possible to join similar cases in one trial. For
instance, Karadzic could have been tried together with
Momcilo Krajisnik, another former senior leader of
Republika Srpska within Bosnia and Herzegovina,
whose trial is ongoing. Lukic, Lazarevic, Pavkovic and
Djordjevic could still be tried together with
Milutinovic, Ojdanic and Sainovic, who are awaiting
trial in the Tribunal’s detention unit.
The situation is similar for Gotovina. His two coaccused, Cermak and Markac, are also awaiting trial.
Borovcanin, Pandurevic, Popovic and Nikolic should
be tried with Beara, who was arrested and transferred

recently. It is therefore of crucial importance for the
completion strategy timeline that those arrests be made
as soon as possible so as to avoid duplication of efforts
and waste of resources.
The Governments of Croatia, Serbia and
Montenegro, and Bosnia and Herzegovina bear the
main responsibility for bringing those fugitives to The
Hague. A vast majority of them, probably more than a
dozen, live freely in Serbia. Prime Minister Kostunica
has made it clear that he is not willing to arrest
fugitives — only to try to convince them to surrender
voluntarily. On 13 July, the sealed indictment against
Goran Hadzic, the former President of the so-called
Republika Srpska Krajina, in Croatia, was handed over
to the relevant authorities in Belgrade, which were also
provided with the precise whereabouts of Hadzic. Only
hours later, my investigators observed that he had been
informed and left immediately. He has since
disappeared.
On 8 October, detailed information about the
location of Ljubisa Beara, a close aide to Ratko Mladic
indicted in 2002, was forwarded to the Serbian Prime
Minister. Beara did not resist arrest, and he was
transferred to The Hague on the night of 9 October.
Obviously, that arrest happened only because my
Office provided full information on the fugitive’s
location, and because Belgrade knew that we were
monitoring Beara’s residence. Furthermore, I was due
to address the Ministers of the European Union two
days later. Only such immediate pressure seems to
produce results. However, my Office cannot be
expected to do the same for each and every fugitive.
Furthermore, for their own domestic political reasons,
the Serbian authorities presented that arrest as a
voluntary surrender. They underlined thereby their
official policy, which is that all fugitives should
voluntarily surrender. But that policy has not produced
any results so far, and it blatantly contradicts the
country’s international obligations, namely under
article 29 of the ICTY Statute and numerous Security
Council resolutions.
The Serbian Government has deliberately chosen
to ignore its legal obligations. Serbia’s consistent
failure to cooperate was once again brought to the
attention of the Council on 4 May 2004 in a report
forwarded by the President. In the meantime, the
Serbian Government’s attitude of defiance towards the
Tribunal, which also challenges the Council, has not
changed.

11

S/PV.5086

There is, however, some progress to report in the
areas of cooperation that are within the competence of
the State Union of Serbia and Montenegro. Thanks to
the effective work of the National Cooperation
Council, the huge backlog of waivers authorizing
officials or former officials to be interviewed has been
dealt with. There is also a desire to resolve issues
related to access to documents, but many difficulties
remain, principally because the documents requested
are in the hands of authorities who are blocking
cooperation with the Tribunal. All in all, the lack of
cooperation on the part of Belgrade remains the single
most important obstacle faced by the Tribunal in the
implementation of the completion strategy.
Whereas most fugitives have found safe haven in
Serbia, some still reside in Bosnia and Herzegovina or
travel regularly to that country. They continue to enjoy
the protection of powerful networks. The High
Representative has taken energetic measures against
those networks that include the beginning of structural
reform at the State and entity level. But the fact
remains that, nine years after Dayton, the authorities of
Republika Srpska have not apprehended a single
individual indicted by the ICTY. That raises
fundamental questions about the willingness of
Republika Srpska leaders to fulfil their pledges to
cooperate with the ICTY by taking firm action.
It also now confirms, I believe, the fact that there
are fundamental, systemic weaknesses built into the
law enforcement and security structures in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and in particular the Republika Srpska.
They must be tackled so that the structures finally help,
not hinder, the country in cooperating with the
Tribunal. The Ministries of Defence and of the Interior
of Republika Srpska cannot by any reasonable
standards be judged to have helped in this regard. The
report of the Srebrenica Commission imposed upon the
Republika Srpska by the international community, once
published, should help raise awareness of the genocide
and of the necessity to punish those responsible.
The Stabilization Force (SFOR) has supported the
Tribunal over the years. It will soon have completed its
mandate, which should be taken over by the European
Union-led peacekeeping force (EUFOR) and NATO. It
is a great frustration for me that SFOR has to leave
while Radovan Karazdic is still at large, especially
since all SFOR commanders promised that they would
arrest him during their tenure.

12

In my view, success will come only when the
relevant authorities in Serbia and Republika Srpska
finally work together with international forces. That
type of transborder cooperation needs to be further
encouraged throughout the region. In this context, the
transfer of Miroslav Bralo on 12 November is a
positive development. The accused had been indicted
on a sealed arrest warrant in 1995. There were strong
indications that he was in Croatia, although this was
denied by the Croatian authorities. The seal was lifted
on 12 October 2004, and he was surrendered in Bosnia
and Herzegovina just one month later.
Whereas most of the fugitives are in Serbia or in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, there is one senior accused
who has been seen repeatedly in Croatia, as recently as
last summer. Ante Gotovina disappeared in June 2001,
just after he had been informed by the Croatian
authorities of a sealed indictment against him. This
spring, Croatia apparently stepped up its efforts to
locate and arrest Gotovina. However, doubts may be
raised concerning the effectiveness of those measures,
or even their seriousness, as they have not produced
any concrete results so far, not even relating to his
whereabouts inside or outside of Croatia. On the other
hand, there are strong indications that Gotovina, whose
public image as a national hero is not denied by
anyone, has enjoyed, and continues to benefit from, a
well-organized support network, including within State
structures. It is of paramount importance for the
completion strategy and for the overall achievements
of the ICTY that Gotovina be brought to justice in The
Hague. That is the only remaining obstacle to the
cooperation of Croatia with the ICTY. As soon as
Gotovina is in The Hague, it will be possible to say
that Croatia is indeed cooperating fully with the
Tribunal. The failure to locate Gotovina, either inside
or outside of Croatia, and to transfer him means that
the networks protecting war criminals are more
powerful than the part of the Government that
genuinely wants to cooperate fully with the Tribunal.
Should international pressure recede in this case, it will
be perceived as a signal that the international
community may not be interested anymore in having
the most senior leaders responsible for the most serious
crimes, including Karadzic and Mladic, appear in front
of the ICTY.
The arrest of all fugitives is also a measure of the
ability of States to proceed with domestic trials, as it is
indicative of their commitment to the rule of law. The

S/PV.5086

second key component of the completion strategy is the
deferral to the States of the former Yugoslavia of
indicted and non-indicted cases concerning mediumand low-level indictees. However, the ICTY must be
cautious that the States to which cases are transferred
are able and willing to proceed with trials, and that
those trials are led in accordance with the highest
judicial standards. The ICTY has been actively
supporting the establishment of specialized war crimes
courts throughout the region. The Prosecutor’s Office
has contributed its expertise to training seminars for
prosecutors and judges so as to enhance the capability
of national jurisdictions to try war crimes in fair and
credible trials. We continue to support the efforts of the
Office of the High Representative to establish a war
crimes chamber within the State Court of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to try accused of lower and intermediate
rank who were originally indicted by the Tribunal.
However, ultimately, the proper functioning of those
institutions is beyond our control.
There is a legitimate concern that a country like
Serbia, which is not willing to arrest indictees, will not
be either interested in or capable of trying alleged war
criminals domestically. The networks supporting
persons accused of war crimes are so powerful there
that they can interfere with the judicial proceedings,
including by intimidating witnesses and by exerting
political pressure on judges and prosecutors, or even by
threatening the stability of the country.
Both in Serbia proper and in Kosovo, aggressive
nationalist rhetoric is being used in smear campaigns
against the Tribunal and its Prosecutor. The message is
the same: if the authorities cooperate with the ICTY, it
will destabilize the country. The groups orchestrating
such propaganda are talented at threatening or causing
violence and at blaming the ICTY, incarnated by its
Prosecutor, for it. The international community and the
democratically elected authorities in the region should
taken further decisive measures against those networks.
When selecting the jurisdiction to which it
intends to refer cases back, the ICTY will have to
consider the general climate in the countries
concerned. It will also have to take into account the
interests of the victims. In accordance with the
principle that justice should be rendered as close as
possible to the victims and to the place where the
crimes were committed, the Prosecutor’s policy is that,
where possible, a case should be referred to the
authorities of the State where the crimes took place. By

the end of the year, 11 indicted cases concerning 20
accused will have been proposed to the Chambers for
transfer to domestic jurisdictions in accordance with
rule 11 bis of the ICTY Rules of Procedure and
Evidence.
The third area of concern impacting on the
completion strategy which is beyond our control is the
provision of adequate resources to my Office. As
members are well aware, the Secretariat imposed a
freeze on new recruitment in May 2004. Moreover, the
2005 budget for the Investigations Division was not
approved. Those measures have been taken at a time
when other bodies, including United Nations bodies,
are offering very competitive packages to investigators
and prosecutors of my Office. Over the past year, the
Office of the Prosecutor has lost over 40 per cent of its
senior investigators and almost 50 per cent of its senior
legal staff. Due to the hiring freeze, they can be
replaced only through internal promotion, and that
creates additional problems, as it is becoming
increasingly difficult to continue to promote internally
to senior levels without compromising professional
standards. The vacancy rate in my Office is now close
to 25 per cent. That situation is already impeding the
work of the Office and could soon impact on the
efficiency of the trials.
The lack of cooperation of States, the state of
preparedness of domestic jurisdictions and the
financial crisis are the three major factors impacting
negatively on the completion strategy. I remain
committed, however, to the completion strategy and to
its time frame.
The first major milestone in the implementation
of the completion strategy will be the closure of all
investigations by the end of this year. All of the six
remaining investigations will be completed before
31 December, with a number of new indictments
issued. However, since two of those indictments could
be joined with two existing cases, that would result in a
maximum of only four additional trials to be carried
out in The Hague. On the prosecution side, efforts are
being made continuously to support the judges in their
efforts to streamline the procedures and increase the
efficiency of trials. My Office is currently ready to
begin five trials, and it is involved in five other
ongoing trials.
Those efforts will have no effect, however, unless
all accused are brought to The Hague in time to be

13

S/PV.5086

tried before the end of 2008. As we enter the second
phase of the completion strategy, 2005 will be crucial.
If some of the most important indictees, like Karadzic,
Mladic and Gotovina, are not arrested and transferred
in the months to come, it may be necessary to revise
the target dates of the completion strategy.
The year 2005 will also mark the tenth
anniversary of three key events: the Srebrenica
genocide, the Dayton Agreement, and the indictments
against Karadzic and Mladic. If the international
community could not prevent the genocide, it should at
least not allow that and other very serious crimes to be
left unpunished.
The President: I thank the Prosecutor for her
briefing.
I now give the floor to the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.
Mr. Jallow: Some five months ago, in my last
report to the Security Council, I projected that the
prosecution expected to close its case in the trial of 10
accused persons before the end of the year and of four
others early in 2005. I reported that we were ready to
commence the trial of six other accused before the end
of 2005, to conclude our investigations into new targets
by the end of 2004 and to determine new indictments,
if any, by October of 2005, and that consultations with
Rwanda and other countries on the transfer of cases to
national jurisdictions for trial would be initiated.
I am happy to report progress in those matters.
Since that report, the prosecution has closed its case in
the Military I trial and in the Butare trial, totalling 10
accused persons. The defence case is expected to
commence in January 2005. We expect to close the
prosecution phase in the Government II trial of four
accused persons by June 2005. The multiple-accused
trials present a considerable challenge to the
completion strategy because of their complexity and
the logistics involved in keeping them going. With the
conclusion of the prosecution case in the Government II
trial in June 2005, the challenge posed by this category
of cases will have been considerably reduced.
As projected, the prosecution opened its case in
respect of six more accused during the second half of
2004 with the Military II case and the single-accused
Simba and single-accused Seromba cases. I am pleased
to report that we have already closed the prosecution
phase in the Simba case and would have done so in the

14

Seromba case but for the defence request for
adjournment. We expect, however, to close our case in
the Seromba trial by the end of February 2005.
As the President of the Tribunal has indicated,
my Office remains committed to the deadline for
concluding investigations into any new indictments by
the end of 2004 and the filing of any new indictments
which may arise by the last quarter of 2005, as we
advised the Security Council at our previous meeting.
The Office of the Prosecutor is also preparing for
trial the cases of the remaining detainees, who now
number 18. In that connection, we propose to be ready
to commence new trials in respect of at least eight of
those detainees during 2005, in accordance with the
new indictment policy of single-accused cases. In
addition, the trial of four other accused should be ready
to commence de novo by January 2005 in the
Government I case, in accordance with the recent
decision of the Joint Appeals Chamber of the two
Tribunals.
I have initiated discussions with Rwanda and
other States on prospects for the transfer of cases to
those States. Those discussions are ongoing. At the
same time, the Office of the Prosecutor is preparing the
case files that have been identified for transfer. We
propose to make the necessary applications to the Trial
Chambers in early 2005 for orders for transfer of those
cases. Nevertheless, I must caution that, apart from
Rwanda, it is not proving easy to find States which are
ready, able and willing to take on cases for prosecution
from the Tribunal. Our options in the choice of States
are considerably limited.
The apprehension and transfer of indicted
fugitives also continues to be fraught with difficulties.
Ephrem Setako, who was arrested earlier this year in
the Netherlands, was finally transferred to the Tribunal
a week ago. Fourteen other indicted persons remain at
large. The level of international support by States in
which such persons reside has fallen below what is
required for a successful arrest programme. The bulk
of our fugitives continue to be based in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Several attempts by the
Tribunal to have a dialogue with the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo on this matter have
elicited no response, save for the isolated case of Yusuf
Munyakazi, who was surrendered earlier this year. We
shall nonetheless continue our efforts and report back
to the Council on the situation. Meanwhile, we believe

S/PV.5086

that it is necessary for the Council to exhort Member
States to live up to their legal obligations in this
respect and to comply with Security Council resolution
1503 (2003) in arresting indicted fugitives in their
territory and transferring them to the Tribunal for
prosecution.
We remain committed to the implementation of
the completion strategy and see no need for any further
revision of it. In many respects, as I indicated at the
beginning, we are on schedule. But in my previous
briefing, I did alert the Council to the potentially
adverse impact of the recruitment freeze on the success
of the completion strategy. I said then that the trials
cannot proceed optimally unless adequate resources are
provided for the core activity of the Tribunal — that is,
prosecution — to be carried out effectively.
The year 2005 will pose a real challenge. During
that year we expect to have the highest number ever on
trial simultaneously at the Tribunal. I do not expect the
peak to decline before 2006. The number of appeals
cases, currently standing at 14 persons, is expected to
rise considerably with the conclusion of each new trial,
as every decision in respect of each accused will —
based on experience — lead to one or perhaps two
appeals. It is anticipated that in 2005 the Office of the
Prosecutor may have to deal with as many as 30
appeals.
Intense work will continue on the preparation of
cases for trial and for transfer. While 2004 has
registered some progress in the preparation and trial of
cases, it will be a great challenge to sustain this
progress and deal with the anticipated increased
workload while continuing to suffer the consequences
of the recruitment freeze and resource constraints.
The freeze on recruitment has hit the Office of
the Prosecutor particularly hard. Although the Security
Council created a separate Office of the Prosecutor for
the ICTR last year, the recruitment of the staff for the
Office has been interrupted by the freeze. Only half of
the complement of six support staff are in place.
Likewise, the new Appeals Unit, which was established
pursuant to the same Council resolution that created
that Office, is below full capacity — in fact, it is at
about half its budgeted strength due to the freeze — at
a time when its workload is increasing, and will
continue to increase as more trials are completed and
more appeals are lodged.

In the Prosecutions Section, the interruption of
recruitment has left 17 vacancies, comprising the posts
of senior trial attorney, trial attorney, senior legal
adviser, legal adviser, legal researcher and case
manager. Recent developments have added the post of
chief of prosecutions to the list of vacancies, which is
therefore subject to the freeze on replacement.
There are currently 21 vacant posts in the
Investigations Division in Kigali, as well as four
vacant posts in the Legal Advisory Section. The
Section, which is responsible for the drafting of
indictments, is now almost non-existent at a time
when, by the conclusion of investigations at the end of
2004, the Office of the Prosecutor is to turn its
attention to evaluating the results of investigations and
preparing new indictments through the Unit.
The filling of all those positions is crucial and
absolutely necessary for us to meet the challenge of
proper completion. Those positions are directly
concerned with the critical and core function of
prosecution. A way must be found to lift the
recruitment freeze if we are to avoid putting the
completion strategy at risk. With a considerably low
capacity the Office of the Prosecutor will be hard put
to prepare new cases, continue ongoing trials and deal
with the new and increased appeals workload at the
same time that it undertakes the programme of
transferring cases.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the
Security Council and the Secretary-General and his
Office for their continued support for the ICTR in
general, and for the Office of the Prosecutor in
particular.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): I would like to start by
thanking the President for convening this debate.
Likewise, I wish to thank the Presidents and
Prosecutors of the International Criminal Tribunals for
the Former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda for their
assessments and reports presented to the Security
Council pursuant to resolution 1534 (2004). Those
reports were eloquent and enlightening with regard to
the resolve of the international community to address
the consequences of the very painful episodes that
occurred in the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda. We
acknowledge
with
appreciation
the
valuable
contribution of the two International Tribunals to the
efforts of the United Nations and the international
community to combat impunity and to bring to justice

15

S/PV.5086

all those responsible for serious violations of
international humanitarian law, thereby supporting
peace and stability and the process of national
reconciliation in the countries of the former Yugoslavia
and in Rwanda.
Despite the complexity and the unprecedented
nature of their mandates, the Tribunals are meeting the
Security Council’s goal of ensuring that persons
responsible for war crimes, genocide and crimes
against humanity are accountable for their crimes in
just, fair and public trials meeting strict standards of
due process. In order to fulfil their mandates and meet
the goals set by the completion strategies, the Tribunals
must be able to try the most senior leaders indicted by
the Tribunals. However, as long as many of those
individuals remain at large, the Tribunals will be
unable to complete their missions — a situation that
calls for the stepping up of international cooperation in
order to capture those persons and bring them to
justice.
In addition to the need for international
cooperation in order to bring all indictees to account,
as recognized by Security Council resolutions 1503
(2003) and 1534 (2004), a key component of the
Tribunals’ work entails referring lower- and mid-level
accused persons to national jurisdictions. Such a
strategy will enhance the critical involvement of
national Governments in the strengthening of longterm national reconciliation, justice and the rule of law.
In that regard, while we recognize that further progress
is still required in connection with many issues, we
note with appreciation that the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) has begun to file motions for the
transfer of cases to domestic jurisdictions. It is our
hope that national jurisdictions will be able to deliver
free, fair and equitable trials. We welcome the
significant steps that have been taken in each of the
countries concerned to make such an endeavour a
reality. The fact that the special Chamber of the State
Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina will soon be ready to
accept cases is a significant development.
With regard to the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), my delegation believes
that the biggest challenge ahead will be the completion
of its mandate within the timeframe set by the Security
Council. As stressed by the Tribunal’s President and
Prosecutor, meeting that challenge will require the full
cooperation and commitment of the international

16

community, including the provision of the necessary
human, material and financial resources to enable the
ICTR to complete trials at first instance by the end of
2008 and appeals by the end of 2010. The transfer of
low- and mid-level cases to national jurisdiction is also
a matter of great importance that deserves appropriate
attention by the international community.
As confirmed by the assessment reports presented
today, the implementation of the completion strategies
for the two Tribunals is on course. It is our hope that
the Tribunals’ fundamental achievements — moving
from impunity to accountability, establishing facts,
doing justice vis-à-vis the victims and giving them a
voice and strengthening the rule of law — will
contribute decisively to peace, stability and long-term
national reconciliation in each of the countries
concerned and in their respective regions.
Mr. Katti (Algeria) (spoke in French): We have
very closely and attentively listened to the briefings by
the Presidents and Prosecutors of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
and the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR). We note that, since their presentations to the
Council on 29 June 2004, progress has been made to
end impunity by bringing to justice persons suspected
of committing serious violations of international
humanitarian law. We also note that the Tribunals’
completion strategies, which were adopted by the
Security Council in 2003, have met with great
difficulty. That situation has not improved since the
Council last considered the matter, given that the
Tribunals continue to face serious financial problems
due to the non-payment of financial contributions by
Member States. The expenditures of the two Tribunals
have been kept to a minimum, recruitment has been
frozen and the capacity of the Tribunals to carry out
their mandates has been seriously compromised. That
is an unacceptable situation, and it is important that the
States concerned make their financial contributions as
soon as possible.
The General Assembly’s election of 14 judges to
the ICTY on 19 November 2004 was an encouraging
development that we hope will have a positive impact
on the functioning of the Tribunal. Similarly, and
despite the Tribunal’s heavy workload, the changes
made to the rules of procedure and the efforts
undertaken to establish a special chamber in Bosnia
and Herzegovina to prosecute war crimes are positive
developments. We hope that will help the Tribunal to

S/PV.5086

complete its work within the time frame that has been
specified.
It is important that persons accused by both
Tribunals of committing low- and mid-level crimes be
brought before the competent national jurisdictions. It
is also important that the States concerned cooperate
with the Tribunals with regard to access to documents,
arrests and bringing accused persons to justice. The
Security Council must ensure that happens, as the
authority and very credibility of the two Tribunals is at
stake. In that regard, my delegation would like to
express its appreciation to the Government of Rwanda
for its cooperation with the Rwanda Tribunal.
Moreover, Republika Srpska’s arrest on
15 November of a high-level accused is, in this regard,
a welcome development. The other criminals at large,
such as Radovan Karadzic, Ratko Mladic and Ante
Gotovina, as well as those still at large in Rwanda,
must be apprehended.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to
reiterate its support to the Presidents and Prosecutors
of the two Tribunals in carrying out their
responsibilities and in their efforts to fight impunity.
Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): Allow
me to begin by thanking the Presidents and the
Prosecutors for their reports. The United Kingdom
continues to support wholeheartedly the work of both
Tribunals. Bringing justice to the indictees is
particularly important some 10 years after the signature
of the Dayton Agreement and the establishment of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR).
Allow me to begin by addressing the issue of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY). We welcome the Tribunal’s efforts
to increase efficiency and to stay on course for meeting
the completion strategy. The re-election of most of the
Tribunal’s sitting judges last Friday will help keep
things on track. However, what we heard this morning
is a rather sobering account of the obstacles to keeping
that strategy on course. I would like to concentrate on
just a few of what I believe to be the most important
points.
First, regarding financing, as we have heard, the
freeze on recruitment is beginning to affect the
Tribunal’s work, and that can only get worse. The
obligation of and the need for all States to pay their
dues to the Tribunal are obvious. The failure to do so,

as we have heard, is jeopardizing the completion
strategy and will lead to more costs. The 25 per cent
vacancy rate quoted to us this morning is an appalling
figure.
Secondly, regarding the transfer of cases to the
region, the Tribunal has done excellent work in
assisting national courts in the former Yugoslavia to
prepare and receive transferred cases. We hope that the
war crimes chamber of the State Court of Bosnia and
Herzegovina becomes operational in January, as
predicted. There can be no doubt, the Chamber will
need the continued support of the donor community.
The United Kingdom has pledged £2.6 million over the
next five years. Our hope must obviously be that other
countries in the region will be able to develop the
capacity to receive cases from the Tribunal in the near
future.
But I want to underline our very strongly held
view that the three key indictees, Mladic, Karadzic and
Gotovina, have to be tried before the ICTY. The United
Kingdom does not believe that the replacement of the
Stabilization Force by the European Union-led force,
which we do indeed welcome, should bring any
diminution in our resolve to arrest Karadzic.
Thirdly, regarding cooperation with the ICTY, the
Tribunal’s work is dependent on the arrest of the
indictees and their transfer to The Hague. That is
crucial, and 20 indictees at large is far too many. In our
view, the transfer of Karadzic, Mladic and Gotovina is
crucial to the long-term stability and prosperity of the
region.
I would like to be absolutely frank about this. We
know that Karadzic spends most of his time in
Republika Srpska and that he moves from place to
place. A network of people and institutions protects
and presumably finances him. Why is it, therefore, that
no one seems to know where he is — or indeed, where
he has just been, which should be much easier to
know? Why is it that none of the arms of the
Government, local individuals or local figures in
contact with the community, such as priests, are
prepared to volunteer information? That information
would enable the most sought-after indictee to be
brought to face the Tribunal. What we need is real-time
intelligence that permits this man to be apprehended.
Do those in positions of authority really believe that
they can outwait justice or that their inaction is
consistent with integration into European and Atlantic

17

S/PV.5086

institutions? Do they believe that continued avoidance
of arrest actually promotes the reconciliation that we
all hope for in the Balkans?
The same goes, very clearly, for Mladic, whom
we know to be in Serbia. It is very disappointing to
hear once again this morning that Serbia and
Montenegro remains the country that is the most
reluctant to cooperate. Cooperation is not optional. It is
a legal obligation. Yet certain indictees in Serbia and
Montenegro remain free to move about the territory
without even bothering to hide.
We welcome Croatia’s cooperation in giving
unrestricted access to documents and witnesses. We
agree with the Prosecutor that Croatia’s cooperation
cannot be regarded as complete until Gotovina is
arrested and transferred to The Hague. Earlier this year,
the Prosecutor was able to give a positive assessment
of Croatia’s efforts to arrest Gotovina. But this
morning the Prosecutor reported that efforts have
slowed down and that no significant progress has been
made. Moreover, the Prosecutor asserts that Gotovina
continues to benefit “from a well-organized support
network, including within State structures” (supra).
Cooperation is about more than meeting a legal
obligation. It is about ending impunity; it is about
bringing to justice individuals indicted of horrendous
crimes; and it is about furthering reconciliation within
and between Balkan States. There should be no doubt
that continuing non-cooperation will frustrate any
aspirations of the authorities in Belgrade, in Zagreb or
in Banja Luka to closer integration with Euro-Atlantic
structures. I would be very grateful if the Prosecutor, in
responding to this debate, could be more direct not
only about what she believes are the reasons why the
Governments concerned are not meeting their
obligations, but also about what specifically she thinks
they should do and how we might be able to help to
encourage them to do it.
Finally, the President of the ICTY has drawn
attention to the need to address the issue of prisoners
serving ICTY sentences after the end of the completion
strategy. The United Kingdom was pleased to enter
into a sentence enforcement agreement with the
Tribunal earlier this year, and we would welcome
further dialogue on this and on other residual issues in
due course.
Allow me to turn now to the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), on which I will

18

be much more brief. This brevity, however, does not in
any way imply less interest in that key Tribunal. We
warmly welcome the Tribunal’s efforts to improve its
efficiency, the changes that have taken place in the last
12 months and the trend towards shorter trials. The
completion strategy is clearly at the centre of the
overall management of the Tribunal. However, once
again, as for the ICTY, the freeze on recruitment is
bound to have an impact on the Tribunal’s efficiency.
Again, the need for States to meet their financial
obligations is obvious.
The number of fugitives is, again, too large: 15 is
far too high a number. In another parallel with the
other Tribunal, States must comply with their
obligations to cooperate by arresting individuals and
transferring them to the Tribunal. The transfer of cases
to national jurisdiction is, again, a sensible strategy.
We assume that the majority of cases will be
transferred to Rwandan jurisdiction. We would
therefore welcome views on the readiness of Rwandan
courts to accept such cases and on how the capacity of
the national courts could best be supported.
In conclusion, I would like to say that the whole
question of ending impunity and delivering people to
justice is fundamental to the rule of law, which is a
crucial element in leading any country out of conflict
and in actually building peace. That is why, for the
United Kingdom — and, I believe, for the Security
Council, in all the resolutions we have adopted — we
do not trot out that we want individuals to go to The
Hague just for the sake of retaliation or for some
response after the event; we want that because it is in
everyone’s essential interest that that should happen.
In the end, Governments have the ultimate
responsibility to ensure that the rule of law applies and
is supported. Those are the fundamentals of the EuroAtlantic structures. That is why the Governments that
look to benefit from those structures need to get a
simple message: these people have to be taken to The
Hague.
Mr. Valle (Brazil): First of all, I would like to
thank Judge Theodor Meron, President of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY), and Judge Erik Møse, President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), as
well as Prosecutors Carla Del Ponte and Hassan
Bubacar Jallow for their thorough reports on the level

S/PV.5086

of progress achieved in the work of the two courts, as
well as on the difficulties that are prevailing.
Almost 10 years after the establishment of the
ICTY and the ICTR, there is no doubt about the
importance of their contribution to international law.
They can be seen as a successful example of the
commitment of the international community to
ensuring that those responsible for the most heinous
crimes, which offend the very essence of human
dignity, answer to them in public trials meeting the
highest standards of international justice and due
process.
As acknowledged in the report presented by the
President of the ICTY to the Security Council, the
international community faces the challenge of
adapting the inherent limitations of ad hoc judicial
arrangements to the principle of due process and to the
rights of both victims and those accused, as well as to
the overall objective of bringing an end to impunity. It
is necessary that the Tribunals remain committed to the
goals set forth by resolution 1534 (2004), while
concentrating resources and efforts to make sure that
the most senior leaders suspected of being responsible
for crimes within the jurisdiction of the courts be
prosecuted.
In our view, the transfer of cases involving lowerranking officials to local courts, in accordance with
rule 11 bis of the Tribunals’ rules of procedure and
evidence, should reflect the actual conditions of those
judicial instances to provide independent judgements.
In addition, given the difficulties in implementing the
completion strategy, we believe that insisting on rigid
deadlines as set out in the completion strategy may
frustrate justice rather than assist the international
community to end impunity. The Council may
eventually need to adjust those timetables in order to
enable the Tribunals to fulfil their mandates.
We are seriously concerned over reports
regarding a lack of cooperation with the Tribunal on
the part of interested countries. It is not acceptable that
United Nations Members disregard their obligations
under the Charter, the Tribunal Statutes, the rules of
procedure and evidence and the relevant Security
Council resolutions. We urge Member States directly
involved in the Tribunals’ work to fully cooperate with
them, ensuring the prompt surrender of fugitives and
access to pertinent documentation.

Moreover, it is essential that the Tribunals
continue to rely on adequate resources and personnel to
perform their functions. Financial difficulties present a
threat to the accomplishment of their duties and to the
ability to meet the completion strategies.
Mr. Guan Jian (China) (spoke in Chinese): We
listened carefully to the reports of President Meron and
Prosecutor Del Ponte of the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and of President Møse
and Prosecutor Jallow of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR). We express our
appreciation to the Tribunals for their work.
The two Tribunals have continued to take steps to
actively implement the completion strategies. We
commend them for their work in that regard. We are
gratified to note that, in accordance with the time
frame set out in the completion strategies, the two
Tribunals will complete all investigative work by the
end of this year, thus marking a propitious beginning to
the successful implementation of other goals outlined
in the completion strategies. We believe that the timely
transfer to competent national jurisdictions of cases
involving intermediate and lower rank suspected of
being responsible for crimes is of crucial importance; it
will help to ensure that the two Tribunals complete
their work as scheduled and that reconciliation and
justice can be realized in the two countries and regions.
The transfer process should be intensified when
that is practicable. We note that the Prosecutors of the
two Tribunals have begun to submit proposed transfer
cases to the competent Trial Chambers for approval.
We hope that the War Crimes Chamber in Bosnia and
Herzegovina will be operational by January 2005, and
we expect that Croatia, Serbia and Montenegro,
Rwanda and a few other countries will be prepared to
receive appropriate cases at an early date.
We appreciate the efforts of the two Tribunals and
of the international community to strengthen the
national judicial capacity-building in both regions. We
believe that the Security Council, the countries
concerned and the Tribunals should continue to assist
in the establishment of national chambers that conform
to international standards.
It is our hope that, with their vast experience and
expertise, the Judges of the two Tribunals will, in
addition to ensuring fair trials, further enhance the
efficiency of trials and accelerate trial processes. In
that regard, it is necessary that both the Trial Chambers

19

S/PV.5086

and the Offices of the Prosecutors make specific
arrangements to ensure that those objectives can be
attained.
Mr. Lacanilao (Philippines): We would like to
begin by noting the conclusion of the election of judges
to the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) last Friday. We hope that that will
provide impetus to the efforts of the Tribunal as we
face the final years of its work.
My delegation would like to thank the Presidents
and the Prosecutors of the two Tribunals for their
reports this morning. We note with satisfaction that,
first, the Tribunals continue to operate at full capacity
and secondly, since the last time the Council heard
their reports, in June this year, the Tribunals have
continued to improve the efficiency of their
proceedings and to concentrate their focus on the most
senior leaders suspected of being responsible for the
most serious crimes.
We commend the efforts to establish institutions
and rule-of-law mechanisms in the national
jurisdictions of concerned countries to prevent
impunity and to promote justice. We hope that the
situation of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) is now more hopeful and hope that the
Tribunal will continue its work towards the
achievement of the completion strategy.
I would like to comment on the points raised in
the report of the ICTY. We commend its efforts to
contribute expertise to training seminars for judges and
prosecutors in the former Yugoslavia so as to enhance
the capability of national jurisdictions to try pending
cases as well as to support the efforts to establish a War
Crimes Chamber within the State Court of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We believe that the bulk of the cases will
need to be tried by national courts and that, aside from
being a critical element of the completion strategy, the
ability of the Tribunal to refer cases to competent
national jurisdictions for trial will enhance the
involvement of national Governments in bringing
reconciliation and justice to the region. That will serve
the process of healing wounds and strengthening the
sense of nationhood of the republics in the former
Yugoslavia. I hope that, in his closing statement, Judge
Meron will be able to provide an indication of when
cases of minor suspects could actually be transferred to
national jurisdictions.

20

Today, we again heard the plea of the Tribunals to
have adequate personnel to perform their work. We
were informed last June that this requirement had been
seriously affected by the hiring freeze, which not only
limits the ability of the Tribunals to take on new staff
to meet their increasing workload, but also prohibits
hiring even to replace essential personnel who leave
the Tribunals. The Tribunals also pleaded for support
to improve their ability to retain qualified staff and
rectify the severe staff shortage. We hope that this
problem will be addressed in the near future, as it
could affect the completion strategies. I hope that the
concluding statements will further elaborate on why
the problem still persists.
My delegation is fully cognizant of the challenges
and difficulties involved in achieving the completion
strategies, specifically the requirement for the
completion of all trials by 2008. We hope that the
Tribunals will faithfully comply with the timelines set
by the Council in the completion strategies. We
understand that major fugitives are yet to be brought
before the Tribunals and that any delay in their arrest
would have an adverse impact on the Tribunals’ work.
We call on all concerned delegations to cooperate fully
with the Tribunals so that all trials can end by 2008 and
the Tribunals can be closed by 2010. My delegation
would not want to see any further adjustments to the
completion strategies.
Mr. Trautwein (Germany): First of all I would
like to thank the Presidents of the two ad hoc
Tribunals — the Honourable Judge Erik Møse and the
Honourable Judge Theodor Meron — as well as the
Chief Prosecutors of both tribunals, Mr. Hassan
Bubacar Jallow and Ms. Carla Del Ponte, for their
reports to the Council. I would also like to express my
gratitude to them and to their staff for their hard work
and dedication to the realization of international
justice. Let me also express my sincere condolences on
the passing away of Judge Richard May. We commend
his contribution to the work of the Tribunal and his
able leadership in his capacity as presiding judge in the
Milosevic case.
Germany welcomes the significant progress that
has been made during the period under review by both
Tribunals to implement their completion strategies in
accordance with the time frame and other parameters
established in Security Council resolutions 1503
(2003) and 1534 (2004).

S/PV.5086

But besides those positive developments, there
are also factors that could have significant negative
impact on the fulfilment of the completion strategies.
Above all, it is imperative that Governments cooperate
with the Tribunals, particularly the Governments of the
regions in question and those suspected of providing
haven to indicted fugitives. We again urge all States
concerned to fully cooperate with the Tribunals.
Overshadowing the progress achieved by the
Tribunals is the issue of their financial situation. The
well-known funding problems have two interrelated
components: the question as to whether the amount of
money spent on the Tribunals is proportional to the
benefits derived from them, and the poor level of
honouring assessed contributions.
As the third largest contributor to the budgets of
the Tribunals, we believe that every effort should be
made to secure their effective functioning and to avoid
any waste of money. All in all, we believe that the
combined efforts of the Tribunals and of the United
Nations budgeting and oversight mechanisms give us
the necessary guarantees that the Tribunals are
operating at acceptable levels of efficiency. That does
not mean that they are inexpensive. But we believe that
it is virtually impossible to put a price tag on the
Tribunals’ contributions to making peace and
reconciliation sustainable, their contributions towards
the reestablishment of justice and decency and their
contributions to the development of international
criminal law. Unless we prefer to pay the price of war,
we should accept the cost of justice as an intrinsic part
of the cost of peace.
Sir, allow me make a few final remarks. First,
from now to the end of the completion strategies, the
Tribunals will find themselves in a tight situation. They
will be hard pressed to meet all expectations, and they
will need all available assistance, including, and
notably, from the Security Council. This implies an
intensified dialogue, as envisaged by resolution
1534 (2004). Such a dialogue is a matter not of public
speeches but of a detailed exchange of views,
especially at the expert level. The Council should
consider holding such expert meetings not only in New
York but also at the seat of the Tribunals.
Secondly, the Council may also wish to consider
the usefulness of endowing itself with steadier
expertise on the Tribunals by agreeing to a steadier,

elected chairmanship of the Working Group instead of
a monthly rotating one.
Thirdly, I would like to assure the representatives
of the Tribunals, as well as the staff members of the
secretariats concerned, of Germany’s continued and
unwavering commitment to promote the noble ideals of
peace and justice through the Tribunals, through the
International Criminal Court and through other
appropriate international or hybrid judicial or nonjudicial mechanisms. Important progress has been
achieved in this field over the last two years, and the
Secretary-General’s recent report on the rule of law
and transitional justice (S/2004/616) has highlighted
and conceptualized those developments in an
extremely able manner. It has been a gratifying
experience for us to be able to contribute, to the best of
our ability, to many developments in the field of
justice. We certainly wish to continue to do so in the
future.
Mr. Yáñez-Barnuevo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I particularly wish to express our thanks for the oral
briefings and written reports from both Tribunals, from
Judge Theodor Meron and Prosecutor Carla Del Ponte
to the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and from Judge Erik Møse and Prosecutor
Hassan Bubacar Jallow of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR).
Having been present in 1993 and 1994 at the
establishment of both Tribunals by this Council, I
welcome the result, the important work done by both
Tribunals both to ensure that justice is served and to
achieve the goal of national reconciliation within the
territories of their two respective jurisdictions. I also
welcome their important contribution to the
development of international criminal law and
international criminal proceedings applicable to similar
types of judicial situations. As could clearly be seen in
the reports and oral briefings, all that work is an
essential contribution to the International Criminal
Court, which is now beginning its enduring work in the
service of the international community.
As some colleagues have said, we are not here to
make long statements, but rather to see how we are
going to ensure that the completion strategies for both
Tribunals can be implemented in accordance with the
provisions of the relevant Security Council resolutions
and the arrangements established for each Tribunal.

21

S/PV.5086

We welcome the fact that both Tribunals have
made undisputable progress in applying their
respective completion strategies.
We note that work has intensified in both
Tribunals, perhaps more so in the ICTR, possibly
because it had been further behind until quite recently.
There has been a considerable increase in the pace of
work done by the judges. We also welcome the fact
that steps are being taken to refer cases of
comparatively
lower
importance
to
national
jurisdictions in due time, once those jurisdictions have
been properly prepared to take them on with full
guarantees that justice will be served in accordance
with international norms.
We stress that it is essential that the purpose for
which the Tribunals were established be carried out
effectively. That means that the completion strategies
should not inadvertently become mere exit strategies at
any cost: exit strategies which do not ensure that those
who are most responsible for the serious events which
took place in the Balkans and in Rwanda are brought to
justice. That is an important point for both Tribunals,
but also for the States concerned. We are particularly
concerned by the fact that some countries are not
cooperating fully with the Tribunals. It is thus a
challenge for the Security Council, which should
remain very vigilant and demanding on this point, as
well as for the United Nations and the entire
international community.
My delegation’s second general observation is
that both Tribunals should retain their respective
strategies under continued assessment. If need be, they
should be reviewed and adapted as deemed
appropriate, as we note the ICTR has done. The
Council should be informed of any changes that are
made.
Thirdly, and like previous speakers, I wish to
highlight the need for all States Members of the United
Nations to pay their contributions to the budgets of
both Tribunals, fully and on time. We recall and
underscore that those contributions are obligatory
under the United Nations Charter.
In any event, we support the appeals that have
been made to lift the recruitment freeze in both
Tribunals, in particular with respect to posts deemed
essential for the legal work and for the implementation
of the completion strategies. On this point, we propose
that, in addition to receiving reports from each of the

22

Tribunals, we should also receive periodic reports from
the Secretariat, since the recruitment freeze stems from
the Secretariat. We would like the Secretary-General to
tell the Security Council why that decision was taken,
and why it is not now possible to lift the freeze, either
partially or fully. As we can see, the freeze is
beginning to seriously affect the implementation of the
completion strategies.
We would like also to express our interest in the
ideas that have just been put forward by the German
delegation. First, in order to show its continued interest
in the proper implementation of the Tribunals’ statutes
and completion strategies, the Security Council should
continue the mandate of its working group on this
issue. Also, there might be periodic visits to the
headquarters of the Tribunals to provide an opportunity
for more direct and detailed discussions with their
leaders.
In conclusion, I have a few specific questions to
put to the Presidents and, perhaps, the Prosecutors of
the two Tribunals. First, in today’s briefings, we heard
no detailed information on measures that the Tribunals
have adopted in order to increase the number of
countries which have agreed to accept those convicted
and sentenced to prison terms, either by signing
agreements for the enforcement of sentences or in
some other way. The Tribunals are invited to do this in
paragraph 8 of resolution 1534 (2004).
We are pleased to note that, as the representative
of the United Kingdom has informed us, an agreement
has just been signed between the United Kingdom and
the ICTY, but we recognize that only a very limited
number of countries have so far agreed to have
sentences carried out in their respective territories. My
country is among them, with respect to the ICTY. We
would like to know more about efforts to increase the
number of countries which have agreed to enforce
sentences in their countries. This is particularly
important as the Tribunals move forward with their
completion strategies.
My second question again refers to both
Tribunals, but more specifically to the ICTY. It relates
to measures that might be taken to maximize continuity
in the participation of ad litem judges, in particular
those who have already been assigned to a Chamber
and who are already dealing with specific cases, so as
to avoid changes in the composition of the Trial
Chambers, which might negatively affect the trying of

S/PV.5086

cases and hence the completion strategies. Here, I
would like to join the representative of the Philippines
in welcoming the fact that the election of permanent
judges of the ICTY took place well in advance. We
consider that that is a positive factor for the completion
strategy because there is great continuity among the
permanent judges. We wonder whether measures are
being considered to ensure that the same will take
place for the ad litem judges as well.
Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): I too
would like to thank the Presidents and the Prosecutors
of the two Tribunals for the briefings they have just
given us on developments in the implementation of
their completion strategies. We note that the two
Tribunals are seeking ways to lessen the impact of
factors which are holding back progress in their work.
That is most encouraging. In particular, we welcome
the Tribunals’ efforts to speed up procedures through a
rational use of available resources. Increasing the
number of ad litem judges made available to the ICTR,
we think, has helped speed up the work of the Tribunal.
The Tribunals’ reports offer a convincing analysis
of the number of days of deliberation necessary to
complete the cases before them, with estimates based
on the nature of the cases, taking into consideration the
cases of fugitives and the new tasks and timelines laid
down by resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534 (2004).
This gives us a fairly precise idea of the prospects for
implementing the completion strategies. All of this
shows that the Tribunals have taken to heart the
international community’s desire to see their work
completed on time. We welcome the fact that the
Tribunals have fully integrated the completion strategy
into their activities.
Nevertheless, in spite of the determination shown
by the Tribunals, it would seem that they are faced
with genuine time, economic, structural and political
constraints; these have introduced a certain amount of
uncertainty into their forecasts. The time constraints
relate to the internal management of the Tribunals, and
we fully trust in the Presidents and Registrars of the
Tribunals to overcome them. Rather, I shall discuss the
structural and political constraints, because it is in that
sphere that action by the Security Council might truly
make a difference.
These constraints are linked to specific problems
facing the international community. I refer in particular
to the recruitment freeze imposed on the Tribunals,

which they have asked to be lifted so that they can
make use of the services of legal officers in order to
face up to the increased workload stemming from the
need to speed up their procedures. In this regard, we
think that the Security Council working group on the
Tribunals should look into this issue in order to find a
way to solve the problem.
Another issue is the capacity of national judicial
systems that are being asked to take on the secondary
cases that the International Tribunals are supposed to
refer to them in order to focus on the cases of highranking officials bearing major responsibility for
crimes falling within international jurisdiction. The
seminars organized by the Tribunals are, no doubt,
helpful in enhancing the national capacity of the
countries concerned; we support those seminars. But
the question of safeguarding and respecting
international norms should be stringently evaluated. In
that connection, the alternative formula of deferring
some cases to third-country tribunals should be given
all due consideration.
In dealing with this aspect of the completion
strategy, what is most to be feared is that cases will be
transferred to overburdened and politicized national
justice systems. Here, we encourage the Tribunals to
continue their discussions with third States which they
have determined to meet international norms in order
to ensure that accused are given speedy and fair trials.
In our view, political constraints are essentially
linked to a lack of cooperation from States that delay
handing over to the Tribunal persons who have been
accused and who are still at large on their territory. My
delegation urgently appeals to the Governments
concerned to apprehend those involved as soon as
possible and to hand them over to the Tribunals so that
they can answer for their acts before international
justice. In so doing, they would be making a very
valuable contribution to combating impunity and to
promoting respect for the rule of law and the principles
of humanity necessary for the preservation of
international peace and security.
In conclusion, we renew our firm support for the
officials of the two Tribunals. We pay tribute to them
for all their efforts to ensure that the rule of law
prevails.
Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): My
delegation too warmly thanks the Presidents and
Prosecutors of the International Tribunal for the former

23

S/PV.5086

Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for their briefings today
on the implementation of their completion strategies
and, more generally, for their endeavours.
France supports both Tribunals. From the outset,
we have supported the concept of a completion strategy
for their work, which France feels is in the interest of
justice and of the victims and, hence, of peace and
reconciliation. We therefore, welcome the initial
measures taken, with the full respect for the Tribunals’
jurisdictions and the independence of their Prosecutors;
such respect is clearly essential.
We are also pleased the first requirement — the
completion of investigations by the end of the year —
can be met. We note with satisfaction that the pace of
trials and judgements has been more sustained in both
jurisdictions.
Finally, the renewal of the mandates of ICTY
judges, recently carried out by the General Assembly,
will contribute to the successful conclusion of cases
now under way before that Court.
We therefore have reason for satisfaction, and
reason to thank the officials of both Tribunals for the
efforts they have made since the adoption of Security
Council resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534 (2004).
However, we must not overlook a number of
difficulties. It seems to us that the role of the Council
should be to help resolve those difficulties.
How can we do that? First of all, by reminding
States of their obligations. Here, I would like to refer
to two obligations, the first of which is quite simply
that States must respect their duty to finance the
Tribunals. Judge Meron underscored the devastating
effect of the recruitment freeze, decided on as a result
of the shortfall resulting from unpaid arrears. Judge
Møse too alerted us to the critical nature of the present
situation.
There is a paradox here: on the one hand, States
clearly support the completion strategy; and, on the
other hand, the implementation of that strategy has
been slowed as a result of delays in payment. We
believe that this situation must not continue. We take
note of the fact that the Secretary-General will address
this problem in the near future. We truly hope that he
will find a definitive solution that will halt the
departure of qualified officers to other institutions.

24

In passing, we like others, wonder about the
competition among international bodies that has
recently arisen, including within the United Nations,
with regard to the recruitment of experts. I believe that
Ms. Del Ponte referred to this matter. Unfortunately,
this competition is detrimental to international justice.
There is a second obligation that it is our duty to
recall and to underscore: the obligation of all States,
first and foremost Rwanda and the States of the former
Yugoslavia, to cooperate fully with the Tribunals.
Progress has been noted recently. There have been
arrests and surrenders, but assessments are still
disturbing, with respect to arresting fugitives and
transferring them to The Hague or to Arusha, access to
witnesses and the provision of documents.
In the view of France, I would say that, quite
simply, the lack of cooperation that has come to the
attention of the Security Council, particularly in the
case of Serbia and Montenegro and the Republika
Srpska of Bosnia and Herzegovina, must end as soon
as possible. I would like to clarify in that regard that
the Tribunals’ missions cannot be completed until the
principal accused individuals — I am thinking in
particular of Mr. Karadzic, Mr. Mladic, Mr. Gotovina
and Mr. Kabuga — have been tried. The timetable
established in resolution 1503 (2003) should in no way
facilitate impunity.
With respect to Rwanda and the States of the
region, resolution 1534 (2004), which must be
respected, provides for the enhanced cooperation of
those States with the ICTR in investigations related to
the Rwandese Patriotic Army in order to bring to
justice Mr. Kabuga and all others accused.
With respect to the former Yugoslavia, it is
disturbing to note that, 10 years later, effective and
well-placed networks continue to protect those
responsible for major crimes. It is also disturbing to
hear of grave acts of witness intimidation in some
regions, such as Kosovo.
I will conclude with two general observations.
First, the climate of intimidation to which I have just
referred and, in general, the climate in which the
Tribunals’ authority is challenged oblige us to question
the environment in which certain national jurisdictions
must try cases involving the low- and mid-level
indictees that will be transferred to those jurisdictions
by the two Tribunals. We agree with those transfers,
but we cannot ignore the climate in which those trials

S/PV.5086

will take place. For transfers to take place in conditions
that comply with international norms, the international
community must further mobilize, provide more
assistance and undertake greater monitoring. Regional
legal cooperation in that context must be strongly
encouraged, as must be the establishment of witness
protection programmes.
One final comment: the establishment of the
ICTY and the ICTR has been a fundamental stage in
the history of justice and, in a way, in the history of
civilization. From day to day, the Tribunals may
encounter frustration and weariness, but we must
always bear in mind the ideal we have set for
ourselves: to see justice done for the victims and thus
contribute to peace-building and reconciliation in
regions afflicted by horrific wars and, ultimately, to
avoid the repetition of such atrocities. That ideal is
more alive and more important than ever. Therefore,
the Security Council must spare no effort to ensure that
the Tribunals, whose periodic assessment the Council
considered today, fully accomplish their mission and
thus contribute decisively, as they have done so far, to
the development of international criminal justice.
Mr. Karev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): First, I congratulate Judge Meron and the
current permanent judges of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) on their reelection to new terms, as well as the two new
permanent judges of the ICTY. The results of the
elections show that the Member States of the United
Nations have an understanding of the wishes of the
ICTY judges. I also express our gratitude to the
Presidents and the Prosecutors of both Tribunals for
their extremely comprehensive briefings on the annual
reports.
The attention the Security Council has given to
the activities of the Tribunals, including consideration
of the implementation of the completion of strategies
for their work pursuant to resolution 1534 (2004), is
yielding positive results. In our assessment, over the
past year both Tribunals have clearly intensified their
implementation of the completion strategies as set out
in resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534 (2004). Internal
reforms are under way to enhance effectiveness and to
speed up the handling of cases. Efforts are being made
to strengthen the capacities of the court systems of the
relevant States, with a view to subsequently
transferring to them for prosecution the mid- and lowlevel leaders responsible for the commission of crimes

within the jurisdiction of the ICTY and the ICTR. We
welcome the Tribunals’ efforts and the practical steps
taken to transfer cases to national courts.
As previously noted, one of the key conditions
for successful implementation of the completion
strategies for the work of the Tribunals is ensuring
States’ full cooperation with the Tribunals. That does
not involve just the arrest and transfer to the Tribunal
of indicted individuals. It is also important to ensure
compliance with all State obligations stemming from
the Statutes of the Tribunals and the relevant Security
Council resolutions, including granting access to
witnesses, records and other evidence of decisive
importance.
We cannot fail to express concern at the
outstanding problems related to the financing of the
work of the Tribunals. As was pointed out by Judge
Meron, this year Russia paid in full its assessment to
the ICTY. We owe no debts to the Tribunal. The
Russian Federation calls upon other States to follow
that example. The significant gap between the
approved budget and Member States’ payments of
assessed contributions is becoming a serious hindrance
to implementation of the completion strategies for the
activities of the ICTY and the ICTR by the deadlines
set out in resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534 (2004), as
has been mentioned by most Council members.
In conclusion, I should to assure the Presidents of
the Tribunals that it is the view of the Russian
Federation that the successful implementation of the
Tribunals’ completion strategies means that all of those
indicted will be tried. All those accused must be tried.
Mr. Motoc (Romania): I would first like to thank
the Presidents of the International Criminal Tribunal
for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), Judge Meron
and Judge Møse, and Prosecutors Carla Del Ponte and
Hassan Bubacar Jallow, for their highly informative
presentations. We appreciate the thorough written
reports submitted to us on issues of continuing interest
to the Security Council and to this delegation.
I am also honoured to acknowledge with
appreciation the presence in the Council of the Foreign
Minister of Croatia, Mr. Miomir Zuzul, and of the
Minister of Public Administration and Local SelfGovernment of Serbia and Montenegro, Mr. Zoran
Loncar.

25

S/PV.5086

I take this opportunity to extend my delegation's
warmest congratulations to Judge Meron and to the
other candidates who have been recently either elected
or re-elected to the high office of ICTY judge. We trust
that the outcome of these latest elections will be
beneficial in meeting the terms of the completion
strategy.
Since many of the aspects related to the activities
of the two Tribunals under scrutiny today were taken
up by this delegation at the June 29 open briefing, I
will confine myself to some brief additional comments.
I wish first to make a remark of a general nature
on the work of the ICTY and its Prosecutor. Romania
looks forward to the day when all concerned countries
of the western Balkans will have cleared up the
remaining issues related to their cooperation with The
Hague-based jurisdiction. They must be able not only
to shut the door with respect to past wounds but also to
take full advantage of existing prospects for their
participation in the European and Euro-Atlantic
integrative endeavour. As a country of the wider
region, Romania will do its utmost to bring those
prospects within closer reach.
Secondly, the re-election of 12 of the 14 judges
serving on the ICTY, positive as it may be, will not by
itself solve all the problems related to the
implementation of the completion strategy. Several
other factors come into play in that respect: full
cooperation by all relevant countries, strict observance
of the seniority criterion, the transfer of cases
involving medium- and low-level accused to national
jurisdictions, ensuring the availability of the necessary
financial resources, and so on.
Thirdly, cooperation — especially in the form of
arresting and handing over the principal fugitives,
facilitating access to evidence and granting immunity
waivers to enable witnesses to provide statements or
testify before the Tribunal — is by far the most
important element in that equation. We therefore
strongly encourage all States that still need to meet
their obligations in that respect to do their utmost in
that regard. Nonetheless, a survey of the reasons
behind insufficient or unsatisfactory cooperation by
certain States would undoubtedly reveal a number of
factors affecting their capacity to do so, which should
also be taken into account.
Fourthly, we have noted the institution of judicial
proceedings, five years after the end of the conflict in

26

Kosovo, in what appears to constitute the first case
brought against alleged perpetrators from that
province. Yet it appears from the report submitted by
the ICTY that none of the three individuals involved in
that case is at the decision-making level. It might be
useful to get some indications from the ICTY as to the
main lines of approach that are intended to be taken in
that area. Our consistent stand in that regard remains
that all those suspected of having committed crimes
within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal should be
brought to justice, as that would significantly
contribute to an even greater level of acceptance of
ICTY decisions.
Fifthly, we reiterate our view that, while an
increased number of guilty pleas entered by those
accused at both Tribunals would undoubtedly facilitate
compliance with the terms of the completion strategies,
efforts to reach that objective should not compromise
internationally recognized principles of due process
and fairness or the rights of either the accused or the
victims.
Sixthly, we note with concern the information
provided in the report by the ICTR to the effect that 17
indictees and 16 suspects are still at large. In many of
those cases, there is no reasonable expectation that the
persons in question will ever be apprehended and
brought to justice.
We are also concerned at the fact that, according
to some assessments by humanitarian nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), the ICTR has
thus far focussed mostly, if not exclusively, on persons
belonging to only one party to the 1994 conflict,
although a Commission of Experts established by the
Security Council concluded that individuals on both
sides had perpetrated serious breaches of international
humanitarian law and crimes against humanity. It
would be useful to learn more about how the ICTR
intends to deal in future with those issues and to find
out what approach is envisaged by the Tribunal in that
respect.
Finally, I would like to pick up on an idea that
was put forward by the representative of the Republic
of Korea during the debate on this subject in the
General Assembly and to express our support for the
proposal concerning the establishment of a mechanism
for consultations among all judicial bodies put in place
with United Nations assistance. Sharing experiences
and information on the activities of all those courts

S/PV.5086

might prove highly useful in efforts to avoid the
fragmentation
of
jurisprudence
on
emerging
international criminal law.
Mr. Khalid (Pakistan): We would like first of all
to congratulate the newly elected and re-elected judges
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) after what became a hard-fought
election.
Pakistan attaches great importance to the role
played by the International Tribunals set up by the
United Nations to prosecute crimes against humanity
under the genocide conventions and international
humanitarian law. The cornerstone of our policy is to
promote respect for and compliance with international
law.
The Secretary-General aptly pointed out, in his
recent statement to the General Assembly, that
“Rule of law as a mere concept is not enough.
Laws must be put into practice and permeate the
fabric of our lives.” (see A/59/PV.3)
The two Tribunals are doing exemplary work in
the field of the international rule of law and justice,
which we fully support. We strongly believe that there
should be no impunity for crimes against humanity,
including genocide. We support all efforts aimed at
increasing the efficiency of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR).
We hope that these efforts will help in the fulfilment of
the completion strategy of the Tribunals.
We are grateful to the Presidents and the
Prosecutors of the International Criminal Tribunals for
the former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda for their written
assessments and briefings today to the Security
Council, pursuant to resolution 1534 (2004), and we
appreciate the efforts of the two Tribunals made in
pursuance of the completion strategy, as reiterated in
resolution 1534 (2004). We are heartened to note that
the ICTY will be able to complete all investigations by
the end of 2004 and all trial work at first instance by
the end of 2008, in accordance with the completion
strategy.
We have also noted that by 2008 the ICTR may
be able to complete trials and judgements in the range
of 65 to 70 per cent, depending on the progress of
present and future trials. We have also taken note of
other issues that might affect the completion strategy,

such as retaining old and hiring new staff, as well as
the need for all States to cooperate fully with the two
Tribunals. We believe that the arrest and prosecution of
indictees at large, especially those indicted for
genocide, is equally important for the completion of
work of the two Tribunals.
The transfer of cases involving intermediate and
low-rank accused to competent national jurisdictions
would help the two Tribunals to concentrate on the
most senior leaders suspected of being most
responsible for crimes within their jurisdiction. In this
regard, we have noted that the Special Chamber of the
State Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina will soon be
ready to accept transferred cases of lower- and
intermediate-level officials.
The ICTY and the ICTR are performing
important work in the context of the international rule
of law and justice. To borrow a phrase from the ICTY
assessments, the Tribunals continue to send a powerful
message of responsibility and accountability. They
need the support of the international community to
achieve their completion strategies. We stand ready to
contribute to the efforts of the two Tribunals to fulfil
their completion strategies.
Mr. Donoso (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank the Presidents and Prosecutors of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) for their briefings. The assessment
report provided by the President of the ICTY in
accordance with resolution 1534 (2004) contains a
detailed report of the progress achieved on the
completion strategy. The report reveals progress in
trials at first and second instance and in investigations
by the Prosecutor’s Office.
We note with concern that there is lack of
cooperation on the part of States of the former
Yugoslavia and that this continues to make
implementation of the completion strategy difficult. We
believe that the Security Council must draw the
appropriate conclusions so that the resultant impunity
can be avoided.
The completion strategy calls for a War Crimes
Chamber to be established in Bosnia and Herzegovina
as soon as possible, as provided in resolution 1503
(2003). In that connection, we are pleased to note that
the report indicates that in January of 2005 that
Chamber will begin work. We agree with the

27

S/PV.5086

assessment that the work of the new Chambers requires
considerable supervision to ensure that international
standards are complied with. In addition, we believe
that it is essential to ensure the appearance before the
ICTY of Radovan Karadzic, Radko Mladic and Ante
Godovina, as called for by Security Council
resolutions. It appears that the cooperation of the States
of the former Yugoslavia is key in this area.
With respect to the ICTR, we are pleased to note
that this jurisdictional body is now in a position to
conclude all trials by 2008, as required by resolution
1503 (2003). We further believe that efforts should be
redoubled so that Felicien Kabuga can be brought
before the Tribunal.
In conclusion, I wish to we reiterate the support
of my country for the completion strategies of both
Tribunals and for the efforts that are under way to
ensure that that is accomplished.
Mr. Danforth (United States of America): I will
now speak in my national capacity. The United States
remains strongly committed to supporting the United
Nations International Criminal Tribunals for the
Former Yugoslavia and Rwanda and welcomes the
reports provided by both Tribunals. We must all work
together to ensure success of the Security Councilendorsed completion strategies of both Tribunals to
successfully complete trials by 2008 and appeals by
2010.
Serbia and Montenegro, Bosnia and Herzegovina
and Croatia must fill their legal obligations to
cooperate fully with the ICTY by apprehending all
fugitive indictees within their territories and
transferring them to The Hague. In this regard, we note
that the Republika Srpska has failed to render a single
fugitive indictee to the Tribunal, and the cooperation of
Serbia and Montenegro has deteriorated to a standstill
in the past twelve months.
The United States and others have made clear that
upholding international obligations to the ICTY is a
prerequisite for further integration into the EuropeanAtlantic community. Serbia and Montenegro’s lack of
cooperation with the ICTY also undermines the
confidence of the international community that it is
willing and able to prosecute war crimes fairly and
effectively. Until Serbia meets its cooperation
obligations, we do not see domestic trials of ICTY
indictees in Serbia as a realistic option. We call on all
authorities in Serbia, especially the Prime Minister as

28

head of the Government, to act immediately to
apprehend and render to The Hague all fugitives hiding
in the country. We continue to support efforts to help
create the capacity for credible domestic trials of lowand mid-level war crime cases throughout the region.
We note the significant work being done in Sarajevo in
this regard and urge other States to contribute to this
court, either through direct financial assistance or inkind contributions.
With regard to the ICTR, first we note and
commend the increased pace of trials under the
leadership of its President. We urge all States,
especially the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Republic of the Congo and Kenya, to fulfil their
international obligations to apprehend and transfer to
the Tribunal all persons indicted for war crimes by the
ICTR found within their countries. These fugitive
indictees continue to incite conflict in the Great Lake
region and must be actively pursued and apprehended,
as called for repeatedly by the Security Council.
The United States has completed the transfer of
all of its 2004 assessed contributions for the ICTY and
ICTR to the United Nations and is committed to
significant financial and diplomatic support to both
Tribunals.
Before resuming my function as President, I
would like to direct two questions to the President and
Prosecutor of the Rwanda Tribunal. I would appreciate
the President’s assessment of Rwanda’s capacity to try
lower-ranking defendants. I would also appreciate the
Prosecutor’s assessment of Rwanda’s cooperation with
his Office, particularly with regard to investigations of
alleged offences by the Rwandan People’s Army.
I now resume my function as President of the
Council.
I would like to proceed as follows. I propose that
we take a 10-minute break now, and when we resume
the panel will be given an opportunity to respond,
beginning with Judge Meron. We will then hear from
the representatives of the four countries that have
requested to participate.
The meeting was suspended at 1 p.m. and resumed
at 1.10 p.m.
The President: I give the floor to Judge Meron to
answer questions.

S/PV.5086

Judge Meron: I would like first to correct one of
my earlier comments. Since we have just started the
Limaj case at The Hague, there have in the past few
days been not four, but five, ongoing trials, in addition
to the two cases that are in the judgement-writing
stage.

movement of cases — certainly to the Sarajevo special
chamber, but not only there. So we are really on track.
The Trial Chamber is also considering those motions
that have been submitted, and I am sure we will,
equally expeditiously, consider motions to be
submitted in the future.

I will begin by responding to the questions put by
the representative of the Philippines. He asked why the
financial problem exists and why the financial freeze
continues. The freeze imposed by the Secretariat in, I
believe, early May 2004, resulted from the fact that
many countries — far too many countries — were in
arrears with regard to their past and current budget
obligations to the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda.

The representative of Spain asked what we could
do with regard to ad litem judges in order to avoid
disruptions to trials. As the Council knows, the
mandate of all of the ad litem judges will expire in
June 2005. As I mentioned in my earlier remarks today,
I have already written to the Legal Counsel of the
Secretary-General asking him to do what is necessary
in order to advance elections of a new group — a new
slate — of ad litem judges as early as possible in 2005.
I am confident that the Legal Counsel will consider
that request soon.

During the past few weeks I have spent a lot of
my time approaching individual Governments and
urging them to pay their debts as soon as possible —
right away, if possible. That fund-raising campaign has
met with significant success. We have also approached
smaller countries, which owe less money to the
Tribunal but whose support is, I think, as important
morally and politically as that of the major
contributors. I am happy to report that in terms of
arrears, the financial situation of the Tribunal today is
better than it was in, say, mid-November one year ago.
I believe that we have reached a stage at which
continuing the freeze would cause havoc in the very
efficient and very intensive work that we are trying to
accomplish in the Tribunal. It would result in much
greater expense. The leadership of my Tribunal — the
Prosecutor, the Registrar and I — have appealed to the
Secretary-General to reconsider the freeze. Given the
better financial situation, I hope that the freeze will
be — as it should be — lifted soon.
I was asked by the representative of the
Philippines when we can expect cases of intermediate
or low-level defendants to be transferred to the area.
As I mentioned earlier, six motions presented by the
Prosecutor are already before the Trial Chamber, and
she told us today that she will be presenting additional
motions. Under our rules of procedure, the
determination as to whether a case should be sent on
for trial to competent national jurisdictions is in the
hands of the Trial Chamber. I would prefer not to
second-guess my judges, but I would like to say that I
am quite hopeful that in early 2005 we will see some

In order to avoid disruptions, the mandates of
individual ad litem judges who will be involved in
trials that will not have been completed by June 2005
will also need to be extended, and the ICTY will be
approaching the Security Council in due course to
request extensions for individual judges.
I would like to draw the attention of the Council
to one policy question that is not for the judges but for
the Council to decide on. This relates to whether it
would not be wise to lift the ban that exists under the
current statute on the re-election of ad litem judges.
That is a question of policy that is for the Council to
consider.
Spain also asked for more information regarding
States which have concluded — or with which we are
in contact concerning — additional agreements on the
enforcement of sentences. We now have 10 agreements
of that kind with 10 countries. But as the number of
people convicted grows as our docket becomes more
and more impressive, we need more States to conclude
such agreements with us. In this context, we also need
more States to conclude agreements with us on the
relocation of witnesses. Protection is needed because
of the testimony given — sometimes very bravely —
during our proceedings.
Our Registrar is therefore very actively involved
in trying to enlarge the circle of States with whom we
have agreements, and I would like to make a personal
appeal to Governments to be sympathetic towards
those requests and approaches, because we need that. It
was the representative of Spain who asked that

29

S/PV.5086

question, and I would like particularly to salute Spain
not only for having such an agreement with us, but for
the fact that four convicted persons are now serving
their sentences in Spain. We understand the cost; we
understand the burden; we understand the sacrifice;
and we are extremely grateful.
France made the point that the transfer of cases to
national jurisdictions should occur only where we can
expect fair trials — trials without intimidation or
ethnic or religious bias. I would like to assure the
Government of France that the leadership of the
Tribunal fully shares those views. We have rules of
procedure that in fact make the transfer of cases to a
particular jurisdiction dependent upon fairness and due
process.
I would now like to conclude by making a few
general comments. First, allow me to say how grateful
I am to the permanent members and to the entire
Security Council for the overarching message of
support for the work we are now doing to try to end
impunity, establish the principle of international
criminal justice in a very concrete and credible way,
and foster justice and reconciliation in the former
Yugoslavia.
I also heard comments suggesting that the
completion strategy should not be an excuse to create
an impunity gap. That is very much our belief as well.
We are gratified by the acknowledgement of so many
members of the Council of the more efficient measures
we have adopted and the reforms we have and are
continuing to undertake in order to make trials as
efficient and as cost-effective as possible, while
ensuring that they respect human rights and
international due process.
I am also very grateful to all the members of the
Council for the concern they have expressed about the
continuing freeze that has been imposed upon us, the
continuation of which can only be disruptive to the
goals of the Security Council and the prospects for the
completion strategy.
Finally, with regard to the Security Council’s
Working Group to review the operation of the
Tribunals, which was mentioned by Germany and
Spain, I have had the pleasure of working with the
Group twice and I very much look forward to working
with it in the future. I am sure that I speak on behalf of
the Prosecutor and the Registrar when I say that the

30

Group would be very welcome to hold its meetings in
The Hague.
The President: I now call on Judge Møse.
Mr. Møse: Let me start by conveying my wholehearted appreciation to all the members of the Council
who expressed their strong support for the Tribunals.
There is consensus vis-à-vis the two sets of obligations
incumbent upon all Member States. First, there is the
need to cooperate. Members unanimously stated that
all States must apprehend accused persons and
facilitate the transport of witnesses and the production
of documents, which would certainly be of value to us
in our daily work.
The second set of obligations relates to resources,
We have again been heartened to hear the unified
position of the Council, namely, that it is concerned
about the problems we encounter in that connection
and with regard to lack of manpower — people leaving
us — and the problems caused by the freeze. I think
that will also be a very helpful element in future
developments. Like President Meron, I have of course
been in touch with individual Member States and have
drawn their attention to the problems associated with
the economic difficulties. We have had some results,
but the possibilities will be greater when the Security
Council lends its full authority to financial requests.
Turning to the matter of agreements on sentences,
which was raised by the representative of Spain, I
simply want to say that our position is exactly the same
as that of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia. We have six agreements in that
regard, but we would certainly welcome more. Thus
far, only one State has received all our convicts. But
there will be a need for more agreements, and we
appreciate any Government’s willingness to enter into
such arrangements.
The representatives of the United Kingdom and
the United States raised the issue of the transfer of
cases to Rwanda and, in particular, the trial readiness
of that country. That decision is of course a judicial
one — again, I can echo what President Meron said —
and it will be for the Trial Chambers designated by the
President to make a determination under rule 11 bis as
to whether transfers should be effected or not. I
therefore think that, at this stage, it is better that I not
go into too much detail or prejudge the conclusion of
an individual Trial Chamber. But I note that, in the
light of the rather clear statements made in prominent

S/PV.5086

circles in Rwanda, there seems to be considerable
progress in that country in relation to the death penalty.
With regard to due process and the overall situation,
that is something we will have to revisit in connection
with the judicial context. That the Prosecutor may have
additional remarks on that issue, as he is actively
pursuing the matter.

France and the United States. We are deeply aware of
the fact that the investigation of those allegations falls
within our mandate and our duty at the Tribunal. We
are also conscious that the Security Council is
currently concerned about this particular issue.
Investigations have been conducted over a period of
many years.

The representative of Germany very kindly
pointed to the possibility that the Security Council
could meet at the seat of the Tribunals at some level. I
think that is an excellent idea. Of course, the Council is
master of its own procedures and will have to decide
upon the level at which it would wish to go to Arusha.
Let me simply reiterate the invitation I extended to the
Council on 29 June 2004, namely, that all members of
the Council are wholeheartedly welcome in order to
obtain first-hand observations of daily life in Arusha
and of our commitment to carry out our task.

At this stage, as I mentioned to counsellors at the
last meeting, we are not conducting any more
investigations, but we have started a process of
assessing what material has been gathered over the
years in order for me to be able to determine what
cases exist — and against whom — with regard to
those particular allegations of Rwandese Patriotic
Front (RPF) involvement. I have indicated to the
Rwanda authorities themselves that I am assessing the
material at the moment and will get back to them to
advise them of the outcome of my assessment in due
course. This will hopefully take place early in the year.
That is the situation as far as the RPF is concerned.

I think that brings me to the end of the questions
and observations that need to be addressed at this
stage. Let me simply say that the year 2005 will be an
important one for the Tribunal and that I look forward
to reporting about the progress made at the next two
occasions.
The President: I now call on Prosecutor Del
Ponte.
Ms. Del Ponte (spoke in French): I would like to
associate myself with President Meron’s words of
thanks to the President and members of the Security
Council for their ongoing support. We certainly hope
that 2005 will be a successful year, especially in
connection with the arrests of persons with primary
responsibility, especially as regards the Srebrenica
genocide. I very much hope, 10 years after the
commission of that crime, that we will finally be able
to apprehend Mr. Karadzić and Mr. Mladić and begin
their trials.
The President: I now call on Prosecutor Jallow.
Mr. Jallow: I would also like to thank the
President and the members of the Council for their
support for the Tribunals. I too have been heartened by
the responses we have heard concerning some of the
specific issues and difficulties we have raised. I would
like to respond to two issues that have been raised.
I would first like to address the issue of the
investigations into the Rwandese Patriotic Front (RPF),
which was raised by the representatives of Romania,

On the issue of the transfers, the assumption by
the Ambassador of the United Kingdom is quite
accurate, that out of the 41 persons or dossiers that are
earmarked for possible transfer to national jurisdiction,
the bulk would be directed to Rwanda, subject to the
conditions being satisfied for a transfer to be effected
by the Trial Chamber. Under the rules, the Trial
Chamber will make an order for transfer only if it is
satisfied that the person will have the benefit of a fair
trial in the country concerned and would not be subject
to greater penalty than he would have been subjected to
if he had been tried at the Tribunal. This means, for
instance, that the death penalty would be a bar to any
possible transfer.
The bulk of the transfers are identified for
Rwanda, largely for two reasons. First, it is the place
where the offences were committed, and secondly, it is
not proving easy to find other candidate countries that
are willing to accept these cases or that are able to
accept them without additional resources being
provided. Resources may have to be provided even in
the case of Rwanda, particularly with regard to the
establishment of a court that will handle the cases
when they are transferred. I have already initiated
discussions with Rwandan authorities and indicated to
them what measures need to be taken on the ground in
Rwanda in order to enable the Prosecutor to submit an
application to the Trial Chambers for an order for
transfer.

31

S/PV.5086

Among the measures, of course, is the fact that
we need to have a court in place in Rwanda that is
effective and operational and that can handle the cases.
We need to have an appropriate legal regime that will
guarantee a fair trial and will also cover the offences
that are within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal. We also
need to have legislation in place that will exclude the
application of the death penalty to any of those
persons, if they were to be convicted after transfer. I
believe those issues are receiving the close attention of
the Government of Rwanda at the moment. As the
President has indicated, we believe the issue of the
death penalty should no longer pose a problem. There
has been an indication that it would be excluded in
relation to these cases.
The Tribunal itself, of course, cannot provide
resources to any country that wishes to take these cases
through transfer. We do not have the resources. What
we can provide, however, is training for their staff. We
have a number of Rwandan staff in the Office of the
Prosecutor and in other branches of the Tribunal. This
staff will be able to return to Rwanda and help there
with the handling of the cases. We have also indicated
that we are willing to take, on secondment, their own
prosecutorial staff in my Office over a period of time
and then release them to subsequently assist with the
handling of these cases. That is the situation at the
moment. Once the Rwandan side has attended to these
measures, we should then be able to proceed to make
the necessary applications in early 2005 for the Trial
Chambers to decide on the question of transfer.
I believe these were the two issues that were
raised specifically for my attention. I would like to
express my gratitude for your support and cooperation,
Mr. President, as well as for the support and
cooperation of all the members of the Council.
The President: I would like to thank, on behalf
of all the members of the Council, both Presidents and
both Prosecutors for their presentations today and their
excellent work.
I now call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Croatia, whom I invite to take a seat at the Council
table.
Mr. Žužul (Croatia): I would like to thank the
President of the Tribunal, as well as the Chief
Prosecutor, for their very noble work and for their
annual reports on the work that the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) has

32

accomplished in the past year. I would also like, on
behalf of my Government, to express our satisfaction
and to congratulate President Meron on his re-election.
Allow me to now outline Croatia’s position on
this issue and explain what we have achieved thus far
in our cooperation with the Tribunal.
I wish to stress the point that Croatia was one of
the leading proponents for establishing the ICTY. We
have held from the very beginning that the prosecution
of war crimes is fundamental to establishing lasting
peace in our part of Europe. Croatia also believes that
bringing the perpetrators of war crimes to justice is a
precondition for confidence-building in the region. I
think there is full agreement on these points. I do,
however, wish to make a few brief remarks on the
general political circumstances that surrounded the key
events in the 1990s. These remarks are directly
relevant to the outstanding issues that still exist today.
First of all, I must reiterate that Croatia was
attacked and subsequently partly occupied by the
invading Yugoslav army, which was firmly under the
control of Slobodan Milošević. The fact that this
aggression was conducted within internationally
recognized borders and on the territory of the Republic
of Croatia has been reflected in a large number of
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions,
including Council resolutions 815 (1993), 871 (1993),
947 (1994), 981 (1995) and 1023 (1995). Allow me to
quote from the second and third preambular paragraphs
of just one resolution, General Assembly resolution
49/43 of 9 December 1994, at the time when Croatia
was still trying to find a peaceful and negotiated
solution:
“The General Assembly …
“Stressing the importance of efforts to
restore peace in the entire territory of the
Republic of Croatia as well as to preserve its
territorial integrity within the internationally
recognized borders, and emphasizing in this
regard that the territories comprising the United
Nations Protected Areas are integral parts of the
territory of the Republic of Croatia,
“Alarmed and concerned by the fact that the
ongoing situation in the Serbian-controlled parts
of Croatia is de facto allowing and promoting a
state of occupation of parts of the sovereign
Croatian territory, and thus seriously jeopardizing

S/PV.5086

the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
Republic of Croatia”.
Our people did not want a bloody conflict on
Croatian territory, but were confronted with armed
aggression, which had to be resisted. Our Government
had the solemn duty to protect its citizens.
Secondly, the Croatian Government invested
great efforts in reaching a peaceful solution with the
local Serb authorities. I know this firsthand, as I
personally participated in negotiations during this
period. In hindsight, I feel more than confident stating
that Croatia exerted great restraint and demonstrated
true patience in searching for a negotiated settlement.
In the end, we had no choice but to liberate our
occupied territory by military force. The former United
States Ambassador to Croatia, Peter Galbraith, in his
testimony during the Milošević trial, openly blamed
the local Serb authorities for rejecting a negotiated
settlement.
In order to fully understand Croatia’s decision to
take military action, one must take into account the
situation in neighbouring Bosnia and Herzegovina,
which was, in fact, quickly deteriorating at the time. I
will remind you that in the summer of 1995, the Serbs
had occupied the United Nations-protected enclaves of
Zepa and Srebrenica and were attacking Gorazde.
Following the brutal massacre at Srebrenica, it was
clear that decisive military action was the only way to
counter the Serb onslaught, and the world simply could
not allow Biha to fall into the hands of Ratko Mladić.
I am making these points in order to emphasize
once again the legitimacy of Croatia’s decisions at the
time. I think it is of central importance that not only we
today, but also future generations, have a clear
understanding of the events I have briefly described.
The past must not be forgotten, and, more important, it
must be properly assessed and understood.
However, the fact remains that crimes were
committed, and justice demands that the perpetrators
be properly punished. My Government insists on the
individualization of responsibility for the criminal acts
that have been committed. We understand that the
ICTY has a central role in prosecuting those crimes,
and that is precisely why we strongly supported the
establishment of the Tribunal from the very beginning.
Croatia views cooperation generally as a matter of
enforcing the rule of law and, more specifically, as a
matter of implementing the relevant Security Council

resolutions, the Statute of the ICTY and our own
constitutional law, which mandates compliance with all
Tribunal requests.
Now I would like to address the current state of
affairs in our cooperation with the ICTY. The facts
clearly indicate that the Croatian Government has been
fulfilling its commitment to comply with the requests
of the Tribunal. In March of this year, two of Croatia’s
generals — Generals Markac and Cermak —
surrendered to stand trial in The Hague. We also
secured the handover of six indicted Bosnian Croats,
who subsequently appeared before the Tribunal and are
now waiting for their trials to begin. Most recently, the
Bosnian Croat indictee Miroslav Bralo surrendered to
the ICTY authorities.
Croatia’s position has been clear and
unequivocal: all of our citizens are obliged to
cooperate fully with the Tribunal. That includes
General Gotovina, who remains at large. On this point,
I want to stress that my Government is in no way
evading its own responsibility and that we have, in
fact, repeatedly appealed to General Gotovina to
appear before the court.
Prime Minister Sanader recently stated once
again that The Hague is the only location where one’s
guilt or innocence can be established. I want to reemphasize the point that this is the only outstanding
issue that exists between Croatia and the ICTY.
Both President Meron and the Chief Prosecutor
Del Ponte stated that Croatia’s cooperation with the
Tribunal is good and that the case of General Gotovina
remains the only obstacle to our full cooperation with
it. Allow me once again to express, on behalf of the
Croatian Government, our commitment to cooperate
fully with the ICTY authorities and with the
international community in resolving this remaining
issue. We are determined to fulfil our responsibilities
as a mature democracy and will continue to insist that
every citizen, without exception, comply with the
country’s laws. In the end, those who are found guilty
must be punished, regardless of their ethnic
background.
Croatia is investing great efforts in preparing its
national courts to assume cases involving war crimes. I
am especially pleased that President Meron has
recognized the efforts we have made in that regard.
This process has been developing in close cooperation
with the ICTY and is designed to prepare judiciary

33

S/PV.5086

officials to prosecute war-crimes cases in a
professional and unbiased manner. It is not widely
known that since 1992 the Croatian judiciary has
independently conducted nearly 1,500 war-crime
cases — 1,491, to be exact. The case involving
Croatian General Mirko Norac — who was sentenced
to 12 years in prison — demonstrated that our courts
are able to act both professionally and in an unbiased
manner.

In conclusion, let me reiterate that Croatia is fully
aware of the importance of cooperation with the ICTY.
We will continue to fulfil our obligations to the best of
our ability.
The President: I now call on the Minister of
Public Administration and Local Self-Government of
the Republic of Serbia, on behalf of Serbia and
Montenegro. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.

Croatia fully supports the Tribunal’s completion
strategy as outlined in Security Council resolutions
1503 (2003) and 1534 (2004). We understand that that
is a priority of the Security Council, and we are
prepared to help expedite the work of the ICTY. The
referral of cases to competent national jurisdictions is
one of the pillars of the completion strategy. The
Croatian Ministry of Justice, Administration and Local
Self-Government is conducting a programme, with the
generous support of the Royal Dutch Government, that
is designed to train legal experts in prosecuting warcrimes cases. Most recently, a working session was
held on 29 and 30 October in cooperation with the
ICTY Registry.

Mr. Loncar (Serbia and Montenegro) (spoke in
Serbian; English text provided by the delegation): In
my capacity as a member of Serbia and Montenegro’s
National Council for Cooperation with the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), I would like to thank the
Presidents and the Prosecutors of the ICTY and of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for
their detailed briefings. As a member of the National
Council, I would also like to express my appreciation
for the opportunity to present to the Security Council
the positions of Serbia and Montenegro concerning the
issue on today’s agenda.

Croatia now believes it is prepared to assume part
of the Tribunal’s work. We will continue to pursue a
dialogue with the ICTY on that issue and cooperate in
the field of training and technical assistance. In cases
that have already been conducted, evidentiary material
obtained by the ICTY has been used by Croatian
national courts. We are pleased with the cooperation
we have established with the Office of the Prosecutor,
and we intend to intensify our regular communication
with the authorities in The Hague.

First of all, I would like to reiterate that Serbia
and Montenegro, as a Member State of the United
Nations, fully accepts its obligation to cooperate with
the ICTY. In that connection, the State Union of Serbia
and Montenegro and the Government of the Republic
of Serbia have been undertaking constant efforts to
fully comply with the obligation of Serbia and
Montenegro to cooperate with the Tribunal. In my
statement to the General Assembly on 15 November
2004, I presented concrete examples of that
cooperation.

It has been stated on many occasions that the
Tribunal must perform the role of enforcer of justice
and protector of memory. We must ensure that future
generations will be able to distinguish between victim
and aggressor, but also between a nation’s right to self
defence and the individual crimes that may have been
committed. As I stated earlier, those found guilty must
be punished, regardless of their ethnic background.

In the meetings between the Tribunal’s Chief
Prosecutor, Carla Del Ponte, and the highest-ranking
officials of the State Union of Serbia and Montenegro
and of the Republic of Serbia during her visit to
Belgrade on 4 October 2004, mutual interest was
expressed in enhanced and even more successful
cooperation between our country and the Tribunal.

We also have an obligation to resolve the most
difficult issues from our past. No nation can expect to
build a better future if it is not capable of assuming
responsibility for its own actions. I assure the Council
that Croatia is ready to do its part, and that is why we
are a credible candidate for European Union
membership.

Following
the
early
parliamentary
and
presidential elections whereby the institution-building
process in Serbia was completed, a newly formed
National Council for Cooperation with the ICTY
became operational in July this year. Since then, 53
persons have been granted waivers with respect to their
obligation to keep State, military or official secrets. All
requests submitted by the Office of the Prosecutor by

34

S/PV.5086

15 September 2004 have been duly approved; the new
requests are being processed and addressed in a more
efficient manner.
Moreover, there is another form of ongoing
cooperation with the ICTY, concerning the access of
the Office of the Prosecutor to written evidence and to
archives. A large number of the requested
documents — including those marked as containing
State or military secrets from meetings of the Supreme
Defence Council, the Parliament of the Republic of
Serbia, the Ministry of Defence and the Ministry of
Interior, inter alia — have been transmitted to the
Office of the Prosecutor. Since the establishment of the
new National Council, as many as 21 such requests
have been granted.
The competent authorities have been undertaking
a series of concrete measures aimed at tracking down
the indicted persons who are, according to the
information of the Office of the Prosecutor, at large in
our country.
As for the case involving Ratko Mladic, accused
of the crimes in Srebrenica, our authorities are sparing
no effort to detect his whereabouts. Thus far a number
of operations have been carried out, but despite
thorough and credible identity and residence checks, so
far there has been not a single piece of reliable proof
that Ratko Mladic is indeed within the territory of the
State Union of Serbia and Montenegro. We are
determined to continue to take all necessary steps to
credibly investigate whether Mladic is hiding within
our territory.
I would like to take this opportunity as well to
recall that since January 2003 as many as 24 indicted
persons from the territory of Serbia and Montenegro
have been transferred to the custody of the Tribunal. It
should be noted in particular that on 9 October 2004,
following the visit of the Chief Prosecutor Carla Del
Ponte to Belgrade, Colonel Ljubisa Beara of the Army
of Republika Srpska, who was indicted in connection
with Srebrenica, surrendered to the Serbian authorities.
He was immediately transferred to the Tribunal,
accompanied by the Minister of Justice of the Republic
of Serbia. We consider that this act may be viewed as a
step in the right direction in fulfilling our obligation to
cooperate and as an appropriate way to honour the
remaining obligations of Serbia and Montenegro to the
Tribunal.

After the surrender of Colonel Beara, the
consciousness of the general public was raised
regarding the idea that voluntary surrender is the way
to effectively carry out our cooperation with The
Hague Tribunal. That would enable our country to
move forward along the road to European integration
and to intensify its cooperation with the international
community, to which most of the citizens of Serbia and
Montenegro are actually committed. All State officials
reach out to the public on a regular basis in an effort to
explain that the State must not be held hostage to The
Hague indictees and that their surrender would
contribute to the country’s stability.
I would like to emphasize in particular the
comprehensive cooperation by the Government and the
State authorities of the Republic of Montenegro and
their full commitment to fulfilling all obligations
arising from that cooperation. Serbia and Montenegro
will discharge all of its financial obligations towards
the Tribunal in the very near future.
The Government of Serbia has also launched an
investigation concerning the disappearance of Goran
Hadzic, who was indicted by the Tribunal. The
investigation should provide an answer as to how a
leak of classified information became possible within
the State authorities, thus enabling Hadzic to flee. My
Government is committed to fully investigating and
resolving this case and to punishing those responsible.
I would like to remind the Council that the trial
for the “Ovcara crime” is currently being conducted in
the Belgrade court. The relevant international actors
have qualified the proceedings as highly professional
and in line with internationally recognized standards.
The Chief Prosecutor of the Tribunal, Carla Del Ponte,
also positively assessed the proceedings conducted by
the Prosecutor’s Office and the Belgrade court, as well
as their capability to conduct other trials. That was the
reason that the Office of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) transferred another case to the
jurisdiction of the Belgrade Prosecutor’s Office, which
is currently conducting a proper investigation.
Serbia and Montenegro is aware of its
responsibilities concerning the Tribunal’s completion
strategy. In that respect, various efforts have been
made to improve the capacity of local courts,
prosecutors’ offices and legal professionals in order to
fully comply with international standards. In that

35

S/PV.5086

regard, the Government of Serbia last week adopted
draft legislation for a witness protection program and a
law which will allow domestic courts to recognize
evidence and information gathered by international
courts. All of this proves that war crimes trials may be,
and increasingly have to be, conducted before domestic
courts.
I would like to inform you that on 22 November
there was a meeting between the President and Prime
Minister of the Republic of Serbia and their
counterparts from Republika Srpska and most of their
attention was devoted precisely to the issue of
cooperation with the Tribunal. It was concluded that
vigorous and resolute efforts should be undertaken to
resolve the remaining issues in this field.
The government of the Republic of Serbia and all
relevant political actors in Serbia and in the State
Union of Serbia and Montenegro are absolutely aware
of the obligation to fully cooperate with the Tribunal.
There is also full agreement among them on the need to
pursue that cooperation. Consequently, new steps will
be taken to fulfil our obligations to the international
community, and I am convinced that they will bring
concrete results very soon, which will testify to our
cooperation with the Tribunal. Most important, I would
like to emphasize that the Government of Serbia and
Montenegro is determined to take new steps, with a
view to achieving concrete results that will testify to its
cooperation with the Tribunal.
The President: I now call on the representative
of Rwanda, whom I invite to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Ngoga (Rwanda): Mr. President, my
delegation wishes to thank you for calling this meeting
at which the Council heard reports from the Presidents
and the Prosecutors of the International Criminal
Tribunals for Rwanda and for the former Yugoslavia.
My delegation will confine its remarks to the report of
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR).
First of all, we would like to congratulate the
President of the ICTR, Judge Erik Møse, and the
Prosecutor, Mr. Hassan Bubacar Jallow and to thank
them for their reports.
This November, it is 10 years since the Security
Council adopted resolution 995 (1994), establishing the
ICTR. This is the right time for us to take stock and to

36

make an assessment of the Tribunal’s performance so
far. We recognize and commend the Tribunal for the
work done this year. We hope that the Tribunal will
improve its efficiency and effectiveness and will
identify areas for further improvement. Continuous
improvement is particularly important given the
relatively short period of time remaining for the ICTR
to complete its mandate.
Originally, the Office of the Prosecutor had
identified more than 300 “big fish” for prosecution
before the Tribunal completed its mandate. We note
that today the workload of the Office of the Prosecutor
has been reduced from the initial number of “big fish”
to a bare minimum. As a result, we now see that such
notorious suspects as Callixte Mbarushimana are no
longer being targeted for prosecution. Instead, he is
being compensated for lost income from his United
Nations employment. My Government considers this to
be not only a slap in the face of the international
community, but also a mockery of justice. We urge the
Tribunal again to consider bringing that individual to
justice.
Based on the numbers provided by the Tribunal,
we note that by the end of its mandate the Tribunal will
have completed its work on only 25.6 per cent of the
number of suspects originally considered to be “big
fish” by the Tribunal itself. But for even that work to
be completed, the Tribunal will have to ensure that all
trials and appeals currently under way are expedited
and completed. The Tribunal must ensure that it
commences proceedings on all cases not yet begun. It
has to ensure that all indictees still at large are arrested
and prosecution started. The Tribunal has to rationalize
its internal management systems, although there has
been tremendous improvement in organization in
recent days. All States must cooperate fully with the
Tribunal.
We are concerned that late or non-payment of
assessed contributions of Member States to the
Tribunal has resulted in serious financial difficulties.
This has resulted in recruitment freezes and
consequently slowed down the Tribunal’s work. This
slowdown comes at a time when we expect the
Tribunal to be working steadily towards implementing
its completion strategy. It is imperative that Member
States make their contributions on time, in full and
without conditions, if we are to realize the goals
outlined in the completion strategy.

S/PV.5086

Rwanda is concerned not only about the
Tribunal’s efforts to meet the expected level of
delivery, but also that the Tribunal’s completion
strategy should not become an escape strategy for
suspects not yet brought to justice. The idea of
transferring cases from the Tribunal to Rwanda, as
envisaged in the Tribunal’s completion strategy,
addresses our concerns. The Government of Rwanda
considers the transfer of cases to Rwanda a key factor
in ensuring that all major genocide suspects and
perpetrators face justice, even after the completion of
the Tribunal’s mandate.
The Government of Rwanda is ready to receive
all cases that will not have been completed at the end
of the Tribunal’s mandate. We therefore urge the
Tribunal to expedite the process leading to an effective
transfer of those cases.
Rwanda commends the efforts of the Tribunal in
tracking fugitives. We also appreciate the commitment
by some Member States to offer support and
cooperation to the Tribunal by arresting and
transferring the suspects to the seat of the Tribunal. We
specifically commend the joint efforts between the
Tribunal and the Governments of the Netherlands and
South Africa in arresting and transferring Ephreim
Setako and Ephreim Kanyarukiga, respectively.
However, we still note that there is a significant
number of suspects whom the Tribunal has indicted,
such as Felicien Kabuga, Ngirabatware and others, who
remain, not only at large but in the territories of some
Member States. We wish to note with dismay that some
States have proved to be reluctant to cooperate with the
Tribunal in arresting and handing over such fugitives to
the Tribunal. We urge the Tribunal to exhibit greater
transparency when reporting and discussing this matter.
We particularly request the Tribunal always to inform,
report and involve us in discussions on the level of
cooperation received from Member States in dealing
with this challenge. Though the majority of fugitives
are in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, there are
others who are in States other than the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and we have suggested that the
Prosecutor, as a way of enhancing transparency in this
matter, also name those other States that are harbouring
fugitives.
My Government appreciates the support of the
international community, which enabled it to construct
a detention facility in Rwanda that meets international

standards. We expect that convicts will now serve
sentences in Rwanda, which will contribute to the
process of reconciliation and healing, and eradicating
the culture of impunity, as the people will now be able
to make a direct link between crimes committed and
punishments rendered, which has been missing for all
this time.
We would also like to note that Rwanda will
require support in training its investigators, lawyers
and judges, as well as upgrading its court facilities and
infrastructure, in order to handle these trials with the
highest level of professionalism and efficiency. We
shall require support from the international community
in our bid to make our efforts a success. We welcome
subsequent monitoring, but this will have to be
preceded by initial capacity-building, and I wish to
reiterate that Rwanda needs assistance in this area in
the same way as the States in the Balkans need such
assistance, and they are being assisted.
My delegation would like to bring to the attention
of the Security Council the plight of many of the
survivors of the 1994 genocide. They live in conditions
of enormous hardship. To date, most genocide
survivors, particularly the orphans, widows and victims
of sexual violence, are suffering from abject poverty,
HIV and limited access to education and medical care,
to mention only a few problems. We urge the
international community to recognize the seriousness
of the problem and support the General Assembly draft
resolution which is being tabled in the plenary of the
General Assembly in this session.
Security of witnesses who testify before the
Tribunal is another major concern of the Government
of Rwanda. At least one prosecution witness was
recently killed. Several others are reported to be living
under
threats.
My
Government
continues
investigations, arrest and prosecution of all those
suspected of taking part in these heinous crimes. We
have also invited the Tribunal, particularly the
Registrar, to a cooperation review meeting. The
meeting is expected to draw up a document on the
policy and framework for cooperation in key areas,
including witness protection. We have proposed to the
Registrar that this meeting take place in the first week
of December, and we expect a positive response from
the Registrar.
Finally, Rwanda is very much committed to
cooperation with, and support to, the Tribunal, and we

37

S/PV.5086

are happy that the President and the Prosecutor of the
Tribunal are acknowledging the level of cooperation
that we are extending to the Tribunal, and we pledge to
continue extending cooperation to the extent we can.
We also recognize the attention and support of the
international community given to Rwanda in its bid to
uphold justice and rebuild the country on the basis of
unity, rule of law and reconciliation.
Through you, my delegation wishes to thank all
members of the Security Council for their support to
the Tribunal and to Rwanda.
The President: I now call on the representative
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, whom I invite to take a
seat at the Council table.
Mr. Kusljugić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset allow me to take this opportunity to thank the
President of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, Judge Theodor Meron, and Chief
Prosecutor Carla Del Ponte for their annual report and
their very clear and straightforward messages in regard
to the Tribunal’s current problems. Bosnia and
Herzegovina once again reaffirms its support for the
Tribunal and commends its entire staff for their efforts
to prevent impunity and bring justice to the victims of
genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity,
thus setting new milestones in international criminal
justice.
In the eleven years of its existence, the Tribunal
has established itself as an impartial, professional and
competent institution. Its role has been twofold: on the
one hand, its historical role has been to set the record
straight and individualize the responsibility for some of
the most gruesome crimes against humanity, thus
relieving the participants in the conflict of collective
guilt; on the other hand, its second role has been to be
a pioneer in international criminal justice, paving a
path for establishment of the International Criminal
Court. Prevention of impunity has in the meantime
become a widely accepted international principle, and
investigations, processes and verdicts of both Tribunals
have become an important part of international
jurisprudence.
One hundred four accused war criminals have
been brought before the Tribunal. Fifty-two of them
have received Trial Chamber judgement; 30 have
received their final sentence and 10 convicts have
already served their sentences. It is not without regret
that we learn from the President, Honourable Judge

38

Meron, that international financial assistance to the
tribunal is evidently drying out, and therefore, I would
like, on behalf of my country, to reiterate the appeal to
the main contributors to continue their support for the
Tribunal for as long as it is necessary. On a more
optimistic note, it is commendable that, in the elections
held last week, 12 out of the 16 permanent judges at
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia were re-elected to serve until November
2009. That will enable the Court to carry on with the
same consistency it has shown in the past.
Bosnia and Herzegovina underlines in particular
the role of the Tribunal in individualizing war crimes
as a precondition for sustainable inter-ethnic
reconciliation in the country and in the region as a
whole. Notably, gestures made by indictees — who not
only pleaded guilty but also expressed remorse to the
victims — represent the cornerstone of the
reconciliation process.
Bosnia and Herzegovina remains determined to
continue meeting its obligations as regards cooperation
with the ICTY. Our record with respect to the arrest
and transfer of indictees still at large, requests for
documents, access to archives and ready availability of
witnesses has improved in the last year. Therefore, it is
not without disappointment that we learn that the most
recent activities of the authorities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, in particular those of Republika Srpska,
are not recognized by the ICTY, since the Chief
Prosecutor still reports that “there is no cooperation on
the part of Republika Srpska”.
On 11 October, the European Union took the
decision to freeze all the assets and bank accounts of
persons indicted by the ICTY. Just a few days later, the
Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina followed suit
and imposed the same measure. Furthermore, on
15 November, special forces of the Ministry of Interior
of Republika Srpska arrested eight persons indicted for
war crimes, genocide and crimes against humanity:
Veselin Cancar, Goran Vasic, Svetko Novakovic, Jovan
Skobo, Momir Glisic, Zeljko Mitrovic, Dragoje
Radanovic and Momir Skakavac. Warrants for their
arrest were issued by the cantonal court in Sarajevo
following investigations conducted in collaboration
with the ICTY, and the indictees were handed over into
the Court’s custody. The action was accompanied by a
statement of the Minister of Interior of the Republika
Srpska, who said, “This is the first action taken to
improve Republika Srpska’s cooperation with the

S/PV.5086

ICTY. Such actions will continue until Republika
Srpska’s cooperation with the ICTY is deemed
satisfactory.”
In spite of the evident progress achieved in
cooperation with the Tribunal, many of the indicted
war criminals have still not been apprehended; this
creates a major obstacle to inter-ethnic reconciliation,
since, for the country to come to terms with its tragic
past and to move on, all indictees, especially the two
most notorious, Radovan Karazdic and Ratko Mladic,
must go to The Hague to face justice.
The absence of full cooperation with the ICTY is
also the reason that Bosnia and Herzegovina was
denied membership in the Partnership for Peace at the
NATO Istanbul Summit held in June. Let me cite what
NATO leaders said about this in their Istanbul
communiqué:
“We are concerned that Bosnia and
Herzegovina, particularly obstructionist elements
in the Republika Srpska entity, has failed to live
up to its obligation to cooperate fully with [the]
ICTY, including the arrest and transfer to the
jurisdiction of the Tribunal of war crimes
indictees, a fundamental requirement for the
country to join the [Partnership for Peace].”
The European Union too also emphasizes that full
cooperation by the countries of the western Balkans
with the ICTY remains an essential element of the
European Union Stabilization and Association Process,
underlining that failure to cooperate fully with the
ICTY would seriously jeopardize further movement
towards the European Union.
Thus, it is clear that the failure to cooperate fully
with the ICTY is now the main obstacle to Bosnia and
Herzegovina becoming a stable, peaceful and
prosperous European democracy.
Criminal files against some 5,908 persons have
been submitted to the Prosecutor’s Office for review,
but only around 100 persons have been brought before
the courts. Thus, hundreds — even thousands — of
perpetrators of serious war crimes committed in Bosnia
and Herzegovina have not even been charged. They

include community members, outsiders who may have
contributed to the outbreak of violence, and bystanders
who did not participate in crimes but did not intervene
to stop them either.
Based on its completion strategy, the ICTY
intends to transfer to the domestic courts dossiers of
unfinished investigations and investigative materials. It
will then be up to the domestic judicial and
prosecutorial authorities to act on those cases. That
will start happening next year and will represent a
serious test of the maturity of the domestic courts. It is
also an important step in the building of institutions of
justice in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which will
contribute to significant progress in the creation of a
society based on the rule of law and respect for human
rights.
Bosnia
and
Herzegovina
welcomes
the
cooperation of the ICTY and the Office of the High
Representative in the process of the establishment of a
special chamber for war crimes prosecutions in the
State Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina and calls upon
Member States to provide the technical and financial
support necessary for its functioning. In that respect, it
is very important to complete the process of staffing
and budgeting for the special chamber for war crimes
of the State Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina, bearing
in mind the considerable workload that would be
placed before it in the near future.
We also fully support the significant work being
done by the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) mission in the region to promote
rule of law, including by strengthening national judicial
systems and supporting police reform. Monitoring
domestic war crimes trials constitutes an essential
contribution in that context. We welcome proposals for
greater involvement of the OSCE in supporting the
ICTY completion strategy.
The President: There are no further speakers on
my list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on the
agenda.
The meeting rose at 2.20 p.m.

39
