VII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

Reiterating the importance of publicity as an instrument for furthering the mandate given by the Ge~e~al
Assembly to the United Nations Council for Namibia,
and mindful of the pressing need for the Office of Publíe Information of the Secretariat to intensify its efforts
to acquaint world public opinion with all aspects of
the question of Namibia,
l. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia to send a mission to the headquarters of the
specialized agencies and non-gove~nme1;1.tal. organi~ations to discuss the question of d1ssemmat1on of mformation and assistance to Namibians;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to direct the
Office of Public Information of the Secretariat, in cooperation with the United Nations Council for Namibia:
(a) To acquire and distribute appropria_te_ films _on
Namibia, including the new film on Namibia which
was shown at United Nations Headquarters on Namibia Day, 26 August 1976;
( b) To prepare, in consultation with the South
West Africa People's Organization, a film on the contemporary situation inside Nami~ia an~ the. struggle
of the Namibian people for genume nat10nal mdependence;
(e) To continue publicity through television, radio
and other media;
(d) To continue to give publicity to the United
Nations Council for Namibia and the South West Affrica People's Organization on tt:levision in the Uni!ed
States of America and other ma1or Western countnes,
in arder to mobilize support in those countries for the
genuine national independence of Namibia;
3. Requests Member States and the United Nations
Postal Administration to issue commemorative stamps
on Namibia until genuine national independence far
Namibia is achieved;
4. Further requests the Secretary-General to direct
the Office of Public Information to continue to make
every effort to generate publicity and disseminate information with a view to mobilizing public support far
the independence of Namibia;
5. Decides to make adequate budgetary provtsion
in arder to meet the additional costs required to expand the circulation of the Namibia Bulletin and to
add German to the languages in which it is published;
6. Decides to observe the week of 27 October as
a week of solidarity with the people of Namibia and
its liberation movement, the South West Africa People's
Organization, as proposed by the President of Senegal
at the Dakar International Conference on Namibia and
Human Rights, 96 and requests the United Nations
Council far Namibia to prepare a commemorative programme far that purpose;
7. Requests the Secretary-General urgently to undertake, in consultation with the United Nations Council far Namibia, the preparation of a comprehensive
United Nations map of Namibia reflecting therein the
territorial integrity of the Territory of Namibia;
8. Further requests the United Nations Council for
Namibia to fallow the implementation of the present
96 /bid., Supp/ement No. 24 (A/31/24 ), vol. II, annex 11,
para. 25.

135

resolution and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its thirty-second session.
105th plenary meeting
20 December 1976
31/151.

United Nations Fund for Namibia

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2145 (XXI) of 27 October
1966, by which the United Nations decided to termínate
the Mandate of South Africa over Namibia and assume
direct responsibility far the Territory until its independence, and resolution 2248 (S-V) of 19 May 1967,
by which it established the United Nations Council for
Namibia,
Recalling further its resolution 3112 (XXVIII) of
12 December I 973, by which it appointed the United
Nations Council for Namibia trustee of the United
Nations Fund for Namibia,
Reaffirming its determination to continue to discharge
its responsibility with regard to the Territory in accordance with resolution 2248 (S-V) and subsequent
resolutions of the General Assembly,
Mindful that, by assuming direct responsibility far
Namibia, the United Nations accepted a solemn obligation to grant all possible support to the Namibian
people in their struggle for self-determination, frecdom
and national independence in a united Namibia,
Convinced of the need to grant all possible material
assistance to Namibians and their dependants who are
victims of South Africa's repressive and discriminatory
policies,
Having examined the report of the United Nations
Council far Namibia on the United Nations Fund for
Namibia, 97
l. Takes note of the report of the United Nations
Council far Namibia on the activities of the United
Nations Fund for Namibia and approves the conclusions
and recommendations contained therein;98
2. Expresses its appreciation to all those who have
made voluntary contributions to the United Nations
Fund for Namibia;
3. Decides to allocate to the United Nations Fund
far Namibia the sum of $US 300,000 from the regular
budget of the United Nations for 1977;
4. Requests the Secretary-General and the United
Nations Council for Namibia to continue to appeal to
Governments, intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations and private individuals for generous voluntary contributions to the United Nations Fund for
Namibia;
5. Invites Governments to appeal once more to
their national organizations and institutions far voluntary contributions to the United Nations Fund far Namibia;
6. Appeals to all States, the specialized agencies
and other organizations within the United Nations system, as well as other organizations having a special interest in Namibia, to make financia! contributions to the
United Nations Institute for Namibia through the United
Nations Fund for Namibia;
vol. 11, annex XIII.
/bid., annex XIII, paras. 89-106.

i>7 /bid.,
~8

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

136

7. Expresses its appreciatian to the specialized
agencies and other organizations within the United
Nations system for their assistance to Namibians and
requests them, in consultation with the United Nations
Council for Namibia, to give priority to the allocation
of funds for material assistance to the Namibian people;
8. Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system to render
all necessary assistance to the United Nations Council
for Namibia in implementing its programme of work;
9. Calls upan all specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system-in particular the International Labour Organisation, the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, the World Health Organization, the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development,
the International Monetary Fund, the United Nations
Development Programme, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the United Nations
Institute for Training and Research-to assist the
United Nations Institute for Namibia in all possible
ways, including the provision of specialists, lecturers
and researchers;
10. Expresses its appreciatian of the efforts of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to
assist Namibian refugees;
11. Decides that Namibians shall continue to be
eligible for assistance through the United Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa
and the United Nations Trust Fund for South Africa;
12. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia to report to the General Assembly at its thirtysecond session on the implementation of the present
resolution.
105 th plenary meeting
20 December 1976
31/152.

Observer status for the South West
Afrfra People's Organization

The General Assembly,
Having cansidered the question of Namibia,
Recagnizing the crucial phase reached in the struggle
of the N amibian people and the added demands and
critica! tasks imposed upan their liberation movement,
the South West Africa People's Organization,
Taking inta consideratian the report of the United
Nations Council for Namibia99 and the recommendations contained therein, 100
Reaffirming the resolutions and decisions of the
General Assembly and the Security Council concerning
the question of Namibia,
Recalling, in particular, its resolution 3111 (XXVIII)
of 12 December 1973, by which it recognized the South
West Africa People's Organization as the authentic
representative of the Namibian people,
Nating that the Organization of African Unity and
the non-aligned countries have recognized and invited
the South West Africa People's Organization to participate in their meetings in an observer capacity,
99 /bid., Supp/ement No. 24 (A/31/24).
100 /bid., Supplement No. 24 (A/31/24),

and 273.

l. Invites the South West Africa People's Organization to participate in the sessions and the work of the
General Assembly in the capacity of observer;
2. Invites the South West Africa People's Organization to participate in the sessions and the work of a1l
international conferences convened under the auspices
of the General Assembly in the capacity of observer;
3. Considers that the South West Africa People's
Organization is entitled to participate as an observer
in the sessions and the work of all international conferences convened under the auspices of other organs
of the United Nations;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to take the necessary steps for the implementation of the present resolution and to accord all the facilities as may be required.
105 th plenary meeting
20 December 1976
31/153.

Nationhood Programme for Namibia

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2145 (XXI) of 27 October
1966, by which it decided to assume direct responsibility
for Namibia, as well as resolution 2248 (S-V) of 19 May
1967, by which it established the United Nations Council for Namibia to administer the Territory until its independence,
Aware of the decisive stage achieved in the struggle
of the Namibians for self-determination, freedom and
independence under the leadership of the South W est
Africa People's Organization,
Recognizing that, by assuming direct responsibility
for Namibia, the United Nations and its Member States
have also assumed the responsibility of assisting the
people of Namibia morally and materially,
Recalling its resolution 2679 (XXV) of 9 December 1970, by which it decided to establish the United
Nations Fund for Namibia, as well as subsequent resolutions relating to the Fund,
Having examined the report of the United Nations
Council for Narnibia, 1º1
Welcoming the inauguration of the United Nations
Institute for Namibia at Lusaka,
Commending the steps taken by various specialized
agencies and other organizations and bodies within the
United Nations system to provide assistance to Namibia,
Reaffirming its determination to fulfil its responsibility
towards the people and Territory of Namibia,
1. Decides to launch, in suppon of the nationhood
of Namibia, a comprehensive assistance programme
within the United Nations system, covering both the
present period of struggle for independence and the
initial years of independence of Namibia and including:
(a) The review and planning of measures for assistance to Namibians by the specialized agencies and
other organizations and bodies within the United
Nations system;
( b) The consolidation of all measures in a comprehensive and sustained plan of action;
(e) The implementation of the plan of action;
2. Calls upan the United Nations Council for Namibia, as the Administering Authority of the Territory,

vol. I, paras. 272
101 /bid., Supplement No. 24

(A/31/24).
