S/2003/711

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
16 July 2003
Original: English

Letter dated 15 July 2003 from the Secretary-General to the
President of the Security Council
I have the honour to convey the attached communication, dated 14 July 2003,
from the Director General of the International Atomic Energy Agency (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would have the present letter and its annex
circulated as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

03-43043 (E)

160703

*
0
3
4
3
0
4
3
*

S/2003/711

Annex
Letter dated 14 July 2003 from the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency to the President of the
Security Council
Pursuant to the provisions of resolutions 687 (1991), 707 (1991), 715 (1991)
and other relevant resolutions, please find attached the report on the inspection
activities, conducted from 7 to 23 June 2003 by the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) at Location C Nuclear Material Storage Facility near the Tuwaitha
complex south of Baghdad, Iraq.
The inspection, carried out in connection with the Safeguards Agreement
concluded between Iraq and IAEA pursuant to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons, had the limited objective of verifying the nuclear material
subject to safeguards at Location C in the aftermath of incidents of looting at that
location.
I would be grateful if you would arrange for the enclosed report to be
distributed as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Mohamed ElBaradei

2

S/2003/711

Enclosure
Implementation of the Safeguards Agreement between
the Republic of Iraq and the International Atomic Energy
Agency pursuant to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons
Report by the Director General
Vienna: 14 July 2003
Agency activities in Iraq
1.
Following persistent media reports of looting of nuclear and radioactive
material at the Tuwaitha complex in Iraq, the Director General requested, and the
Coalition Provisional Authority in Iraq (hereinafter the “Authority”) agreed, that the
Agency would conduct an inspection, in accordance with the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) Safeguards Agreement with Iraq, in order
to verify the nuclear material subject to safeguards stored at Location C Nuclear
Material Storage Facility near the Tuwaitha complex south of Baghdad. The
inspection mission took place from 7 to 23 June 2003 and was carried out relying on
the logistical support provided by the Authority. The nuclear material inventory at
Location C Nuclear Material Storage Facility consists of low enriched, natural and
depleted uranium in various chemical forms, and was last verified in December
2002.
2.
The nuclear material inspected is housed in two buildings. Building 1 contains
a large variety of uranium compounds, for example, UO 2, U 3O 8, UCl 4 and
yellowcake. Building 2 contains only yellowcake and ammonium diuranate (ADU)
waste. The inspection team found that some safeguards seals applied to the two
buildings after the December 2002 inventory verification had been removed, as the
team had been informed by the authority prior to the start of the mission. The initial
assessment showed that most of the interference with the inventory had taken place
in Building 1, with only minor interference in Building 2.
3.
In Building 1, many containers were missing, many others had been emptied,
and a large floor area was covered by uranium compounds. The material on the floor
was recovered and repackaged into new containers. As far as possible, the recovery
operation was carried out according to material type, in order to make it possible to
compare the recovered material against the inventory. The various uranium
compounds were reverified. Many of the containers that were initially missing have
been subsequently recovered. In Building 2, one drum of yellowcake was missing
but its contents appeared to have been dumped onto the floor adjacent to where the
drum was originally located. This material was recovered. The contents of two
containers of ADU waste were also found spread on the floor and were recovered.
Assessment
4.
The inspection team verified the nuclear material inventory at Location C
Nuclear Material Storage Facility at Tuwaitha in accordance with Agency standards.
The team’s estimate is that at least 10 kg of uranium compounds could have been
dispersed; for instance, a few grams of natural uranium compound could have
remained in each of the approximately 200 emptied containers when upended by the

3

S/2003/711

looters, in the form of dust on the container walls or as material adhering to the
bottom folds. The quantity and type of uranium compounds dispersed are not
sensitive from a proliferation point of view. However, the Director General will
request the Authority to make every effort to recover this dispersed material and, if
and when the material is recovered, to return it to the Location C Nuclear Material
Storage Facility and to place it under Agency safeguards.
5.
In addition to the nuclear material stored at the Location C Nuclear Material
Storage Facility, there is also nuclear material subject to safeguards stored at other
locations in Iraq, principally material previously recovered from rubble. In this
connection, the Director General will request the Authority to ensure the physical
protection and security of the entire nuclear material inventory in Iraq.

4
