A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/50/128
23 February 1996

Fiftieth session
Agenda item 12
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/50/615/Add.1)]
50/128.

Preventive action and intensification of the
struggle against malaria in developing
countries, particularly in Africa

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 49/135 of 19 December 1994,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolutions 1994/34 of
29 July 1994 and 1995/63 of 28 July 1995,
Gravely concerned by the fact that malaria causes the death of
four million people annually, that hundreds of millions of cases of malaria
are reported annually and that infants and children under age five are the
major victims,
Alarmed by the loss of human life, the severe degradation in the quality
of life and the fact that the social and economic development of developing
countries is impeded as a result of malaria, and despite the development of
new vaccines,
Recalling agreed conclusions 1993/2 of the coordination segment of the
substantive session of 1993 of the Economic and Social Council on the
coordination of the policies and activities of the specialized agencies and
other bodies of the United Nations system in the fields of preventive action
and intensification of the struggle against malaria and diarrhoeal diseases,
in particular cholera, 1/

1/
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-eighth
Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/48/3/Rev.1), chap. III, sect. B, para. 33.
96-76813

/...

A/RES/50/128
Page 2

Acknowledging the importance for countries where malaria is endemic of
adopting national plans of action in conformity with the Global Malaria
Control Strategy of the World Health Organization, 2/ endorsed by the
Ministerial Conference on Malaria held at Amsterdam in 1992 and by the World
Health Assembly in 1993,
1.
Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on preventive action
and intensification of the struggle against malaria in developing countries,
particularly in Africa; 3/
2.
Reaffirms its endorsement of the Global Malaria Control Strategy
of the World Health Organization, as adopted;
3.
Expresses its appreciation of the efforts of the World Health
Organization and the specialized agencies concerned in assisting the
developing countries in their efforts to combat endemic diseases;
4.
Notes with appreciation the continuing efforts of the affected
countries to control the disease, in spite of their meagre resources, through
national plans and projects, and urges the affected countries that have not
yet done so to adopt national plans to control malaria in conformity with the
Global Strategy of the World Health Organization;
5.
Stresses the need for strengthening national capacity-building
within the context of primary health care so as to enable developing countries
to meet the objectives of the Global Strategy, with a view to contributing to
the development of overall health;
6.
Endorses the strategies and work plans that have been developed
through a collaborative process involving relevant organs, organizations and
programmes of the United Nations system, with the World Health Organization as
task coordinator, to provide optimal support to affected developing countries
in order to achieve the goals and objectives pertaining to the prevention and
control of malaria and diarrhoeal diseases;
7.
Calls upon the international community, in particular the donor
countries, to expand, where possible, fund-raising channels and to provide
adequate financial resources and medical and technical assistance to the
affected developing countries, in particular African countries and least
developed countries, for the successful implementation of work plans and
projects and the achievement of significant progress in both the short and the
medium term in controlling malaria, and to intensify basic and applied
research on anti-malarial vaccines as a priority;
8.
Encourages the Director-General of the World Health Organization,
through the World Health Organization’s Division of Control of Tropical
Diseases, to continue his efforts to mobilize international organizations,
multilateral financial institutions, the specialized agencies, organs and
programmes of the United Nations system and non-governmental organizations as
well as other groups to provide the affected developing countries, in

2/
World Health Organization, A Global Strategy for Malaria Control
(Geneva, 1993).
3/

A/50/180-E/1995/63.
/...

A/RES/50/128
Page 3

particular African countries, with technical, medical and financial resources
and assistance commensurate with the needs set forth in those countries’
national plans to control malaria;
9.
Welcomes the proposal of the Secretary-General related to the
struggle against malaria in Africa contained in his initiatives for Africa;
10.
Welcomes with satisfaction the agreement signed between
Dr. Manuel Elkin Patarroyo of Colombia and the World Health Organization, in
May 1995, by which Dr. Patarroyo donated to the World Health Organization the
licence of the patent rights and know-how related to the SPf66 anti-malarial
vaccine developed by him, which constitutes an example of solidarity and
effective South-South cooperation for development, and supports the request of
the World Health Organization for the provision of additional resources for
malaria research under the United Nations Development Programme/World
Bank/World Health Organization Special Programme for Research and Training in
Tropical Diseases in order to accomplish its goal of developing an effective
vaccine for the control of malaria;
11.
Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the General Assembly
at its fifty-first session the progress report of the Director-General of the
World Health Organization on the implementation of the strategies and work
plans to be prepared in collaboration with the other relevant organs,
organizations, bodies and programmes of the United Nations system.
96th plenary meeting
20 December 1995
