S/2010/35

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
20 January 2010
Original: English

Letter dated 19 January 2010 from the Secretary-General to the
President of the Security Council
I have the honour to convey the attached communication dated 8 January
2010 (see annex), which I have received from the Deputy Secretary-General of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization, Mr. Claudio Bisogniero, transmitting the
quarterly report on the operations of the International Security Assistance Force in
Afghanistan, covering the period from 1 August to 31 October 2009.
I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members of the
Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

10-21475 (E) 280110

*1021475*

S/2010/35

Annex
Letter dated 8 January 2010 from the Deputy Secretary-General of
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization to the Secretary-General
In accordance with Security Council resolutions 1386 (2001) and 1510 (2003),
I attach the report on the operations of the International Security Assistance Force
(ISAF) covering the period from August to October 2009 (see enclosure). I would
appreciate your making the present report available to the Security Council.
(Signed) Claudio Bisogniero

2

10-21475

S/2010/35

Enclosure
Quarterly report to the Security Council on the operations of the
International Security Assistance Force
Introduction
1.
The present report, pursuant to the renewed request under Security Council
resolution 1890 (2009) to report to the United Nations on the progress of the
mission of the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF), covers the period
from 1 August to 31 October 2009. As at 31 October, total ISAF strength stood at
80,123 personnel from 28 NATO nations and 14 non-NATO nations.
2.
Throughout the reporting period, ISAF has continued to assist the Government
of Afghanistan in accordance with relevant Security Council resolutions. From
1 August to 31 October, ISAF suffered 1,446 casualties, including 170 killed in
action, 1,260 wounded in action and 16 non-battle-related deaths.
3.
During this reporting period, General McChrystal, Commander of ISAF,
provided his initial assessment of the mission in Afghanistan. On 23 October, the
Commander spoke to the NATO defence ministers in Bratislava on the current
situation in Afghanistan and on his assessment of the mission. The Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), Kai Eide, was present. At the meeting, the ministers
adopted four key NATO priorities: to improve the protection of the Afghan people;
to build the capacity of the Afghan National Security Forces and facilitate their lead
role in security; to facilitate governance and development; and to engage with
Afghanistan’s regional neighbours, especially Pakistan. These priorities are
reflective of the renewed Security Council resolution on Afghanistan, which
recognizes the importance of sustainable progress in security, governance and
development and expresses serious concern for both the increase in violence in
Afghanistan and the high number of civilian casualties. To address these issues, the
Commander, with the endorsement of the North Atlantic Council, has refocused his
campaign priorities on protecting the Afghan people and on embedded partnering in
order to achieve better governance, rule of law and national security forces. During
this reporting period, the NATO Training Mission-Afghanistan was established to
consolidate and standardize the efforts of the Combined Security Transition
Command-Afghanistan, led by the United States of America, and the ISAF
Directorate for Afghan National Army Training and Equipment Support programme.
In addition, the ISAF joint command was established to improve unity of command
and unity of effort to the missions of the five regional commands.
Security situation
4.
Insurgent activity throughout Afghanistan during the quarter was higher than
the same period in 2008. Insurgents avoided direct confrontation, choosing instead
to utilize improvised explosive devices and suicide attacks as their primary method
of attack. The insurgency continues with its efforts to stir up instability and
influence the population by undermining their faith in the ability of the Government
of Afghanistan and the international community to provide security. Regional
security situations are as follows:

10-21475

3

S/2010/35

(a) Regional Command Capital: Insurgent activity decreased following a
spike in events during the electoral process. It is anticipated that insurgents will now
focus on the reorganization and provision of supplies to enable similar attacks in the
near future. The threat level in Kabul will remain high in the foreseeable future;
(b) Regional Command North: Security in Regional Command North is
relatively stable compared to other regions, and most provinces show declining
insurgent activity. Despite this, Kunduz and Baghlan faced a growing number of
incidents induced by key activists and facilitated by external support;
(c) Regional Command West: Although insurgent activity remained at
relatively the same level as the previous period, the insurgents made efforts to
disrupt the electoral process throughout the region, particularly on election day. Due
to successful operations against some of the most active insurgent leaders, the
security situation in Herat Province is expected to improve steadily;
(d) Regional Command South: Insurgent activity remains focused on
Helmand and Kandahar Provinces. ISAF operations and expanded presence threaten
insurgent safe havens and disrupt insurgent supply lines. Counter-narcotics
operations have influenced the activities of some traffickers in the region, forcing
them to temporarily move these activities into other areas;
(e) Regional Command East: Following the election day surge in events,
insurgent activity has decreased but remains high in Kunar, Paktika, Paktiya and
Khost. The successful operations of the Pakistani Armed Forces against radical
militants in Swat caused, as a side effect, an influx of refugees. Insurgents focused
their improvised-explosive-device attacks along Highway 1 in Wardak, Logar and
Ghazni.
5.
Improvised-explosive-device attacks remain the main cause of casualties
among ISAF, the Afghan National Security Forces and Afghan civilians, with a total
of 1,208 detonations during the reporting period. During the same period,
1,302 improvised-explosive-devices were discovered, representing 52 per cent of all
improvised-explosive-device events, defined as detonations, discoveries, turn-ins by
local nationals or predetonations.
Governance
6.
NATO continued to stress that the ISAF mission, as mandated by the Security
Council, cannot be accomplished without the international community assisting the
Government of Afghanistan in achieving the necessary concomitant improvement in
the development and the governance of the country. Sustained security can only
come with development and good governance. Lack of progress in development and
governance solidifies mistrust of and opposition to Kabul in the population, which
in turn undermines the establishment of security. NATO/ISAF underlines its
readiness to continue to support the United Nations and UNAMA as the designated
coordinator and leader of international efforts in Afghanistan.
Afghan National Security Forces
7.
As at 1 November 2009, the Afghan National Police had a force strength of
just over 90,000 growing towards 96,800. However, only 20 per cent of the force
has followed a police reform programme, owing to a lack of qualified police
mentorship teams. It is anticipated that the advent of a direct role for ISAF in

4

10-21475

S/2010/35

supporting police mentoring through police operational mentoring liaison teams
within the framework of the NATO Training Mission-Afghanistan will ameliorate this
situation, in addition to speeding up the growth of the force. Commitments from
nations to provide such mentoring liaison teams are urgently needed to help with this
issue.
8.
Overall, Afghan National Army numbers are growing in a positive trend, with
approximately 1,600 soldiers per month being added. If this growth rate is
maintained, the Afghan National Army will reach its desired end state of 134,000
troops by December 2011. Provision of operational mentoring liaison teams, support
to branch schools and equipment donations are key initiatives that influence field
activities of the Afghan National Army. With the intent of rapidly building the size
and quality of the Afghan National Security Forces, there will be a requirement for
continued, as well as additional, support from the international community in order to
accomplish that goal.
Civilian casualties
9.
Minimizing civilian casualties remains a top priority for ISAF. Thanks to the
implementation of the Commander’s tactical directive regarding civilian casualties,
there has been a marked reduction in the frequency of civilian casualty incidences
attributable to friendly forces. However, mistakes have been made and non-combatant
casualties continue to occur due to insurgent actions and the counter-actions of ISAF
and Afghan National Security Forces personnel. These mistakes are continuously
analysed and lessons learned are drawn from them in order to further reduce the
possibility of recurrence.
Counter-narcotics
10. As mentioned in the previous report, military operations in isolation will not be
sufficient without the effective enforcement of national narcotics laws and the wider
National Drug Control Strategy. Historically, it has been proven that national
institutions immune from the influence of drug producers and distributors are
essential to good governance and to gaining and maintaining respect of the
population. Due diligence must be shown in breaking the narcotics/insurgency nexus.
Furthermore, in the light of President Karzai’s renewed pledge to fight corruption, the
Government of Afghanistan should also take measures to discourage any associative
behaviours or practices between Afghan officials and narcotics producers/traffickers.
11. The international law enforcement operation has focused on identifying the
smuggling of chemical precursors used for illicit narcotics, primarily along the
borders of Afghanistan. This international effort, coordinated by the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), is a positive step in coordinating counternarcotics activity in the region. Similar interdiction operations continue to prove that
wherever drugs are found insurgent equipment is also found, including bomb-making
material and weapons.
12. Alternative livelihood programmes have achieved positive results. During the
reporting period, the wheat seed distribution programme to 39,000 farmers started in
Helmand Province. Districts that received or will receive wheat seed include Nad Ali,
Geresk, Lashkargah, Garmsir, Nowzad, Sangin and Musa Qalah. The recipients of
wheat seed will contribute 700 Afghanis for their portion, equivalent to 10 per cent of
the gross cost of fertilizer and seed.

10-21475

5
