General Assembly-Eighth Emergency Special Session

II. RESOLUTIONS 2

ES-8/1.

Having heard the statement by the President of the
United Nations Council for Namibia,' the legal Administering Authority of the Territory until genuine independence is achieved,
Having heard the statement by the Secretary for
Foreign Relations of the South West Africa People's
Organization,9 the sole and authentic representative of
the Namibian people,
Having heard the statements by African Ministers and
by Ministers of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries,
l. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Namibia to self-determination, freedom and national independence in a united Namibia, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations and General Assembly
resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, as well as
the subsequent relevant resolutions and decisions of the
Assembly and the Security Council;
2. Reaffirms that Namibia is the legal responsibility
of the United Nations until genuine self-determination
and national independence are achieved in terms of the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, in particular resolutions 2145 (XXI) of 27 October 1966 and
2248 (S-V) of 19 May 1967;
3. Reaffirms its support for the South West Africa
People's Organization, the sole and authentic representative of the Namibian people, and for its armed
struggle to achieve self-determination, freedom and
national independence;
4. Strongly condemns South Africa for its continued
illegal occupation of Namibia and its persistent refusal
to comply with the resolutions and decisions of the
General Assembly and the Security Council, thus
violating the principles of the Charter and defying the
authority of the United Nations;
5. Condemns South Africa for its increased oppression of the Namibian people, for the massive militarization of Namibia and for its armed attacks against
neighbouring States, particularly Angole;
6. Calls upon Member States, spedalized agencies
and other international organizations to nmder increased and sustained support and material, financial,
military and other assistance to the South West Africa
People's Organization to enable it to intensify its
struggle for the liberatioo of Namibia;
7. Calls upon the international community to extend, as a matter of urgency, all support and assistance,
including military assistance, to the front-line States in
order to enable them to defend their sovereignty and
territorial integrity against the renewed acts of ag&ression by South Africa;

Credentials of representatives to the eighth
emergency special session of the General
Assembly
A

The General Assembly
Approves the first report of the Credentials Committee. 3
2nd plenary meeting
4 September 1981
B

The General Assembly
Approves the second report of the Credentials Committee.·
11 th plenary meeting
11 September 1981
ES-8/2.

Question of Namibia

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Namibia at an
emergency special session,
Declaring that the illegal occupation of Namibia by
South Africa together with the repeated acts of aggression committed by South Africa against neighbouring
States constitute a breach of international peace and
security,
Noting with regret and concern that the Security Council failed to exercise its primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security when
draft resolutions proposing comprehensive mandatory
sanctions against South Africa under Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations were vetoed by the three
Western permanent members of the Council on 30 April
1981, 5
Noting further with grave concern that the Security
Council failed on 31 August 1981, 6 on account of the
veto of the United States of America, to exercise its
responsibilities in the face of unprovoked massive armed
aggression against Angola,
Taking note of the memorandum of the United
Nations Council for Namibia dated 2 September 1981, 7
2
Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee, the
General Assembly having convened in plenary meeting only in accordance with rule 63 of its rules of procedure.
1
Official Records of the General Assembly. Eighth Emergency
Special Session, Annexes, agenda item 3, document A/ES-8/6.
'Ibid., document A/ES-8/6/Add.I.
'See Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-sixth Year,
2277th meeting.
• Ibid., 2300th meeting.
7
A/ES-8/3, annex.

8. Strongly condemns the exploitation and plunder
of the natural resources of Namibia by South Africa and
8
Official Records of the General Assembly. Eighth Emergency
Special Session, Plenary Meetings, 3rd meeting, paras. 33-48.
• Ibid., paras. 68-117.

3

4

General Auembly-Elghth Emergency Special Session

Western transnational corporations, in violation of
Decree No. I for the Protection of the Natural
Resources of Namibia, enacted by the United Nations
Council for Namibia on 27 September 1974; 11'
9. Reaffirms that Security Council resolution 435
( 1978) of 29 September 1978, in which the Council endorsed the United Nations plan for the independence of
Namibia, is the only basis for a peaceful settlement;
IO. Firmly rejects the latest manoeuvres by certain
members of the Western contact group aimed at undermining the international consensus embodied in
Security Council resolution 435 ( 1978) and depriving the
oppressed Namibian people of their hard-won victories
in the struggle for national liberation;
11. Demands the immediate commencement of the
unconditional implementation of Security Council
resolution 435 ( 1978) without any prevarication,
qualification or modification and not later than December 1981;
12. Strongly urges the Security Council, in the light
of the serious threat to international peace and security
posed by South Africa, to respond positively to the
overwhelming demand of the international community
by immediately imposing against that country comprehensive mandatoty sanctions as provided for in
Chapter VII of the Charter;
0
'
Ibid., Thirty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 24 (A/35/24), vol. I,
annex II.

13. Calls upon all States, in view of the threat to international peace and security posed by South Africa, to
impose against that country comprehensive mandatory
sanctions in accordance with the provisions of the Charter;
14. Also strongly ur~es States to cease forthwith, individually and collect1vely, all dealings with South
Africa in order totally to isolate it politically, economically, militarily and culturally;
15. Requests the United Nations Council for
Namibia to monitor the boycott of South Africa and to
bring instances of contacts between Member States and
South Africa to the attention of the General Assembly
as necessary;
16. Requests the United Nations Council for
Namibia to study the modalities for monitoring this
boycott of South Africa and to report to the General
Assembly at its thirty-sixth session on the arrangements
which may be required;
17. Requests all States to report to the SecretaryGeneral on measures taken by them to implement the
relevant provisions of the present resolution;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly as appropriate, but not later than
31 December 1981, on the implementation of the present
resolution.

12th plenary meeting
14 September 1981
