A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/52/93
4 February 1998

Fifty-second session
Agenda item 105
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/52/637)]
52/93.

Improvement of the situation of women in rural areas

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 34/14 of 9 November 1979, in which it endorsed the Declaration of Principles
and the Programme of Action as adopted by the World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural
Development,1 and its resolutions 44/78 of 8 December 1989, 48/109 of 20 December 1993 and 50/165 of
22 December 1995,
Recalling also the importance attached to the problems of rural women by the Nairobi Forward-looking
Strategies for the Advancement of Women2 and by the Beijing Declaration3 and the Platform for Action4
adopted by the Fourth World Conference on Women,
Recalling further its resolution 47/174 of 22 December 1992, in which it welcomed the adoption of the
Geneva Declaration for Rural Women by the Summit on the Economic Advancement of Rural Women, held

1

See Report of the World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development, Rome, 12-20 July 1979
(WCARRD/REP), transmitted to the General Assembly by a note by the Secretary-General (A/34/485).
2

Report of the World Conference to Review and Appraise the Achievements of the United Nations Decade
for Women: Equality, Development and Peace, Nairobi, 15-26 July 1985 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.85.IV.10), chap. I, sect. A.
3

Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4-15 September 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
4

Ibid., annex II.

98-76519

/...

A/RES/52/93
Page 2

at Geneva in February 1992,5 and urged all States to work for the achievement of the goals endorsed in that
Declaration,
Welcoming the growing awareness of Governments of the need for strategies and programmes to improve
the situation of women in rural areas,
Welcoming also the Declaration and Plan of Action adopted by the Microcredit Summit, held in
Washington in February 1997,6 in which micro-finance was identified as an important instrument of poverty
alleviation, including for rural women,
Noting with deep concern that the economic and financial crises in many developing countries have
severely affected the socio-economic status of women, especially in rural areas, and the continuing rise in
the number of rural women living in poverty, including girls and older women,
Mindful of the need for fuller recognition and appreciation of the contribution of rural women to socioeconomic development, including human capital development,
Mindful also that, despite the global trend towards rapid urbanization, many developing countries are
still largely rural,
Recognizing the urgent need to take appropriate measures aimed at further improving the situation of
women in rural areas,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the improvement of the situation of women
in rural areas;7
2. Invites Member States, in their efforts to implement the outcome of the United Nations Conference
on Environment and Development, the World Conference on Human Rights, the International Conference
on Population and Development, the World Summit for Social Development, the Fourth World Conference
on Women, the World Food Summit and the second United Nations Conference on Human Settlements
(Habitat II), and bearing in mind the Geneva Declaration for Rural Women, to attach greater importance to
the improvement of the situation of rural women, including older women, in their national development
strategies, paying special attention to both their practical and strategic needs, by, inter alia:
(a) Integrating the concerns of rural women into national development policies and programmes, in
particular by placing a higher priority on budgetary allocation related to the interests of rural women;
(b) Strengthening national machineries and establishing institutional linkages among governmental
bodies in various sectors and non-governmental organizations concerned with rural development;
(c) Increasing the awareness of rural women of their rights and their role in political and socioeconomic development;
(d) Increasing the participation of rural women in the decision-making process at the local and national
levels;

5

A/47/308-E/1992/97, annex.

6

A/52/113-E/1997/18, annex I.

7

A/52/326.
/...

A/RES/52/93
Page 3

(e) Designing and revising laws to ensure that women have equal access to and control over land,
unmediated by male relatives, in order to end land rights discrimination; according women secure use rights
and full representation in the decision-making bodies that allocate land and other forms of property, credit,
information and new technologies; in the implementation of the Platform for Action of the Fourth World
Conference on Women,4 according women full and equal rights to own land and other property, inter alia,
through inheritance; acknowledging, in the context of land reform programmes, the equality of women's rights
to land and taking other measures to increase land availability to poor women and men;
(f) Investing in the human resources of rural women, particularly through health and literacy
programmes and social support measures;
(g) Promoting and strengthening micro-financing policies and programmes, cooperatives and other
employment opportunities;
(h) Ensuring that women's unpaid work and contributions to on-farm and off-farm production, including
income generated in the informal sector, are visible and recorded in economic surveys and statistics at the
national level;
3. Requests the international community and relevant United Nations organizations and bodies to
promote further the realization of the programmes and projects aimed at the improvement of the situation of
rural women within the overall framework of integrated follow-up to recent global conferences;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare, in consultation with Member States and relevant United
Nations organizations, a report on the implementation of the present resolution and to submit it, through the
Economic and Social Council, to the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth session.
70th plenary meeting
12 December 1997
