United Nations

S/PV.6386

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6386th meeting
Thursday, 16 September 2010, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Apakan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Turkey)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Dunlop
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Briens
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Nishida
Mr. Salam
Mr. Heller
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Rugunda
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rice

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia (S/2010/447)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-53641 (E)

*1053641*

S/PV.6386

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia
(S/2010/447)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Algeria, Ethiopia, Kenya, Norway
and Somalia, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Duale
(Somalia) took a seat at the Council table; the
other aforementioned representatives took the
seats reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.
The President: On behalf of the Council, I wish to
extend a warm welcome to His Excellency Mr. Moses
Wetangula, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic
of Kenya.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Augustine Mahiga, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Political Office for Somalia.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Mahiga to take a seat at the Council
table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend invitations under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His
Excellency Mr. Téte António, Permanent Observer of

2

the African Union to the United Nations, and His
Excellency Mr. Pedro Serrano, head of the delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Antonio and Mr. Serrano to take the
seats reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2010/447, containing the report of the
Secretary-General on Somalia.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Augustine Mahiga. I now give the floor
to Mr. Mahiga.
Mr. Mahiga: I welcome this opportunity to brief
the Security Council following my appointment as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Somalia. I wish to begin with a briefing on some of the
critical developments regarding Somalia that took
place since I assumed office.
For the past two months, I have held
consultations with various Somali stakeholders,
including the Transitional Federal Government (TFG),
the Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama’a group, and regional and
international organizations, as well as civil society
organizations. I have just completed consultations with
countries in the region, as well as with the African
Union (AU) and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD). I consult regularly with envoys
and partners on the Somali crisis on how to advance
the peace process.
Regional leaders have raised concern that the lack
of cohesion within the transitional federal institutions
encourages insurgents to intensify their military and
propaganda campaign against the Government and the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). I have
visited Mogadishu three times in the past 10 days to
consult with the President on the political impasse. I
have undertaken similar initiatives with the Prime
Minister and the Speaker of Parliament, and urged
them to resolve their differences and to continue
working together. Under-Secretary-General Lynn
Pascoe conveyed a similar message when he visited the

10-53641

S/PV.6386

region earlier this month and met with President
Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed in Mogadishu.
Earlier today, the Somali Parliament adopted a
resolution to request the Prime Minister to come before
Parliament and seek a vote of confidence. In this
context, the Security Council may wish to underscore
the need for unity and cohesion in the TFG in
addressing insurgency and advancing the peace
process.
The Transitional Federal Charter and the Djibouti
Agreement provide for the establishment of a new,
more inclusive and democratic dispensation following
the end of the transitional period in August 2011. There
are several tasks to be accomplished before the end of
the transition. These include continuing the initiatives
on reconciliation, building civilian and security
institutions, and the completion of the constitutionmaking process, which could also serve as a vehicle for
the Government and Parliament to reach out to the
population through wide consultations within Somalia
and with the diaspora. Furthermore, the leaders of the
transitional federal institutions need to urgently discuss
and agree on post-transition arrangements.
I have urged the TFG to reach out to more
opposition groups, expand the political process and
focus on delivering basic services to the people. In this
context, the TFG must develop a road map of
achievable objectives and clear timelines to be
developed for the remaining transitional period. In this
context, I have urged the TFG to convene without
delay the high-level committee to define a political
strategy and tasks to be accomplished prior to the end
of the transition. These key elements will define the
future institutions of a united, democratic and stable
Somalia.

evidently bear the political and operational hallmarks of
the international terrorism that threatens the subregion.
Kismaayo has become the entry point for foreign
fighters and war materiel for the insurgents, and a scene
of criminal activities and illicit trade. There is a need
for increased maritime and aviation security to deter
such materiel from being used against AMISOM and
the TFG. I hope that the Security Council will send a
message to those State and non-State actors supporting
these illicit activities, deterring them from doing so.
Importing radical terrorism has negative effects not
only for Somalia but for the entire subregion.
The brutal attack on the Muna Hotel in
Mogadishu during the holy month of Ramadan left
more than 70 people dead, including six
parliamentarians. On my second visit to Mogadishu, I
witnessed continuous attacks on AMISOM positions by
the insurgents armed with light and heavy weapons.
During my third visit on 9 September, accompanied by
the envoys of the African Union and IGAD, there were
suicide attacks by extremists at an AMISOM
checkpoint in the approaches to Mogadishu Airport.
The operation was foiled but left 14 people dead,
including two AMISOM peacekeepers, and several
others injured. The insurgents’ operation points to the
need to strengthen AMISOM’s defensive capabilities.

I commend AMISOM for ably defending the
transitional federal institutions and the vital
installations in Mogadishu, and for preventing the
recurrent attacks by the terrorist insurgents, led by
foreign fighters, from undermining the peace process.
While the crisis in Somalia persists, positive
opportunities still exist in both the political and
security sectors to move the peace process forward.
Scaled-up assistance from the international community
is needed to make a difference.

With only 11 months until the end of the
transition period, the TFG and the international
community should heighten their political resolve to
preserve and expand the fragile peace ushered in by the
Djibouti Agreement and protected by AMISOM. The
military capability of the TFG should be supported and
developed to expand the territorial space and widen the
political space for the TFG to operate and reach out to
the Somali people. Concerted regional and
international support and assistance are required at this
very critical stage of the peace process if the TFG is to
play the role envisaged by the Djibouti Agreement. In
this connection, the decision of IGAD and the AU to
deploy in Mogadishu 2,000 additional troops to enable
AMISOM reach its authorized strength of 8,000 must
be speedily implemented. The initiative of the United
States Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs,
Mr. Johnnie Carson, to help generate more troops,
needed equipment and financial support to AMISOM
has been well received by IGAD and the AU.

I am concerned about the security situation in the
country and its potential impact on the entire region.
The suicide attacks carried out in Kampala on 11 July

The threat level in Mogadishu and in southern
Central Somalia has actually increased; therefore
IGAD and the African Union foresee the need for a

10-53641

3

S/PV.6386

new AMISOM troop level of up to 20,000 in the
coming months. The AU Peace and Security Council
will soon submit to the United Nations Security
Council a request for authorization for increased troop
levels for Mogadishu and other strategic locations in
Somalia. However, this military strategy needs to be
developed within the construct of an overall political
strategy.
The United Nations support operation for
AMISOM has discharged with distinction its mandate
to deliver a support package to AMISOM. The AU and
the Force Commander have on several occasions
expressed their appreciation of these valuable services,
which I have had the opportunity to see for myself in
Mogadishu. I should also take this opportunity to thank
all partners for their collective and bilateral
contributions to the United Nations trust funds and
direct assistance to the TFG. In the immediate future,
support to the security sector and building the TFG’s
institutional capacities stand out as top priorities.
I should also bring to the attention of the Council
the outstanding work performed by the United Nations
Mine Action Service (UNMAS). This effort by
UNMAS staff has dramatically reduced casualties
among civilians and AMISOM peacekeepers. Through
their efforts, we have significantly reduced the number
of AMISOM troop casualties since last year.
It is not the number of initiatives for Somalia that
is in deficit, but concrete and practical actions on the
ground. As we all realize the dangerous conditions in
which the TFG and AMISOM troops operate, I appeal
to all Member States to move from the usual political
commitments to more practical actions. While one
appreciates the value of the support so far extended to
AMISOM, gaps — such as lack of helicopter support
for troop lift and casualty evacuation — still exist in
financial and material support to the Mission. I
therefore would like to stress the importance of the
predictable and timely provision of these resources to
AMISOM and TFG security forces during this crucial
time. Furthermore, AMISOM troop allowances should
match those paid under United Nations peacekeeping
operations.
Of equal importance is the proper equipping of
AMISOM troops with appropriate means to identify,
track, deter or respond to insurgents attacks in a
populated urban setting. AMISOM is currently
critically short of means to prevent civilian casualties

4

and lacks adequate surveillance and operational
intelligence systems. Pre-deployment training in
humanitarian law on the protection of civilians remains
an important requirement. The protection of United
Nations civilian staff to be deployed under the light
footprint in Mogadishu and elsewhere is also critical.
We are encouraging cooperation between the
TFG, Somaliland and Puntland authorities on matters
of security, including anti-piracy issues and the
movement of people, such as internally displaced
persons. Somaliland and Puntland indeed serve as role
models to the rest of Somalia, illustrating that peace
and stability can be achieved.
Additionally, we will continue to advocate for
and mobilize more support to the TFG, Puntland and
Somaliland in other forums, such as the forthcoming
international Contact Group meeting in Madrid later
this month and the mini-summit on Somalia that the
Secretary-General will convene here in New York on
23 September. The Istanbul Conference earlier this
year was also a useful forum for profiling Somalia’s
present and future needs and encouraging privatesector involvement. A follow-up implementation
meeting to the Conference is envisaged.
The humanitarian situation in Somalia remains
dire. The sustained attacks on TFG and AMISOM
positions by the insurgents have compounded the
suffering of innocent civilians, particularly in
Mogadishu. A growing number of civilians, including
those who had recently returned to their homes, have
had to flee the capital as the fighting has intensified.
Refugees continue to arrive in neighbouring countries
and are a major concern to those countries. The
international community ought to make more
assistance available to address the persistent
humanitarian crisis.
That there is a need for greater cooperation and
coordination among the three United Nations entities —
the United Nations Political Office for Somalia
(UNPOS), the United Nations Support Office for
AMISOM and the country team — cannot be
overemphasized. Recommendations on approaches to
integration have been laid out, but implementation has
stalled. I have initiated senior policy group meetings
among the heads of the three United Nations entities,
and a joint planning mechanism is being put in place.
However, there is a need for greater impetus in moving
the integration process forward, consistent with

10-53641

S/PV.6386

practices elsewhere and the prevailing trend for greater
cohesion in the United Nations system. UNPOS has
also initiated its regional deployment of international
staff in Somaliland and Puntland.
I request and encourage the Council to remain
engaged and seized with the situation in Somalia,
which, unlike many African conflicts, contains
multiple threats to international peace and security: a
protracted
civil
war,
international
terrorism,
international piracy and international trafficking.
Experience in Somalia has shown that the more
delayed or inadequate the response, the more complex
the crisis becomes. We have to act in a comprehensive
manner to address these complex challenges.
The President: I thank Mr. Mahiga for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Somalia.
Mr. Duale (Somalia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for giving me the opportunity to participate in this
discussion on Somalia at this Security Council
meeting. I hope to be very brief, although if I could
follow my emotions, I believe I would speak for an
hour.
We are all aware that Somalia has been in deep
trouble since the collapse of the central Government in
1990-1991, and the Security Council has been seized
with the Somalia question ever since. It is no
exaggeration to say that the situation in Somalia has
been grave indeed for a considerable time, and is surely
a threat to regional and international peace and security.
In this connection, I also wish to highlight, with thanks
and appreciation, the issues raised in the SecretaryGeneral’s comprehensive report (S/2010/447), as well as
the departments and staff who participated in its
preparation. I also thank Special Representative
Mahiga for his frank, lucid and sincere presentation of
the current situation in Somalia. We fully subscribe to
the solutions he has just presented, to be acted upon, I
submit, with the urgency the situation requires. I do not
want to dwell on the details Mr. Mahiga has given;
they express the gravity of the situation so well that I
subscribe to them completely.
I also take this opportunity to express my
gratitude for the support that Somalia has received
from the United Nations to date, especially with regard
to the needs of the African Union Mission in Somalia

10-53641

(AMISOM). Those needs are, unfortunately, in the
economic, equipment-related, administrative and
financial areas, despite the fact that AMISOM is
heroically defending a very critical situation, and that
without it the Somali Government would have
collapsed a long time ago. We therefore hope that
AMISOM will be given all the support it needs to deal
with the real problems facing the Transitional Federal
Government (TFG) and Somalia in general.
On the issue of piracy and terrorist activities, we
see a clear link between the continuing instability on
land and the increased acts of terrorism and piracy.
Simply put, we cannot afford to treat piracy and
terrorism in isolation. We must look at the real root
causes and do something about those too.
We are deeply concerned about the constant
negative and hostile media coverage of the sincere
efforts of the African Union (AU), the United Nations,
the World Food Programme, AMISOM and the
Transitional Federal Government and institutions. To
us, this negative, hostile coverage is not an accident,
but looks like part of a larger effort to keep Somalia
destabilized and give ammunition to the propaganda
machinery of the terrorists. We therefore hope that the
media will collaborate with the TFG, the AU,
AMISOM, the United Nations and the international
community in their support of all of Somalia’s efforts.
I take this opportunity to call on the Security
Council to make some significant decisions on Somalia
that will enable my country to stabilize, rehabilitate
and reconstruct, bearing in mind Mr. Mahiga’s
constructive presentation. We hope that we will see
more positive action this time than we have in the past
20 years.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Moses Wetangula, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Kenya.
Mr. Wetangula (Kenya): It is my privilege and
honour to speak to the Council this morning on a
country that has for a long time remained a source of
collective shame for the international community, a
country that is a source of insecurity and many
difficulties in the East African and Horn of Africa
region.
The situation in Somalia can be described as dire,
as Mr. Mahiga put it, because we have armed groups
that operate at will and are overrunning virtually the

5

S/PV.6386

whole country. As we all know, Somalia has not had a
government for 20 years now. It is plagued by war,
violence and instability. Through regional initiatives,
particularly through the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD), supported by the African
Union (AU) and the United Nations, negotiations were
conducted in Kenya leading to the signing of the
Transitional Federal Charter. The Charter gave birth to
several institutions, including a parliament, a
Government and other functioning institutions, albeit
very weak ones.
The Transitional Federal Charter comes to an end
in August next year. As we face the sunset of the
Charter, there is heightened fighting, a lack of effective
central government and a rapid growth in the number
of incidents of terrorism and piracy. A group called
Al-Shabaab has virtually overrun the Government, and
were it not for the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), which continues to hold the fort around
Villa Somalia, Al-Shabaab would perhaps have overrun
the whole Government by now. Indeed, we know that
they have carried out several successful attacks on
Villa Somalia.
The situation in Somalia is now overflowing into
its neighbours. On the day of the finals of the World
Cup in South Africa, very devastating, cowardly and
wicked attacks were carried out in our neighbouring
country, Uganda, where a large number of lives was
lost, lives of both Ugandan nationals and Kenyan
nationals. It has turned out, as claimed by the group
itself, that this attack was mounted by Al-Shabaab
using collaborators and agents from within the region.
In fact, some of the arrested suspects are young people,
of both Somali and non-Somali ethnic backgrounds,
from Kenya.
This fact brings very close to home — to my
country — the real possibility of the chaos in Somalia
spilling over to Kenya. Indeed, the Al-Shabaab
leadership has repeatedly proclaimed that the next
target of attack will be Nairobi, Kenya, Bujumbura,
Burundi and other neighbouring capitals, such as Addis
Ababa, Ethiopia.
As I have said, the story of Somalia is not new.
There has been no lack of initiatives. I think that what
has been lacking is the commitment to see those
initiatives through.
I want to emphasize the need to recognize the
centrality of IGAD in trying to resolve the problems of

6

Somalia. IGAD, as an organization, has been acting as
the representative of the AU, and to some degree in
collaboration with the United Nations. Through IGAD,
a negotiated Charter was signed. Through IGAD, the
Transitional Federal Government (TFG) was formed,
and in collaboration with the United Nations the
Djibouti process that put in place the current
Government was undertaken.
Sometimes, as a region, we feel a little nervous to
see a proliferation of initiatives and meetings and
conferences in several capitals. These are helpful, but
sometimes nonetheless born out of inadequate
consultative processes.
I want to laud the meeting we had in Istanbul,
chaired by the Secretary-General and supported by the
AU, where among the many things agreed upon was
that IGAD was going to remain central to the process
of pushing Somali issues forward. Indeed, the
Secretary-General stated then that initiatives that will
come thereafter will be called IGAD-plus initiatives,
for us to be able to chaperone the Somali problems.
After the Istanbul conference, we had a meeting
of IGAD at the summit level in Addis Ababa where
several positive and proactive pronouncements were
made. First, it was acknowledged that the Government
in Somalia was extremely weak and was in a state that
required very urgent intervention.
Secondly, it was agreed that IGAD, the AU and
the international community, including the United
Nations, should shift gears from business-as-usual
engagement on Somalia and take a more proactive and
better defined trajectory towards seeing how to help
this unfortunate neighbouring country.
Thirdly, it was agreed, that while AMISOM had
an authorized required force of 8,100, even if that
optimal number were achieved, it would remain
inadequate. The region set a figure of a 20,000- to
22,000-strong force, but also agreed and acknowledged
that the problem for Somalia was not and is not the
lack of troops; it is the lack of will of the international
community to bring troops together.
It was noted that there are troops that have been
trained by countries of the region — Ethiopia,
Djibouti, Kenya and Uganda. There are also offers
from Tanzania and some other southern African
countries to train more troops. It was equally noted
that, through the AU peace and security architecture

10-53641

S/PV.6386

and the birth of the Eastern Africa Standby Force, we
have a 15,000-strong troop contingent available that
can be effectively put to use in Somalia.
It was also agreed that the region, particularly
IGAD and the AU, will want to see a joint approach in
which we have a coordinated joint command but with
AMISOM at the apex of the Eastern African Standby
Force, troops trained by neighbours at the request of
the TFG and the international community, and then
other troops that may be available so that the approach
to bringing normalcy to Somalia is not disjointed. This
approach, in Kenya’s view, is predicated on the fact
that it is seeking not a military solution to the problems
of Somalia but a process of securing the integrity of the
territory of Somalia and giving capacity and strength to
the Government of Somalia, because a Government is
no Government if it is not able to provide for the peace
and security of its people and secure the territorial
integrity of its country.
We did this knowing that we have constantly
encouraged the Transitional Federal Government to
reach out to its opponents to discuss and find a lasting
solution to the problems of their country. This was
reiterated in Kampala at the African Union summit
where, apart from the pronouncement by the AU, there
was a mini-IGAD summit, also attended by the
Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs of the
United States, Johnnie Carson, and IGAD partners,
which include several European countries and the
United States. This point was overwhelmingly
endorsed and immediately achievable goals were set in
place. Raising 2,000 troops within 20 days has not
been done. We are closing in on the goal of raising an
additional 2,000 troops within 60 days, but we have not
met the first benchmark. There was also an undertaking
by the United States to call upon our richer friends —
particularly from Europe, though Japan and others
were mentioned — to put some money in the basket to
enable the troops we are putting together, which will
not be within the framework of AMISOM but under a
coordinated command with AMISOM, to be paid their
monthly stipends and rations so that they will be able
to carry out their duties. I hope that together we will be
able to see this happen.
Since Kampala, no meeting has been called. We
hope that after the General Assembly gathering of
heads of State, we can return to Africa and have a
meeting to be coordinated, we hope, by the United
States, which co-chaired the Kampala meeting, and the

10-53641

United Nations. As the Council can see, it is not lack of
initiatives that is the problem in Somalia. It is the
failure to fulfil our promises and the lack of a
coordinated approach in our engagement with Somalia.
We fully welcome the appointment of
Ambassador Mahiga. As he is a son of the region, I
have no doubt that he will be able to understand even
better the problems of Somalia. In our meetings, we
have clearly indicated to him that it does not matter
how many warships we may deploy to fight piracy; as
long as Somalia remains chaotic, piracy will be born
on land and manifested at sea. And if the TFG were to
collapse — and god forbid that should occur — and the
group called Al-Shabaab were to pursue an agenda and
ideology whose foundation is the destruction of all
non-Muslim people in region, as a country and as a
neighbour we would be uncomfortable with a situation
like that. We have no problem with Islam as a religion,
and let nobody make any mistake about that because in
my country we have a very large Muslim population.
We have Muslim ministers, but we are a secular State
and a secular State we want to remain.
I would want to urge the Security Council to
enforce some of the decisions that we have made in the
region. For instance, IGAD recommended the
imposition of targeted sanctions on certain aspects of
Somalia, including airfields in the hands of Al-Shabaab
and other negative elements and the blockade of the
port of Kismaayo, which is the main supply line for
Al-Shabaab. The AU endorsed that, and through this
process the United Nations imposed some targeted
sanctions on the State of Eritrea, which to us in the
region remains one of the principal collaborators and
suppliers of Al-Shabaab. We want to see this process
enforced.
I can assure you, Mr. President, and Ambassador
Mahiga will bear witness for me on this, that if the port
of Kismaayo were blockaded, 70 per cent of the
strength of Al-Shabaab would be dealt a blow because
it is the principal supply line and only about 70
kilometres from the international boundary with
Kenya. The Council can see what type of situation that
puts my country’s peace in.
As I come to an end, I also want to urge the
United Nations to support the region in formulating —
perhaps through Mr. Mahiga’s Office — a very robust
and clear communication strategy to counter the
propaganda from Al-Shabaab. It runs powerful radio

7

S/PV.6386

stations and powerful communications tools that
overshadow or overrun any Government initiative in
Somalia.
The most important point is to now address the
sunset days of the Transitional Federal Charter, which
will expire in August 2011. It has given birth to
legitimate institutions that have helped run Somalia
and to legitimate engagement between nations and the
Government of Somalia. IGAD has already pronounced
itself on this, and we have looked at the Charter and at
the clauses that might allow the extension the life of
the Charter. But we do not want to extend the life of
the Charter only to sustain the status quo. We would
want to extend the life of the Charter on the basis of
reason and thinking that will make a difference and
achieve that which we probably will not have achieved
during the first life of the Charter. That can be done,
and the region will be able to midwife those efforts.
We hope to see the international community come
together in a more coherent, proactive and sincere
manner to assist the region to help Somalia.
The President: I shall now give the floor to the
members of the Security Council.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to thank this morning the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia,
Mr. Augustine Mahiga, for his first appearance in his
new capacity in the Security Council. I would also like
to thank the honourable Foreign Minister of Kenya for
his very heartfelt and thoughtful and insightful
contribution to our discussion today, and the Permanent
Representative of Somalia for his contribution to the
debate.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his latest report (S/2010/447) and for the briefing
that the Special Representative gave us this morning.
We greatly appreciate the work of the Special
Representative, including that of his predecessor, his
team and all the United Nations agencies active in
Somalia. The United Kingdom looks forward to
working closely with him on the Somalia issue, and we
offer him our full support.
The situation in Somalia continues to be of deep
concern. There have been a few bright spots, as the
Secretary-General’s report spells out. The free and fair
presidential elections in Somaliland in July led to a
peaceful transfer of power from one Government to

8

another. But that is hugely overshadowed by some very
distressing incidents, including the Kampala bombings,
the attack on the Muna hotel, and the attacks by armed
opposition groups in Mogadishu during the holy month
of Ramadan. These have been shocking reminders of
the impact of instability in Somalia, both on the Somali
people and on the wider region. The Minister set out
very starkly today the immediate threat to Kenya from
the instability in Somalia.
We extend our deepest sympathy to the
Government of Uganda, the Transitional Federal
Government (TFG) and the Somali people for the
tragic losses they have suffered. I pay particular tribute
to Uganda and Burundi for their continuing
commitment to the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and the difficult operation they face in
Somalia. We unreservedly condemn any attacks on
AMISOM, including attacks on the Transitional
Federal Government and the Somali people.
It is essential that all parties fully support the
Djibouti peace process and join efforts to bring peace
to Somalia. There are only 11 months remaining of the
transitional period, as defined by the Djibouti
Agreement. Important transitional tasks still need to be
completed. It is imperative that the Transitional Federal
Government and the international community intensify
their efforts towards a more peaceful and stable
Somalia.
I would like to make five points this morning on
the United Nations operation in Somalia, the political
situation, peacekeeping, the problem of piracy and the
humanitarian situation.
First, we welcome the Secretary-General’s work
to review the United Nations operation in Somalia and
his efforts to encourage better coordination between
the United Nations agencies. We must have a more
coherent and integrated United Nations approach if the
United Nations is to deliver the strong leadership that
we all want to see. We welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s plans to increase the United Nations
presence in Somalia. We do not underestimate the
difficulties, but we need all parts of the United Nations
working in an integrative manner to deliver a single
strategy. We look forward to seeing further details of
how this can be achieved.
Secondly, greater United Nations engagement
cannot deliver progress without political leadership
from the TFG. We urge the TFG to intensify its efforts

10-53641

S/PV.6386

towards dialogue and reconciliation and to deliver
better governance and reform of the security sector.
The constitutional process provides an opportunity for
the TFG to reach out to those outside the Djibouti
process and to give them a stake in Somalia’s future.
The TFG must resolve its internal differences, which
are deeply damaging. There can be no successful
military strategy in a political vacuum.
The actions of spoilers also need to be addressed.
Arming, training and supporting armed opposition
groups in Somalia, particularly Al-Shabaab, has a
serious destabilizing effect. The AMISOM Force
Commander made that clear when he briefed Council
members on Monday this week, and the Foreign
Minister has reinforced that message to the Council
today. Those actions are also in contravention of
Security Council resolutions. We strongly support the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
calling on all parties to abide by their obligations and
work to foster peace in Somalia and the wider region,
and the Council must assume its responsibilities in this
respect.
Thirdly, AMISOM continues to play a vital role
in providing security. We welcome the recent
announcement
by
the
African
Union,
the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
those in the region about plans to increase the number
of AMISOM troops. And we agree with the three
briefers this morning that AMISOM and the TFG
security forces in Somalia need more support.
The United Kingdom was pleased to be able to
contribute $1.5 million to AMISOM earlier this year
for radio support, in addition to the $15 million we
have already given via the trust fund. We will continue
to look at how we can provide support in the future. It
is essential that AMISOM and the TFG receive
adequate funding, and we look forward to discussing
this issue in more detail with the Secretary-General.
Fourthly, the international community must also
continue its efforts through the Contact Group on
Piracy off the Coast of Somalia, and we look forward
to the comprehensive report that will be presented to
the Security Council in October on this issue.
Finally, the most serious impact of the instability
in Somalia is on the Somali people themselves. The
humanitarian situation remains deeply worrying and
has been compounded by recent fighting and attacks on
humanitarian workers and their compounds by armed

10-53641

opposition groups, including Al-Shabaab. We hope that
the World Food Programme will be able to restore its
programmes in southern central Somalia as soon as it is
safe to do so.
Now more than ever, the United Nations must
show strong leadership in Somalia, and the
international community must do all it can to ensure
that the United Nations has the support it needs. We
welcome Mr. Mahiga’s determination to give that
leadership, and we look forward to discussing these
issues further at next week’s high-level meeting.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): I want to
begin by thanking Special Representative Mahiga for
his comprehensive and very informative briefing, and
for his active leadership on behalf of Somalia. I also
want to salute the Foreign Minister of Kenya and the
Permanent Representative of Somalia for their very
powerful presentations, which, as I think Council
members could see, had an impact on all of us as we
listened.
The United States shares the Secretary-General’s
view of the exceedingly dangerous situation in
Somalia. Long-term security and stability in Somalia
depend on a stable and effective Government. We
continue to support the Djibouti peace process, and we
call upon the Transitional Federal Government (TFG)
to focus on completion of the transitional tasks in the
spirit of inclusivity envisioned in the peace process.
We also urge the TFG to work out its differences, in the
interest of the people of Somalia.
Supporting the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) is key both to stabilizing Mogadishu and
to advancing the Somali peace process. We welcome
and we commend Uganda’s and Burundi’s increased
troop contributions to AMISOM, which now has a
force of nearly 7,000. We salute their sacrifices, and we
thank the forces and their Governments for their
sustained commitment and support. We call on troopcontributing countries to increase their support to
AMISOM so that it can reach its mandated strength.
Since AMISOM’s deployment, in 2007, the United
States has obligated more than $185 million to provide
logistic support, equipment and pre-deployment
training to its forces. We again encourage other nations
to step forward with additional bilateral contributions.
The United States recognizes the calls to increase
AMISOM troop levels beyond the current mandated
strength and the various proposals to expand United

9

S/PV.6386

Nations assessed funding for AMISOM. We are
currently reviewing those proposals and will give them
thorough consideration. We look forward to receiving
more details from the Secretariat, the African Union
(AU) and AMISOM.
The United States condemns the increased
fighting in Somalia. We also denounce the several
recent Al-Shabaab attacks, including the 24 August
attack at the Hotel Muna, the 30 August attack on the
presidential palace in Mogadishu and the 9 September
attack on the AMISOM position at the airport, which
left TFG ministers, AMISOM peacekeepers and
innocent civilians dead. Such incidents demonstrate the
need for continued support to AMISOM to counter
groups such as Al-Shabaab and others that work to
destabilize the TFG and inflict further chaos on the
Somali people.
We remain deeply concerned as well about piracy
off the coast of Somalia. Long-term security and
stability in Somalia are necessary, as has been
underscored, to address the root causes of piracy, and
we anticipate an active discussion of the linkages
between security and development during the next
meeting of the International Contact Group on Somalia
later this month.
At the same time, we must respond to the
immediate challenges that piracy poses. The United
Nations recently published a report (S/2010/394) on
options for better prosecuting and imprisoning pirates.
The United States remains committed to working
together to address piracy off the Somali coast,
including on issues of prosecution and incarceration.
The United States is deeply concerned as well
about the victims of incidents of sexual violence in
camps for internally displaced persons (IDPs).
Deliberately
targeting
vulnerable
populations
undermines stability and exacerbates an already dire
humanitarian situation. The United States also strongly
condemns the use of children to pursue violent
agendas. We call on all parties to immediately release
all children within their ranks, to halt child recruitment
and to provide for the proper reintegration into civilian
life of former child soldiers. Let me say again what I
have said before: the only tolerable number of child
soldiers is zero; the only tolerable amount of sexual
violence is zero.
Today’s
briefing
also
underscores
the
extraordinary strains on the humanitarian situation in

10

Somalia. The United Nations Food Security and
Nutrition Analysis Unit reports that approximately
2 million people will need humanitarian aid between
July and December of this year and that thousands
continue to be uprooted and displaced every month.
The Famine Early Warning System of the United States
Agency for International Development (USAID)
estimates that approximately a quarter of the Somali
population remains food-insecure. and malnutrition
rates remain at crisis levels. Lack of security and
stability continues to worsen this already troubling
situation.
The United States remains deeply committed to
responding to the ongoing humanitarian crisis in
Somalia. We condemn Al-Shabaab’s obstruction of aid
delivery to more than a million Somalis. We also
strongly condemn targeted attacks on humanitarian aid
workers, kidnappings and extortion by Al-Shabaab and
other violent extremists, which further hamper the
provision of life-saving humanitarian aid.
In closing, let me reiterate that the United States
remains committed to seeing peace and stability take
hold in Somalia for the sake of the Somali people and
the region. We continue to support the Djibouti peace
process
and
Somalia’s
Transitional
Federal
Government and its efforts to bring security and
stability to a country that has already endured far too
much.
Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): I thank Ambassador
Mahiga for his comprehensive briefing, and I reiterate
today my delegation’s firm support for his difficult
work. I also welcome the presence of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Kenya and thank him for his
statement, which, as rightly observed by Ambassador
Susan Rice, had a very strong impact on all of us. I
also welcome the presence of the Permanent
Representative of Somalia among us this morning.
Less than one year before the conclusion of the
transitional period in Somalia, we must make an
objective assessment of where we stand and where we
are headed. It is undeniable that some progress has
been made, the most important elements of which are
the preservation of the Transitional Federal
Government (TFG) and the resumption of
parliamentary activity. At the same time, it is clear that
the challenges remain daunting. The heinous attacks in
Kampala and the recent violence perpetrated by
Al-Shabaab in Mogadishu — in defiance even of

10-53641

S/PV.6386

Ramadan — provide compelling evidence of this. It is
also disturbing that the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) has not yet been able to move
from the initial phase of its original plan to stabilize
the country.
In order to overcome the current deadly
stagnation, there is a need to more firmly combine
enhanced political efforts and increased military power.
Regarding the first aspect, it is very positive that
the TFG has been able to reach agreements on
cooperation with Ahlu Sunnah Wal Jama’a and regional
administrations. Yet, for the past several months, the
transitional federal institutions have been mired in
disputes within and among themselves. This has
deviated attention from the priorities for peace and
stability in Somalia, such as expanding political
outreach to further broaden the TFG’s support base and
completing outstanding transitional tasks. The unity,
resolve and public spirit of the transitional federal
institutions are indispensable elements of any
successful strategy for the stabilization of Somalia. An
inclusive and genuine process of consultations, as
envisaged for the drafting of the constitution, can also
serve as an excellent opportunity to re-energize the
political process.
With regard to security, AMISOM is to be truly
commended. It has been able to ensure the survival of
the transitional federal institutions in Mogadishu under
relentless attack, secure strategic infrastructure and
facilitate the provision of humanitarian assistance. This
would not have been possible without the sacrifices
made by Uganda and Burundi. We also welcome the
decision by the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) to deploy 2,000 troops and
enable AMISOM to reach its authorized strength, and
the current planning of the African Union (AU) on new
phases for the strengthening of AMISOM.
It is clear, however, that the Mission needs more
help from us. The Security Council, the United Nations
and the international community as a whole should
complement the subregional and regional efforts.
We appreciate the progress towards a light
footprint of the United Nations in Mogadishu and
elsewhere in Somalia, and on the provision of the
support package by the United Nations Support Office
for AMISOM. Brazil looks forward to the SecretaryGeneral’s proposals on an integrated United Nations
presence in the country as a means to enhance the

10-53641

effectiveness and coherence
activities on the ground.

of

United

Nations

One major concern is the lack of comprehensive,
coherent, predictable and sustainable financial support
to AMISOM and the TFG security forces. It is
worrying that, one and a half years after the Brussels
Conference, the pledges made there are still not fully
disbursed. In addition, the usual multiple earmarks and
caveats with respect to the funds disbursed undermine
the effectiveness of AMISOM and the TFG security
forces in a very challenging environment. We urge
donors to consider lifting them without delay.
Financial
predictability
is
of
particular
importance with regard to the remuneration of soldiers.
If a steady flow of funding for salaries is not ensured,
there is a real danger that efforts and expenses
undertaken by donors in training troops may be
squandered through their desertion to others who pay
better and more regularly. This must be avoided.
Raising the standards of support for AMISOM to those
of United Nations peacekeeping missions is also
important to secure additional troops, especially when
we consider the current IGAD/AU plan for increasing
the Mission’s authorized strength.
We should certainly also do more on the human
dimension of the conflict in Somalia. We welcome the
discussions among the United Nations, the AU and
AMISOM on strengthening the protection of civilians.
The proposal to document the most serious violations
of human rights and humanitarian laws is worthy of
support, especially in a situation where Al-Shabaab is
recruiting children as young as nine years old and
imposing cruel and degrading punishments such as
beheadings, stonings and amputations.
Here as well, financing is a serious problem, as
we know. Significant gaps remain in humanitarian
funding for Somalia, which further worsens the
situation of a people already deeply affected by years
of violence and lack of effective government. The fact
that key activities such as nutrition, health care and
water are less than 40 per cent funded is rather
troubling. Brazil is trying to do its part. We recently
made a voluntary contribution to the World Food
Programme (WFP), to be used in Somalia. We hope
that WFP can soon be in a position to safely resume its
activities in southern central Somalia, beyond
Mogadishu.

11

S/PV.6386

Next year will not only mark the end of the
transitional period in Somalia; it will also be the
twentieth anniversary of a conflict that has already
created a generation of Somalis who do not really
know what peace is. It is time for decisive action to put
an end to this situation.
Mr. Nishida (Japan): I would like to thank
Mr. Mahiga for his first briefing to the Council as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Somalia, and extend our appreciation for the very
strong messages from the Foreign Minister of Kenya
and the Permanent Representative of Somalia.
Japan continues to be concerned at the very
fragile security situation in Somalia, as evidenced by
the recent series of terrorist attacks against the
Transitional Federal Government (TFG) and the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM),
including the latest attack at Mogadishu Airport. It is
our view that, in order to stabilize the political and
security situation in Somalia, the TFG must first of all
strive for political unity and improvement of
management
within
itself.
The
international
community, in particular AMISOM and the United
Nations, can then focus on making concerted efforts to
support the TFG. Japan hopes that the mini-summit
meeting on Somalia at the margins of the new General
Assembly session next week will lay a foundation for
countries, including donors, to further strengthen and
better coordinate their cooperation in support of
Somalia.
Japan takes note of the efforts of the TFG in
promoting the Djibouti process, including the
reorganization of its cabinet to include Ahlu Sunna Wal
Jama’a, since our last briefing in the Security Council.
However, we are concerned that little progress has
been made in the political dialogue with moderate
opposition groups. Japan believes that it is of the
utmost importance that the TFG intensify its efforts to
garner support from moderate opposition groups, and
that the role of international community is to help to
create an environment conducive to that end.
The role of AMISOM is significant for protecting
the TFG and maintaining security in Mogadishu. In this
regard, we pay tribute to the troop-contributing
countries, Burundi and Uganda, for their dedication
and commitment. Japan also appreciates the efforts of
the African Union and the Inter-Governmental
Authority on Development to achieve the mandated

12

AMISOM troop level of 8,000, as authorized by
resolution 1910 (2010). In this context, we welcome
the recent deployment of an additional battalion by
Uganda, and hope that other countries that have
pledged deployments will follow through.
We recognize that the steady implementation of
United Nations logistical support to AMISOM is very
important in supporting the Mission’s work. In this
regard, Japan is ready to continue consultations on the
issue of AMISOM contingent-owned equipment, taking
into account the course of discussions in the Security
Council towards adopting relevant resolutions. We
believe that this issue must be discussed as part of an
integrated strategy, under which the strengthening of
AMISOM will contribute to the political process in
Somalia.
The efforts of the TFG and AMISOM need to be
reinforced by the support of the international
community, including the United Nations. In this
regard, Japan appreciates the engagement of
Mr. Mahiga and the Secretariat in establishing a light
footprint presence in Mogadishu. Japan further
appreciates the continuing provision of humanitarian
assistance under very difficult circumstances.
Japan, for its part, has been actively engaged in
discussion on Somalia issues in the Security Council,
the International Contact Group on Somalia and other
forums, and has provided assistance of $124.4 million
since 2007, focusing on two pillars: humanitarian
assistance and restoration of infrastructure, on the one
hand; and the strengthening of security in Somalia,
mainly through the trust funds, in support of Somali
security institutions and AMISOM, on the other. We
are determined to continue our engagement to support
Somalia, in cooperation with all Member States.
Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I should like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Mahiga, for the briefing he
has just given us and to hail his courage when on
9 September he was confronted with an attack on the
airport in Mogadishu, where he was to meet President
Sharif, accompanied by the Special Representative of
the Chair of the African Union Commission and the
Special Envoy of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD). I would also like to thank the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kenya and the
Permanent Representative of Somalia for the candour

10-53641

S/PV.6386

and the clarity of their statements. I note their
commitment to work for stability in Somalia.

Finally, France is involved in Operation Atalanta to
combat piracy off the coast of Somalia.

As emphasized by the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2010/447), the security situation in Somalia
is deteriorating in a troubling way. The offensive
launched by extremists in recent weeks has led to
violent clashes in Mogadishu. The militias control
today a significant portion of the capital, threaten the
headquarters of the transitional institutions and are
capable of infiltrating neighbourhoods controlled by
the Transitional Federal Government (TFG). Attacks
against parliamentarians on 24 August and against
representatives of the international community and the
President of Somalia at the airport a week ago, are
evidence of that.

Support for Government forces and AMISOM
cannot take place without a genuine strategy
coordinated with the political action of the TFG. The
United Nations has a role to play in this matter.
Politically and on the ground, the support of the
countries of the region is necessary for success.

In Somalia the main day-to-day victims of
terrorists are civilians. In the past four months, 1,600
civilians have been admitted to Mogadishu hospitals as
a result of fighting, including 400 children under
5 years of age. Insecurity also undermines the TFG’s
reconstruction
efforts
and
harms
economic
development in the country.
The capacity of Al-Shabaab to cause harm also
extends beyond the borders of Somalia and involves
the entire region, as shown by the bloody attacks in
Kampala on 11 July. Finally, instability in Somalia is
still fertile ground for the piracy that threatens offshore
sea lanes.
In this context, we welcome the commitment of
the Ugandan and Burundian troops of the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), which makes it
possible to secure key infrastructure in the capital and
that of the transitional institutions. The entire
international community must continue to support
them. While IGAD and the African Union announced
in July an increase of AMISOM troops to 8,000, the
assistance that new contributors could provide would
no doubt be critical.
For its part, France is actively contributing to the
efforts of the international community in Somalia. Let
me recall that in 2009 we trained 500 TGF soldiers. We
are working with the European Union to train 2,000
Somali soldiers. Moreover, France has trained 5,600
AMISOM soldiers over the past three years, and today,
with our European partners, we are financing soldiers
of the force. We are also contributing to the United
Nations logistical support package for AMISOM.

10-53641

In the spirit of the Djibouti Agreement the TFG
has in recent months made efforts to broaden its
political base. The rapprochement with Ahlu Sunnah
Wal Jama’a is an important step, which must be
solidified. Work on drafting a constitution is also
proceeding. Still, we expect more from the TFG.
Disputes among the representatives of the transitional
institutions have undermined their action and are
unacceptable. Gestures must be made towards all who
have agreed to renounce violence. Similarly, regular
dialogue must be conducted by the TFG with the
regions of Puntland and Somaliland. Finally, less than
a year before the end of the transitional period, it is
time for the TFG to prove that it is capable of offering
basic services to the people: health care, education,
justice and security. In all of these areas, needs remain
considerable.
The United Nations is currently assisting the
efforts of the TFG. At the same time, it could adapt to
make its action more effective. The United Nations is
currently conducting in Somalia various and
complementary activities — political, logistical,
humanitarian and development-related — through 25
separate bodies. We support enhanced integration of
these various actions under the direct authority of the
Special Representative, so that they can be more
coherent, as proposed by the Secretary-General. We
will carefully study the specific proposals of the
Secretary-General on this matter. The initial measures
of coordination — including the establishment of a
Senior Policy Group bringing together the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, the Resident
and Humanitarian Coordinator and the Director of the
United Nations Support Office for AMISOM — are a
first step, but they must go further, because our
credibility is at stake.
We also encourage, as soon as possible and in
particular once the security situation permits it, the
establishment of a United Nations office in Mogadishu,
so as to mark the continuity and involvement of the

13

S/PV.6386

United Nations in Somalia. In this regard, we strongly
encourage the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral to continue his efforts to ensure this United
Nations presence in Somalia, as the Secretary-General
has asked him to do.
With respect to piracy, we all agree that we need
to find solutions on land; we also need to pursue our
action at sea. The debate held on 25 August (see
S/PV.6374) enabled us to take a look at options
proposed by the Secretary-General for prosecuting and
imprisoning arrested pirates. The recommendations of
the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on these
issues, Mr. Jack Lang, should enable us to find a
solution that is both effective and equitable, for States
in the region as well as States involved at sea.
The coming months will be critical for Somalia as
the transitional period draws to a close, so I would like
to assure Mr. Mahiga that he will have the support and
confidence of France as he carries out the complex job
he has undertaken.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Somalia, Ambassador Augustine Mahiga,
for the valuable information he has provided, and we
welcome him to the Council. We also welcome the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kenya, Mr. Moses
Wetangula, and the Permanent Representative of
Somalia, Ambassador Elmi Ahmed Duale, to whom we
listened attentively.
The recent and welcome appointment of
Ambassador Mahiga as Special Representative for
Somalia and head of the United Nations Political
Office for Somalia offers an opportunity to fine-tune
the United Nations approach towards Somalia and to
review the strategy to be followed, in view of the daily
threats to the security of the country and the imperative
need to protect the lives and basic living conditions of
its people.
Clearly, the prolonged instability in Somalia
currently poses a threat to peace and security in the
entire region. We reiterate our strong condemnation of
the acts of violence that occurred in Kampala in July as
well as of the constant indiscriminate attacks in
Somalia mounted by insurgent extremist groups,
including attacks against United Nations installations.
It is unacceptable that agencies such as UNICEF or the
World Food Programme should be the victims of direct
attacks aimed at impeding their work.

14

We reaffirm our gratitude to the countries
contributing troops to the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), Uganda and Burundi, and their
ongoing commitment to peace. It is crucial that all
concerned countries support the peace process and
participate positively in the quest for stability in
Somalia and the region as a whole.
We
welcome
the
decision
of
the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
African Union to promote the deployment of 2,000
troops to complete the Mission’s strength, as well as
the support of the United States in that undertaking. We
hope that the increase in AMISOM’s troop levels will
create better security conditions in Mogadishu that will
allow for the safe deployment of the United Nations
presence in the field, in accordance with the
incremental approach that the Council has supported.
We commend efforts to achieve the integration of the
United Nations presence in Somalia as a fundamental
element of a coordinated and coherent approach to
addressing the country’s problems.
Concerning the political process, my delegation
echoes the Secretary-General’s call for a resolution to
the political and reconstruction problems facing the
Transitional Federal Government and for the
accelerated adoption of the constitution before the
transitional period concludes in August 2011. The
Government’s political unity is indispensable to
guaranteeing the security of its authorities and to
strengthening its credibility and legitimacy within the
country and abroad. It is equally important to build on
the progress made in strengthening the security sector,
including through the establishment of military and
police structures.
We acknowledge the support provided by
Uganda, Djibouti and Ethiopia in training officers, and
underscore the importance of ensuring that the support
of the Security Council and the international
community is focused on consolidating Somalia’s
institutions in accordance with its own priorities.
Mexico deplores the escalation of violence by the
insurgent groups, which directly affects Somali
civilians, in particular the most vulnerable groups, such
as women, children and refugees. We reiterate our
appeal for full respect for international humanitarian
law and human rights, and call on the parties
immediately to cease their attacks, to avoid situations
that indiscriminately affect the civilian population, and

10-53641

S/PV.6386

to permit access to and delivery of humanitarian
assistance. Furthermore, in view of the ongoing
recruitment and use of child soldiers in the conflict, we
call on all parties to release the children remaining in
their ranks, whom we recall are entitled to special
protection pursuant to the norms and principles of
international law. We support the decision of President
Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed to investigate the
presence of children within the armed forces of the
Transitional Federal Government, and consider it
necessary for the United Nations to assist Government
authorities in developing a plan of action for the
demobilization and reintegration of children into their
communities. We eagerly await the report that the
Secretary-General is preparing on this issue for the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
In view of the indiscriminate violence in Somalia,
it is necessary to remind its principal perpetrators of
the international criminal liability they shall incur for
such acts as those we have witnessed daily in that
country.
Within the Committee established pursuant to
resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning
Somalia and Eritrea, my delegation reiterates its belief
that the arms embargo and targeted sanctions regime,
when used in a coherent and incremental manner, are a
valuable instrument of benefit to the peace process as a
whole through the full cooperation of the international
community. We welcome the reports we have received
from Members of the Organization pursuant to
resolutions 1844 (2008) and 1907 (2009), as well as
their commitment to the work of the Committee, in
view of the sensitive relationship between its work and
the humanitarian assistance activities in the country.
Finally, we trust that the upcoming high-level
meeting on Somalia to be convened by the SecretaryGeneral on 23 September will be an important
opportunity to reaffirm the Organization’s commitment
to peace and security in Somalia, taking into account
the important observations that have been made here
by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kenya. The
solution lies in Somalia itself, with international
support that requires a coherent approach and a
strategic, long-term vision.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): It is indeed a pleasure to
welcome Ambassador Mahiga to the Security Council
and to listen to his inaugural briefing in his capacity as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for

10-53641

Somalia. I should like to congratulate him on his
appointment and to wish him success in his new
assignment. We take this opportunity to offer him our
fullest support.
I also welcome the Foreign Minister of Kenya,
whose presentation was not only very frank, but also
most compelling. I thank the Permanent Representative
of Somalia for his very lucid statement.
The briefing that we have heard today once again
paints a mixed picture of Somalia. It is a picture of
hope and a picture of apprehension. On the positive
side, we note with satisfaction that, despite the tensions
within the transitional federal institutions, there was
considerable momentum generated by, among other
things,
the
high-level
meetings
of
the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
African Union summit in Kampala, the appointment of
a new Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
and the joint briefings three days ago by the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the United
Nations Support Office for AMISOM.
The formation of a new Cabinet by Prime
Minister Omar Abdirashid Ali Sharmarke, which
includes members of Ahlu Sunnah Wal Jama’a,
demonstrates the ability of the Government to
accommodate other interests. The momentum, we
believe, could be appropriately utilized to galvanize
more action on the ground that will be beneficial to the
people of Somalia.
There is no way peace will last in Somalia if, as
the Secretary-General states in his report, volatility and
insecurity between the insurgents and Government
forces continue to adversely affect the civilian
population in Mogadishu. The terrorist attack on the
Muna Hotel during the month of Ramadan, which left
over 70 people dead, was both cowardly and
despicable. We deplore both the attack and its
perpetrators. We believe that when all parties commit
to peace and take practical steps to consolidate it, the
desired change will endure in the country. In that
connection, Nigeria welcomes the Secretary-General’s
recommendations and believes that, if implemented,
they will have a significant impact in Somalia. The
responsibility for making progress and achieving
results in Somalia lies with all the major stakeholders,
including the Somali people, AMISOM, the Security
Council and all relevant partners.

15

S/PV.6386

On AMISOM, the briefing gave a clear indication
that the Mission is on the right track and that its
existing strategies are helping in no small measure to
deal with the challenges in Somalia. Without the
presence of AMISOM, the situation in Somalia would
indeed be hard to imagine. Given AMISOM’s
commendable role, concerted efforts should be made to
provide support that is commensurate with the
operational mandates. It is a recipe for failure to
deploy troops without giving them the requisite
support, particularly when that support is available. It
is time, therefore, to rethink our support strategy.
We want to underline the need for AMISOM
forces to be paid the same rates of allowance as United
Nations peacekeepers. Furthermore, troop-contributing
countries should be refunded early for their contingentowned equipment. These countries are making
enormous sacrifices to deploy their troops and
equipment in a difficult environment. The Council
should find ways to encourage countries such as
Guinea and Djibouti that are planning to deploy. In this
regard, we strongly appeal to donors that have placed
caveats preventing the use of their contributions for
any expenditure related to the military component of
AMISOM to remove those caveats in order to free
resources for the reimbursement of AMISOM troop
contributors. We welcome in particular the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation that, in order to overcome
the resource gap, the support package for AMISOM
should be identical to the support provided to United
Nations peacekeeping operations. We also support his
recommendation that parity be ensured between the
reimbursement rates for AMISOM and United Nations
contingent personnel.
Nigeria reiterates its support for the Transitional
Federal Government (TFG) and welcomes the progress
it has made, despite the difficulties and internal
disputes it faces. The TFG needs broad and allencompassing support to implement key transitional
tasks, fight piracy and insurgency, engage in political
dialogue and national reconciliation, and, indeed,
extend its authority within the country, beginning with
Mogadishu. It also requires support in order to engage
in genuine dialogue and sustained consultation.
Without adequate support, the TFG will be unable to
fulfil the transitional agenda, while extremists will be
emboldened to continue their attacks on both the TFG
and AMISOM.

16

The heinous attacks of 11 July in Kampala by
agents of Al-Shabaab are a grim reminder of how
easily the situation in Somalia could spill over into the
entire region, with dire consequences. This situation
gives rise to the need for concerted and purposeful
support for the TFG. A core aspect of this would be to
stabilize the security environment by reinforcing the
training, equipping and sustenance of the Somali police
force and the national security forces. This will not be
possible if efforts are not made to mobilize resources to
assist Somalia. As the Secretary-General notes in his
report (S/2010/447), the United Nations does not have
the resources to adequately pay the police and civil
servants or to reimburse countries contributing troops
to AMISOM. It is needless to add that the challenges in
Somalia must be able to benefit from the expertise and
efficiency of an integrated United Nations system. We
therefore underscore the need for the integration of the
United Nations system in Somalia.
Nigeria welcomes the strong and continuing
partnership between the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, the African Union and the United
Nations in Somalia. Indeed, we owe a debt of gratitude
to the gallant men and women of the military forces of
Uganda and Burundi for their efforts and commitment
to the cause of peace in Somalia. We also take this
opportunity to salute the dedication of international aid
and humanitarian workers in that country.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Mahiga, for his
comprehensive briefing, and wish him every success in
his work for peace and stability in Somalia. I also
welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kenya and
thank him for his valuable contribution, and stress the
importance of the statement made the Permanent
Representative of Somalia.
We support the Djibouti peace process in
Somalia, and stress the need to identify a
comprehensive approach to the situation in that country
for a peace that addresses not only security but also
economic development and the promotion of the
country’s institutions.
Lebanon condemns the acts of piracy and armed
robbery off the shores of Somalia, which threaten
navigation and international trade and obstruct the
delivery of humanitarian assistance. Lebanon maintains
that addressing the root causes of piracy will lead us

10-53641

S/PV.6386

into the interior of Somalia, which will require
building the capacities of the Transitional Federal
Government (TFG) and its armed forces, and assisting
it in providing employment opportunities for Somalis.
We have considered the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2010/447) and would like to stress the
following points. In regard to the political process, we
commend the work done by Somali institutions in
certain areas, although their capabilities have been
limited. Here, we note in particular the preparation of a
draft constitution by December 2010. We call on the
TFG to resolve its differences, move forward on
fulfilling its commitments and implementing its main
tasks, and improve the provision of basic services for
the people.
With regard to security, we are greatly concerned
about the acts of violence and repeated attacks by
insurgents against the Government, leading to many
innocent deaths. Such attacks demonstrate the need to
support the Somali armed forces expeditiously, to
expand the authority of the State and to reintegrate the
deserting members of armed groups. We call on donor
parties to promote support for the Somali security
forces and to help them pay their salaries, a matter
concerning which the Secretary-General agrees in his
report, so as to address the dangers of extremism, and
especially the threat posed by the Al-Shabaab
movement not only to Somalis but to Muslims and
others elsewhere.
In regard to the humanitarian situation, we
express our great concern that children have been
recruited by all parties and about reports of the
coercive expulsion of internally displaced persons in
Somalia and the increased sexual violence against
them, particularly in Somaliland. We also condemn the
repeated threats against journalists and humanitarian
workers. In this respect, we regret the fact that the
World Food Programme has been unable to deliver
humanitarian assistance to areas under the control of
Al-Shabaab, leading to a sense of marginalization
among the people who live in those areas and creating
an unintended image of politicization of humanitarian
aid there.
With regard to the international presence in
Somalia, we stress the need for further coordination
between United Nations bodies working there. We also
stress the importance of expediting the implementation
of the phased efforts to strengthen the United Nations

10-53641

presence, and of the Security Council’s sending a
message of support for the Djibouti peace process in
Somalia.
In the absence of international peacekeeping
forces, we call on donor entities to increase their
contributions to covering the costs of the African
Union Mission. We commend the contributions of the
African Union, particularly Uganda and Burundi, to
efforts for peace in Somalia. We also commend the
United States of America for having stated its readiness
to facilitate the deployment of the 2,000 additional
troops pledged by the African Union.
We call for further cooperation with regional
organizations in order to benefit from their
comparative advantages, in particular their special indepth understanding of conflicts in the area and their
local experience. The African Union and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development have called
for the preparation of a new support plan for AMISOM that
would enable it to augment its forces for deployment
throughout the territory of Somalia.
Should we not respond to that call from the
African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development? Should we not support them and back
the Secretary-General in his conviction that assistance
to AMISOM should be in line with assistance provided
to other peacekeeping operations? Should not the rate
of reimbursement for AMISOM be similar to that for
peacekeeping operations elsewhere?
We believe that the cost of investing in the
attainment of peace and stability in Somalia through
the Djibouti peace process and the transitional federal
institutions far outweighs the danger of having a
Somalia in total chaos and lacking a functioning
government — not to mention the human costs, which
can never be recouped.
Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ambassador
Mahiga, for his comprehensive statement to the
Council this morning, and we congratulate him on his
appointment. I also thank him for the gusto and energy
he has deployed as he begins his work. He enjoys the
unequivocal support of Uganda.
I wish also to welcome the Foreign Minister of
Kenya, Mr. Wetangula, and to thank him for his downto-earth statement on the situation in Somalia. I also

17

S/PV.6386

thank the Permanent Representative of Somalia for his
helpful statement.

implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions dealing with spoilers and terrorist groups.

I fully endorse the views of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Kenya and the Permanent
Representative of Nigeria, which call for parity in the
treatment of peacekeepers in Somalia vis-à-vis
peacekeepers elsewhere in the world. In fact, these
peacekeepers, who face the harshest conditions, end up
getting the least care and being poorly treated by the
international community. Hence, we need to do more
than we are doing.

The continuing conflict and the deterioration of
security have led to the worsening of the humanitarian
situation, have increased the number of displaced
persons and have negatively affected the delivery of
humanitarian assistance in the country. We commend
the humanitarian agencies and workers continuing to
operate in Somalia in these very difficult conditions,
and we call upon the international community to
redouble its efforts and increase its support to those
agencies.

Uganda reaffirms its support for the Djibouti
peace process, as it represents the best opportunity for
lasting peace in Somalia. We commend the efforts
made by the Transitional Federal Government (TFG) in
advancing the political process in that country. We are
encouraged by its continued commitment and efforts in
reaching out to opposition groups in the search for
lasting peace. We therefore call upon all parties in
Somalia to engage in the political process.
The security situation in Somalia remains fragile.
During the holy month of Ramadan, instead of
observing the edicts of Islam — which call, inter alia,
for peace and generosity during the time of fasting —
Al-Shabaab and other extremist groups launched an
offensive with the aim of overthrowing the TFG.
Moreover, they carried out these attacks, as they
always do, from civilian-populated areas and facilities
such as markets and hospitals. Al-Shabaab holds the
people of Somalia hostage to its extremist views,
obstructs the delivery of humanitarian supplies to the
needy and grossly violates human rights.
The recent attacks on TFG forces and the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the use of
civilian facilities to carry out those attacks have left
scores of people dead and many more injured. Hence,
Al-Shabaab and its allies and sponsors bear sole
responsibility for the continuing suffering and death
endured by the Somalia people and by our
peacekeepers.
The launch of the recent offensive by armed
opposition groups is a clear indication that they are still
receiving support in various forms from their sponsors.
In addition, we are concerned about the large numbers
of foreign fighters coming into the country.
Al-Shabaab’s activities and methods increasingly
mirror those of Al-Qaida in their nature and objectives.
There is therefore an urgent need to strengthen the

18

The primary responsibility for maintaining peace,
security and stability in Somalia ultimately lies with
the TFG and the people of Somalia. However, without
effective, working State institutions, this will remain a
major challenge. We call upon the international
community to support the rebuilding of State
institutions in Somalia, especially in the security and
justice sectors. Supporting the Government in
improving service delivery will enhance its authority
and legitimacy.
Without unity of purpose within the TFG, the
support provided by the international community for
the people of Somalia will be in vain. We therefore call
upon the TFG and the other transitional institutions to
work in harmony in addressing the challenges that are
facing the country. We commend the efforts of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ambassador Mahiga, to promote cohesion and
understanding within the TFG. The Special
Representative’s work should also help galvanize
cohesion among United Nations agencies and the
international community so that they can focus on
streamlined action.
At the recent African Union summit, held in
Kampala, heads of State or Government reaffirmed
their commitment to support the people of Somalia in
their quest for peace and stability. Thus, we call upon
the international community to support AMISOM in
effectively fulfilling its mandate. There is now a
window of opportunity in Somalia for laying the
foundation for peace and stability that we cannot afford
to waste.
Finally, we welcome the convening by the
Secretary-General of the mini-summit on Somalia on
23 September, which is really next week. We expect
that this summit will help to further mobilize the

10-53641

S/PV.6386

international community to support the efforts and
actions aimed at stabilizing Somalia.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for presenting the SecretaryGeneral’s report on the situation in Somalia
(S/2010/447). We are pleased to welcome Augustine
Mahiga in his new post and wish him success and
pledge him our support. We listened carefully and with
interest to the statements of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Kenya and the representative of Somalia.
On the whole, we share the assessments presented
in the report of the Secretary-General. We are troubled
by recent outbreaks of violence in Mogadishu, which
have aggravated an already unstable situation in the
country. The extremists have not abandoned attempts
to attack the positions of the forces of the Government
and the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM),
which genuinely hinder the actions of the Transitional
Federal Government (TFG) to establish effective
leadership in the country. As a result, the civilian
population and the personnel of the United Nations and
humanitarian organizations remain under threat, which
gives rise to grave concern and deepens the
humanitarian crisis in Somalia. In these conditions, it
is very important to end external support for the
extremist forces in Somalia, in particular through strict
compliance with Security Council resolutions.
We join in the Secretary-General’s appeal to the
international community’s to step up its efforts to assist
the TFG, especially in the area of security. There can be
no doubt that in these conditions it is of special
importance to ensure the unity and solidarity of
transitional federal structures capable of winning the
trust of Somalis. The Government needs to pursue its
work to broaden its social base.
The only credible stabilizing factor in the country
today is AMISOM. It is important to ensure its full
staffing and its required logistical support as soon as
possible. We note the relevant proposals of the
Secretariat, which require some development. We
believe that the phased approach to broadening the
United Nations presence in the country is justified and
should continue to be implemented depending on the
momentum of the military and political situation. We
support the desire to maintain closer contacts between
United Nations agencies and the TFG and other major
Somali parties. It is important to strengthen the

10-53641

coordination action of United Nations agencies,
including in putting together joint programmes and
operations.
The problem of piracy remains pressing, and any
long-term solution will depend on the prospects for
advancing the political process and rebuilding Somalia.
It is obvious that one of the important causes of the
inadequate effectiveness of international anti-piracy
efforts resides in the current imperfect mechanism for
holding the pirates accountable. We must create the
necessary judicial bodies, especially at the regional
level. However, the search for additional opportunities
to combat piracy should be conducted along other
lines. In particular, we believe that effective
prosecution of the leaders of the piracy industry would
be assisted by placing them on Council sanctions lists.
Russia will continue to support the efforts of the
President of Somalia and the TFG to achieve
sustainable peace and national reconciliation in the
country on the basis of the Djibouti Agreement in the
interest of strengthening security and stability in the
region.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, I would like to take this opportunity to thank
Mr. Augustine Mahiga, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Somalia, for his introduction of
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2010/447) and
comprehensive briefing this morning.
Also, we would like to welcome His Excellency
Mr. Moses Wetangula, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Republic of Kenya. Additionally, we would like to
thank the Ambassador of Somalia for his statement.
Bosnia and Herzegovina condemns in the
strongest possible terms the recent suicide attacks in
Somalia and expresses its condolences to the families
of the victims. We also once again express condolences
to the families of the victims of the terrorist attacks
that took place in Kampala on 11 July. Those tragic
incidents once again remind us of the fragility of the
security situation in Somalia, which remains a major
concern for us, and of its impact on the wider region.
Bosnia and Herzegovina reiterates its full support
for the Transitional Federal Government (TFG) and the
Djibouti peace process as the only legitimate and
viable framework to achieve lasting peace in Somalia.
As the end of the transitional period approaches, it is
important that all relevant actors in the country show

19

S/PV.6386

their full commitment to the implementation of the key
transitional tasks through unity. This challenge requires
the serious dedication of Somali institutions to ensure
that the transitional period is not prolonged in order to
justify the confidence and efforts of the Somali people
and the international community.
We call upon the TFG to intensify its efforts,
especially in the areas of political reconciliation and
outreach, the constitution-making process, security,
stability and the delivery of services, and urge all
groups outside the Djibouti peace process to join it as
soon as possible. The international community has
shown its devotion to assisting the Somali people in
achieving lasting peace and stability in the country. We
express our hope that these efforts will continue, and
we reiterate our call on the international community
and partners of Somalia to provide urgent military and
financial support, as well as other necessary resources
to the TFG.
Bosnia and Herzegovina remains concerned
regarding the humanitarian situation in the country.
Despite the fact that the rainy season has improved the
food security situation, a large number of people still
depend on food assistance. Unfortunately, the delivery
of this needed assistance is still obstructed in some
parts of the country.
We are deeply concerned over the recruitment
and use of children in the conflict, as well as over the
reports of cases of killed or injured children. We
therefore urge all parties to the conflict to fully comply
with international humanitarian and human rights law
in order to protect the civilian population.
Once more, Bosnia and Herzegovina would like
to commend the African Union, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, and particularly the troops
of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
for their tireless efforts in stabilizing the situation in
Somalia, despite the extremely difficult environment in
which AMISOM troops are operating. We therefore
call upon the international community to continue its
support to AMISOM with the aim of fully
implementing its mandate. We welcome the efforts of
the Joint Security Committee to coordinate the security
sector development initiatives. Strengthening the
processes of the Somali police force and national
security forces is vital to peace and stability in
Somalia. Therefore, we would like to emphasize that
the cooperation and assistance of the international

20

community to the TFG are crucial, and that every
resource should be used to generate the political and
security conditions necessary for the successful
completion of the transition by 2011.
Bosnia and Herzegovina recognizes the
importance of the United Nations Support Office for
AMISOM and its efforts to provide a logistical support
package to AMISOM, as well as the hard work of the
United Nations Political Office for Somalia, the United
Nations country team and all other humanitarian
organizations.
Finally, on the issue of piracy off the coast of
Somalia, we share the view that the piracy poses a
threat to peace and security, not just in the region but
globally. We reiterate our position that a long-term
solution will come only through fighting the root
causes of piracy by restoring stability and the rule of
law in Somalia.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
today’s public debate to discuss the matter of Somalia.
I would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ambassador Mahiga, for his
briefing. I would like to thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Kenya and the Permanent Representative of
Somalia for their presence and for their statements.
In recent times, the international community has
continued to work towards a solution in Somalia. The
Somali Transitional Federal Government (TFG) has
resolutely fought against attacks launched by armed
opposition forces. Efforts to equip and train the Somali
security forces are proceeding apace. The African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) has been
strengthened. In addition, international cooperation to
combat piracy off the coast of Somalia has continued
to progress. However, the security situation in Somalia
has yet to show any visible sign of improvement. The
humanitarian crisis has intensified and piracy has
continued unabated. The question of Somalia remains a
serious challenge to peace and security in the Horn of
Africa and to the world at large.
Resolving internal political differences and
establishing an effective central Government are the
important pre-conditions for the international
community’s ability to play an effective role. As noted
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/447), the
TFG is undergoing a very tense period. This situation
must be quickly corrected. China supports the Djibouti

10-53641

S/PV.6386

peace agreement. We hope that the TFG will duly
resolve its internal problems and work to strengthen its
role as a pole of attraction to the various political
forces in Somalia. We sincerely hope that the various
political factions in Somalia will place the interests of
their country and their people above all other
considerations and join the political reconciliation and
negotiation processes.
We call on all relevant parties, including the
countries of the region, to respect Somalia’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity and to support the
TFG in order to facilitate early, substantive progress in
the political reconciliation in Somalia.
We condemn the attacks launched against the
TFG, the Somali people and AMISOM. We welcome
the contributions of the Somali security forces and
AMISOM to improving the security situation in
Somalia. At present, the Somali security forces and
AMISOM are facing serious funding gaps. China
therefore calls on the international community to
actively provide that assistance. China supports the
deployment of United Nations peacekeeping operations
in Somalia when the conditions are ripe.
The recent Istanbul Conference on Somalia
demonstrated the greater understanding of the
international community of the severity of the Somali
issue. The African Union’s contributions and tireless
efforts to find a solution to the problem are indeed
commendable. We call on the United Nations to further
mobilize resources through various channels and to
provide further practical assistance to AMISOM. It is
our hope that countries will honour their commitments
to assisting Somalia in a timely manner.
Two decades of war and strife in Somalia have
seriously undermined the cause of peace in Africa. As
an urgent matter, the international community must
take early, effective action to gradually resolve the
question of Somalia. In that respect, the Security
Council should demonstrate a stronger sense of
responsibility and purpose.
The African Union has designated 2010 the Year
of Peace and Security in Africa. African countries are
working tirelessly to resolve all the hot spot issues in
Africa, and they maintain the fervent hope that the
international community, especially the United
Nations, will play a major role in finding a solution for
Somalia. Here, I reiterate that in the interests of peace
in Africa, China is ready to make its own contribution

10-53641

to finding a solution in Somalia. China is also ready to
cooperate actively with the United Nations and all of
the parties concerned on this matter.
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in
French): I, too, thank Ambassador Mahiga, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia,
for his introduction of the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2010/447) on the latest developments
in
the
political, security, humanitarian and human rights
fields in Somalia. Permit me to also welcome the
honourable Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kenya, His
Excellency Mr. Moses Wetangula, to the Council and
to thank him for his highly enriching and edifying
statement.
The numerous meetings held by the Security
Council on the matter of Somalia and other initiatives
taken in this area, in particular the Istanbul
Conference, demonstrate the international community’s
ongoing awareness of the Somali problem. Similarly,
my delegation supports the convening this month of a
mini-summit directed at further involving the United
Nations in the Somalia stabilization process. My
delegation believes that the new options proposed by
the Secretary-General provide a good basis for
discussions on a coordinated and lasting solution to
this crisis.
This debate is being held at a time when Somalia
has become the theatre of violence that has, regrettably,
led to great loss of human life, including, yet again,
among the soldiers of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM). This upsurge in violence recalls
the precarious security situation in a country that has
faced numerous challenges for many years.
As my country has emphasized at previous
meetings on this same subject, the resolution of the
crisis in Somalia requires a three-pronged approach:
security, institutional and humanitarian. Improving the
security situation remains linked to strengthening the
capacities of both the AMISOM and the Somali
national security forces. While it is true that troop
levels have considerably grown, reaching the 8,000
soldiers established in the mandate, it is urgent that the
troops enjoy the financial, logistical and additional
technical means that will allow them to counter the
frequent military attacks orchestrated by the rebel
movements.
Such assistance will also strengthen the authority
of the Transitional Federal Government, above all at a

21

S/PV.6386

time when the Islamist militias are on the offensive, as
demonstrated by the dual attack in Kampala on 11 July
and the progressive advance of Al-Shabaab towards
Mogadishu. In this context, we welcome the logistical
support provided to date by the United Nations, which
has significantly contributed to strengthening the
operational capacities of AMISOM. We also welcome
the support provided by the European Union to train
2,000 soldiers of the Somalia armed forces.
Furthermore, we support the recommendation of
the Secretary-General that the remuneration of
AMISOM troops be aligned with those of United
Nations peacekeepers. Once enacted, this measure will
contribute to strengthening motivation among
AMISOM troops in the theatre of operations.
This is also an opportunity to pay particular
tribute to Uganda and Burundi, whose commitment to
restoring peace and stability in Somalia, at the cost of
enormous human and material sacrifice, deserves
recognition. The same applies to other countries,
including the Republic of Guinea, which has
announced a troop contribution to AMISOM.
Illicit arms circulation also fuels insecurity in
Somalia. In that context, my delegation underscores the
need to ensure the effective implementation of the
sanctions imposed by the Council pursuant to
resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009).
Institutional stability in Somalia will require
strengthening the authority of the Transitional Federal
Government. To that end, we support the SecretaryGeneral’s call on the international community to
provide the military and financial aid necessary to
strengthening the transitional federal institutions. My
Government
urges
the
Transitional
Federal
Government to pursue national reconciliation pursuant
the Djibouti Agreement, which is the political basis for
a resolution of the Somali crisis.
The Government’s inclusion of three members of
the Ahlu Sunnah Wal Jama’a movement following the
last reorganization of the Government and the progress
made in drafting a new constitution are important steps
towards concluding the transitional phase. With a view
to capitalizing on this progress, my delegation invites
the members of the Government to rise above their
differences for the sake of the higher interests of their
country.

22

The humanitarian situation also remains of great
concern. We have the moral duty to sustain and
strengthen the efforts and cooperation of humanitarian
workers on the ground, and to ensure that food aid is
properly transported to its final destination.
The international community’s attention to the
overall situation in that country — that is, security
problems on land and piracy off the coasts of Somalia —
will contribute to establishing a lasting peace, not only
throughout the country, but in the whole Horn of
Africa.
My country, for its part, will continue to support
the work of AMISOM, the involvement of the IGAD
countries and the role of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Somalia.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): At the outset, I
would like to welcome Ambassador Augustine Mahiga
as the new Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral. We thank him for his presentation and for the
commitment he has already shown under truly
challenging circumstances. I would also like to say that
we welcomed the presentation by Foreign Minister
Wetangula and would like to underline the key role that
Kenya is playing in bringing stability to Somalia by
accepting refugees as a basis for the activities of the
international community and, more specifically, on the
issue of piracy. We are also grateful to the Permanent
Representative of Somalia for his statement.
I would like to join others in condemning the
recent attacks of 9 September and the violence of
recent weeks. Austria expresses its condolences to the
victims and their families.
Let me underline that Austria fully aligns itself
with the statement of the European Union that will be
delivered later this morning. Let me now highlight a
few additional points.
Austria would once again like to confirm its
support for the Transitional Federal Government (TFG)
and for the continuation of the Djibouti peace process.
We hope that the TFG, with the support of the
international community, will be able to assume its
responsibilities — namely, to build security and rule of
law institutions and to embark on a reconciliation
process — in unity. As others have already said, the
transitional period comes to an end in August 2011,
and we need a clear strategy for the remainder of this
time.

10-53641

S/PV.6386

We are deeply concerned about the devastating
effect the conflict has on the civilian population and
about the lack of respect for humanitarian principles.
We call on all parties to permit the delivery of
assistance and aid to those in need.
I would also like to reiterate our appreciation for
the dedication and engagement of the many
humanitarian workers who accept very high risks in
order to alleviate the plight of the civilian population in
Somalia. We call upon all parties to ensure the
protection of civilians, in particular that of children, in
compliance with human rights law and international
humanitarian law.
Austria would like to reiterate its condemnation
of the recruitment of children by all parties to the
conflict and request that they be released immediately.
In this regard, we encourage all parties to cooperate
with the Working Group of the Security Council on
Children and Armed Conflict, which is to begin its
consultations on the situation in Somalia in October.
Concerning the surge in piracy, it is, as others
have already said, not only important to consider
piracy as a threat to key international shipping lanes at
sea, but also necessary to consider its root causes and
to see it as a factor further aggravating the security and
humanitarian situation in Somalia. Austria therefore
stresses the importance of determined activities to curb
piracy in the region, as is also done through the
European Union naval operation, Operation Atalanta.
Let me also underline our commitment, support
and admiration for the important contribution of
AMISOM, its troop-contributing countries, Uganda
and Burundi, the United Nations support package for
AMISOM and the substantial support by the European
Union to AMISOM in bringing security and stability to
the country.
We welcome the progress in the integration of
United Nations operations, which will also ensure a
coherent United Nations approach in Somalia. It is
important to enhance the role of the United Nations in
Somalia, specifically in coordinating and leading the
efforts of the international community. We should also
aim at creating more synergies between the TFG and
the international community in Somalia and make more
efficient use of already established mechanisms for
coordination such as the High-level Committee and the
Joint Security Committee.

10-53641

In conclusion, we are looking forward to the
summit on Somalia on 23 September that is to be
convened by the Secretary-General. It will provide an
opportunity to highlight the Security Council’s firm
support and commitment to the remaining tasks during
the transitional period and to the stabilization of the
situation in Somalia.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Turkey.
We too wish to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Mahiga, for introducing
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/447). We
welcome Mr. Moses Wetangula, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Kenya, and thank him for his insightful
statement. We also welcome the Permanent
Representative of Somalia, Mr. Duale.
As others have emphasized, the challenges we
face in Somalia are great and daunting. The political
and security situation is critical. Terrorism, instability
and the precarious humanitarian situation continue to
cause grave concern. The Transitional Federal
Government (TFG) has a great many things to achieve.
For that, there is a need for a strong and determined
Government and functional institutions. Therefore, the
existing political disputes should be solved through
dialogue so that the transitional agenda can be
completed in a timely fashion.
We commend the crucial role played by the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) towards
achieving stability in Somalia. We thank all troop- and
police-contributing countries, especially Uganda and
Burundi. We also welcome the efforts of the
Inter-Governmental Authority on Development,
including its decision to deploy additional troops under
AMISOM.
AMISOM should be fully supported, so that it
can effectively implement its mandate. Turkey shares
the Secretary-General’s view that the support package
for AMISOM should be identical to the support
provided to United Nations peacekeeping operations.
On the other hand, one should not expect AMISOM to
provide security on its own. It is also of crucial
importance that the Somali security institutions be
strengthened.
There is no military solution to the Somali
question, and the only road to a peaceful future is
through dialogue. The TFG, which Turkey fully

23

S/PV.6386

supports, should continue to pursue assertively its
outreach policy vis-à-vis the opposition groups.
Likewise, the TFG has to appeal to the hearts and
minds of the Somali public so as to minimize the
adverse effects of the propaganda machine of radical
elements, which have their own agenda.
We strongly condemn the terrorist attacks in
Kampala and Mogadishu. We should not let radical
elements drive the Djibouti peace process.
Stability in Somalia can be consolidated only if
the gains in the political and security fields are
supported by reconstruction activities. The Istanbul
Conference on Somalia laid out a broad perspective in
that regard. The critical role played by Somalia’s
neighbours in promoting peace, security and
development in Somalia and the region is undeniable.
By reaffirming the principles of good-neighbourly
relations and urging Somalia’s partners to continue to
support efforts towards that end, the Istanbul
Conference also strongly emphasized that.
For the peace process to move forward in
Somalia, the active involvement and leadership of the
United Nations are crucial. In that regard, we welcome
the determination and tireless efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Mahiga,
to reinvigorate the process. We support him, and we are
ready to work and cooperate with him. The increased
presence of the United Nations in Somalia will no
doubt help achieve the targets that have been set. We
are encouraged by the strong commitment of the
Secretary-General to that matter. The mini-summit that
the Secretary-General will convene next week is a
timely initiative in that respect.
Finally, with regard to the fight against piracy, we
follow with satisfaction the work to date by the Contact
Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia. The issue is
also high on the agenda of the Security Council, which
very recently discussed the legal aspects of the issue
(see S/PV.6374). We look forward to the report of the
Secretary-General on piracy, which will be submitted
in October.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Téte
António, Permanent Observer of the African Union to
the United Nations.

24

Mr. António (spoke in French): First, allow me,
on behalf of the African Union, to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this meeting, which
gives our organization the opportunity to brief the
Council once again on what the African Union is
observing on the ground. It will also allow us to
explain the challenges that we face in supporting the
implementation of the peace process. In addition, this
meeting clearly demonstrates the Security Council’s
commitment to remain fully seized of the situation in
Somalia.
We welcome the statement made by the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Kenya and hail the pivotal role
that his country is playing in the region, as well as the
role played by the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), acting in the region on behalf of
the African Union.
We also welcome the briefing provided by
Ambassador Mahiga, whom the African Group
received yesterday. His statement to the Group and the
discussions with his team fully convinced the Group
that his efforts need the support not only of the Group
he visited yesterday, but of the entire international
community, so that results can be seen on the ground.
We know his commitment to the continent, and we
have known him as a colleague in New York. We think
that one could not find a better person — one who
knows not only the issues, but also the Organization —
for this position on Somalia. But Mr. Mahiga is only
one part of our driving force, and without our driving
force, that part could not function.
Since May, when Mr. Ramtane Lamamra,
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union Commission, described the situation in Somalia
to the Security Council (see S/PV.6313), we have seen
a number of positive and less positive developments on
the ground that have had an impact on the peace
process. I will speak briefly about those developments
before turning my attention to the way in which the
African Union has approached the problems and
challenges associated with them.
On the political front, as other delegations have
said, the process of adopting a new constitution drafted
by the Independent Federal Constitution Commission
continues despite the tensions caused by differences
among leaders of the transitional federal institutions.
The Special Representative of the African Union for
Somalia, Ambassador Boubacar Diarra, the Special

10-53641

S/PV.6386

Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia
and the IGAD Facilitator for Somalia Peace and
Reconciliation are talking with the Transitional Federal
Government (TFG) with a view to reaching greater
harmony and cohesion among the transitional federal
institutions to help adopt more positive measures likely
to facilitate achieving the tasks foreseen for the
transitional period, which will end on 20 August 2011.
Security remains volatile. The Al-Shabaab and
Hizbul Islam groups continue to carry out
indiscriminate attacks against the positions of the TFG
and the African Union Mission to Somalia (AMISOM)
in Mogadishu and the surrounding areas, causing many
civilian casualties. However, AMISOM remains firmly
entrenched in all strategic points, including Villa
Somalia, the airport, the port and Kilometre 4.
Recently, it has gained ground and slightly widened its
zone of influence by deploying its forces at new
strategic points in the Bondere and Abdiaziz districts of
Mogadishu.
As other delegations have underscored, the
humanitarian situation too continues to deteriorate in
Mogadishu and in other parts of Somalia, while
fighting among the various armed groups continues.
Thousands of civilians are directly affected by the
violence, which is increasingly causing casualties and
displaced persons, who urgently need humanitarian
assistance. The humanitarian agencies have extremely
limited access owing to the widespread insecurity,
intimidation, harassment and attacks perpetrated by
armed groups, in particular Al-Shabaab.
Against that very complex background, I would
like to report that the situation in Somalia has received
the highest political attention both in the region and on
the continent. As the delegations who spoke before me
have emphasized, the Conference of Heads of State and
Government of the African Union, held in Kampala, at
its closure reaffirmed its full support for Somalia’s
Transitional Federal Government and resolutely
condemned the attacks and other acts of violence
perpetrated by Al-Shabaab and other terrorist groups
against the TFG, the Somali population and AMISOM,
as well as the attacks in Kampala, Uganda, on 11 July.
Moreover, the Conference endorsed the decisions
contained in the Communiqué of the fifteenth
Extraordinary Summit of the Heads of State and
Government of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, held in Addis Ababa on 5 July 2010,
aimed at enabling AMISOM to achieve the authorized

10-53641

level of its personnel of 8,100 men. And this morning,
we heard that reviewing this figure upwards is being
considered.
In implementing the mandate conferred on it by
the Conference of Heads of State, the Commission has
begun to plan new deployment phases for AMISOM.
That process, including drawing up new strategic
directives and a concept of operations for AMISOM,
has necessitated consultations with partners, including
the United Nations, and will soon be completed. The
results of that process will be submitted to the Council
once they have been endorsed by the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union.
As we finalize the planning of new deployment
phases for AMISOM, allow me to draw attention to a
number of challenges that we are already facing today.
Security Council resolution 1863 (2009) of
16 January 2009 authorized a “logistical support
package to AMISOM, including equipment and
services” (para. 10). The operational aspects of that
logistical support package provided to AMISOM, as
noted in a letter from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/2008/804),
will be funded through regular contributions from
States Members of the United Nations. Other United
Nations support measures for AMISOM, including
reimbursement for the contingents’ logistical
arrangements, come from the special United Nations
Trust Fund for AMISOM.
Member
States
are
making
generous
contributions to the Fund and we thank them for that.
At the same time, we need to find a solution to a
number of conditions imposed by donors banning the
use of funds in certain critical areas. With some rare
exceptions, those restrictions, as some delegations have
noted, have largely curbed expenditures in the military
components of AMISOM. AMISOM continues to be
subject to significant financial restrictions that prevent
it from being operationally effective, which could
discourage new troop contributors.
It is therefore vital that AMISOM financing be
not only sufficient but also predictable and sustainable,
and that cannot be guaranteed unless the regular budget
is used to cover all key operational elements of
AMISOM, including military equipment and
implements of war deployed by troop-contributing
countries in the highly precarious security environment
of Somalia.

25

S/PV.6386

Obviously, the situation in Somalia poses a threat
to international peace and security. Unrestrained piracy
and the bomb attacks of 11 July, mentioned by many
delegations, show the extent to which insecurity in
Somalia has a profound impact beyond its borders. A
firm response from the international community is
necessary. The commitments made by the African
Union to re-establish peace and security in Somalia
need international support. I therefore urge the Council
to consider authorizing all possible cooperation and
collaboration between AMISOM and United Nations
operations under way in the region in order to deliver
personnel and air and maritime logistical support for
AMISOM.
Let me now speak briefly about the problem of
civilian casualties. The humanitarian community is
expressing growing concern over the high number of
casualties resulting from the fighting in Mogadishu
between insurgents and Government forces. Some
organizations and media have repeatedly accused
AMISOM of blindly looting civilian zones in
Mogadishu in reaction to attacks from Al-Shabaab
insurgents in those neighbourhoods. These accusations
are launched by the Al-Shabaab propaganda machine.
In that regard, AMISOM is working closely with its
partners, including the United Nations Support Office
for AMISOM, to develop an active communication
strategy targeted to counter this manoeuvre. Moreover,
AMISOM and the United Nations country team agree
in principle on the establishment of a working group to
share information on the situation of civilian casualties
and to adopt practical measures to deal with the
different concerns.
In conclusion, let me reiterate the African
Union’s determination to assume its fair share of the
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security, working closely with the Council, Member
States and all our international partners in seeking and
implementing our common goal — a Somalia that is
stable and at peace. However, we must emphasize that
AMISOM needs sufficient, predictable and lasting
resources, as I have indicated. Without sufficient and
predictable resources, AMISOM will not be able to
guarantee the security conditions necessary to allow
the Transitional Federal Government to complete its
transitional tasks, including the development of Somali
security forces and the establishment of conditions
conducive to stability and development in Somalia.

26

Finally, I commend the statement made by the
representative of Somalia. I would especially like to
welcome the partnership to be developed among the
African Union, the United Nations and IGAD. In the
meantime, we will have to give substance to these
partnerships. We clearly heard Mr. Mahiga when he
talked about the attacks that took place during his trip
to Somalia in the company of the representatives of
IGAD and the African Union. Clearly, we are united
through thick and thin. But we also have to give
substance to these partnerships, and that substance will
come only from firm action from the Council, from all
States Members of the United Nations and from all
partners working for Somalia — and above all with the
help of Somalia itself.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Pedro Serrano, head of the delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations.
Mr. Serrano: The candidate countries Turkey,
Croatia and the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia; the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Montenegro and Serbia; as well as
Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova align themselves
with this declaration.
Let me start by thanking the Foreign Minister of
Kenya and the Ambassador of Somalia for their
important statements. I also wish to warmly welcome
Ambassador Mahiga and to express the full support of
the European Union (EU) for his crucial mission.
The European Union strongly condemns the
Al-Shabaab deadly attacks on Mogadishu’s airport on
9 September, during which several people, including
African Union peacekeepers, lost their lives.
Despite all the efforts of the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the international
community, the security situation in Somalia remains
fragile. The transitional federal institutions are
continuously facing serious challenges to their efforts
to improve security, to strengthen the political process
and to intensify institution-building, as well as to
deliver minimum basic services to the Somali people.
Somalia is now entering a critical phase, with the
transitional period culminating in less than a year in
August 2011, while the Djibouti Agreement has yet to
be fully implemented. It is imperative that the
Transitional Federal Government (TFG) urgently take

10-53641

S/PV.6386

the necessary steps in order to address the outstanding
priority transitional tasks and intensify its outreach
efforts. The consultative process that should take place
to win broad-based popular support for a new
constitution will provide an opportunity to reach out on
substantive issues of concern for the future prospects
of Somalia.
The most recent Al-Shabaab terrorist attacks on
Mogadishu Airport, aiming at a high-level meeting of
United Nations, African Union and Somali officials
taking place there, and previous attacks in Kampala in
July and in Mogadishu in August pose a serious threat
not only to the security situation in Somalia, but also to
the wider region and all international actors. The peace
process in Somalia must continue despite all the
attempts to derail it by an increasingly well-organized
and violent minority.
Together with international partners, the
European Union has long been engaged in supporting a
peaceful and sustainable solution to the Somali crisis.
The European Union assists in stabilizing Somalia by
providing support to such priority areas as the security
sector — including support to the Somali police force —
as well as the training of military personnel,
humanitarian and development assistance to the
population and capacity-building support. In addition
the European Union is largely involved in the ongoing
naval operations against piracy through deployment of
its Operation Atalanta forces. The European Union and
its member States continue to constitute the largest
donor to Somalia. It is, however, important to
underline that the role of the European Union is only to
assist. The main responsibility for Somalia’s future lies
with the Somalis themselves, and the role and
initiatives of the TFG will be decisive for Somalia’s
future. Without a credible and inclusive Somali-owned
political process, gains will be short-lived.
The European Union, in line with the United
Nations and the main international partners, considers
AMISOM to be a crucial element in supporting and
protecting the Transitional Federal Institutions and to
help them carry out their responsibilities. AMISOM
contributes to the provision of the much-needed
security to allow the TFG to undertake dialogue,
reconciliation and political outreach. Since 2007, the
European Union contribution to AMISOM has
amounted to €95 million, to which we have recently
added a further €47 million. The European Union
reiterates its call on the broader international

10-53641

community to follow its lead and do more to support
both the Somali security apparatus and AMISOM.
We recognize that security support is essential,
but we understand well that there can be no purely
military solution in Somalia. Whilst we support the
imperative to get AMISOM to its mandated strength,
such a capacity needs to be matched by corresponding
and parallel political efforts by both the international
community and, above all, by the TFG itself.
The European Union fully supports the current
peace process led by the United Nations in Somalia.
However, the international coordination urgently needs
further improvement. Specifically, there is a need for
stronger United Nations leadership of the international
efforts, as well as closer cooperation with the African
Union. The European Union calls for more effective
use of the current mechanisms of coordination between
the international community and the TFG, such as the
High-Level Committee and the Joint Security
Committee.
As for the fight against piracy, we have recently
dedicated a specific session to that instance. Therefore,
let me simply take this opportunity to reiterate the need
for the international community to devote more
attention to reversing the socio-economic drivers that
feed the scourge of piracy. The European Union
commends the work done so far by the Contact Group
on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia and calls for an
increased coordination by the United Nations on the
issue of the fight against piracy on land. The European
Union will continue to support the region’s own
leadership and efforts in finding solutions to counter
piracy by helping the regional countries to develop
their judicial capabilities, as envisaged in the Djibouti
Code of Conduct. We invite the States of the region to
make use of this offer.
In conclusion, the European Union reiterates its
commitment to improving the lives, dignity and
security of the Somali people, to foster reconciliation,
to support human rights and good governance, to
increase access to basic services, to initiate
reconstruction activities, and foremost to help set
Somalia firmly on the path to peace and sustainable
development. In this respect, we call on the
Transitional Federal Government to strengthen its
efforts to address these considerable political,
economic and security challenges. As the transitional
period will end in less than a year, we call on the

27

S/PV.6386

United Nations and the TFG to immediately start
working on a road map for the most urgently needed
measures to be taken before August 2011 in order to
avoid a prolongation of the transitional period.
Securing peace in Somalia may not be easy and
will certainly demand considerable resources, but it is
an effort worth of making, and one that we must
make — not only for Somalia, but for peace and
stability in the region, and indeed, in a very real sense,
for world security.
The President: I
representative of Norway.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mrs. Smith (Norway): I join others in thanking
Special Representative Mahiga for his thorough and
comprehensive briefing.
Norway joins the Secretary-General and other
Member States in strongly condemning the recent
terrorist attacks carried out by extremist groups against
the peacekeepers of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) and innocent civilians in
Mogadishu and Kampala.
In spite of the commendable efforts made by
AMISOM under extremely difficult circumstances, we
have to face the fact that the situation in Mogadishu is
still fragile. And the same may also be said about the
Transitional Federal Government (TFG). The threat
posed by militant and extremist groups to other
countries in the region underlines that what is
happening in Somalia is also a serious threat to peace
and security in the wider international community. It is
therefore important for the Security Council to take
appropriate action to boost the strength and the
operational capability of AMISOM.
The main victims of the ongoing war of attrition
in Mogadishu and other parts of Somalia are, of course,
the Somali people, who have been compelled to live
under the direst conditions for such a long time. As
long as the present situation continues, there is little
hope for any improvement, and those who are able to
do so are fleeing Mogadishu with their families.
Norway, together with other donors, is seeking to
provide humanitarian assistance, but access is often
difficult.
As regards piracy, Norway wishes to thank all the
countries that are currently contributing to the naval
capacities in the Gulf of Aden and the Indian Ocean. At
the same time, we note with concern that the

28

prosecution of captured pirates remains insufficient
and sporadic, despite our collective efforts.
Even if AMISOM should be significantly
strengthened, a lasting solution to the conflict in
Somalia can be achieved only by political means.
Norway remains a strong supporter of the Djibouti
process and the efforts to reach out and integrate those
groups that are not yet party to the peace process. We
believe this should be vigorously pursued. At the same
time, it is vital that the TFG get its act together and
show a unity of purpose. The internal dispute over
political positions is seriously undermining not only
security, but also any efforts to achieve peace.
Norway will continue to support the transitional
federal institutions of Somalia, in particular the
ongoing constitutional process. With only one more
year left in the transitional period, time is now highly
limited if we are to find a lasting solution in Somalia.
The President: I
representative of Algeria.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria): At the outset, I should
like to congratulate and thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this important debate on the situation in
Somalia. I would also like to congratulate Ambassador
Augustine Mahiga on his appointment as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia. I
thank him for his opening remarks, which provided
further insights into the significant challenges in
Somalia, and assure him of the full support of Algeria
in his new and challenging mission. I should also like
to commend the Secretary-General for producing a
comprehensive and thoughtful report (S/2010/447)
pursuant to resolution 1910 (2010), which provides an
update on main developments in Somalia.
Algeria has always been firmly attached to a
comprehensive and lasting settlement of the situation
in Somalia based on respect for sovereignty, territorial
integrity, political independence and national unity. As
a concrete contribution, Algeria provided the logistical
airlift support for the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) troops. At the International
Conference on Somalia, held in Istanbul in May 2010,
a high-level Algerian delegation participated to renew
my country’s commitment towards peace and
reconstruction in Somalia. Algeria also supported the
decision of the African Union summit, held in Kampala
from 25 to 27 July, to deploy additional troops for
strengthening AMISOM.

10-53641

S/PV.6386

As Somalia’s transitional period approaches its
end, my delegation shares the concern of the SecretaryGeneral, as highlighted also by his Special
Representative, that the transitional agenda remains
largely unfulfilled. It is time for the Transitional
Federal Institutions to show determination to complete
the transitional tasks. We note the Secretary-General’s
assessment in his report that the Transitional Federal
Government (TFG) needs to develop credible
Government structures to deliver services to its people.
As suggested by the Secretary-General, we encourage
the TFG to make more effort to implement the Djibouti
Agreement, which should remain open to all Somalis
seeking peace, reconciliation and development.
My delegation shares the Secretary-General’s
concern about the substantial resource gaps in United
Nations funding for AMISOM, which continue to
hinder the effectiveness of the Mission and could
discourage potential troop contributors. In addition,
AMISOM forces should be provided more effective
operational logistics in order to strengthen their
capacity.
We lend our support to an integrated, coherent
United Nations approach to the challenges confronting
Somalia, and welcome the Secretary-General’s
intention to take further steps towards establishing an
integrated United Nations presence in Somalia. Algeria
is pleased to note the increased level of coordination
between the United Nations and the African Union.
Algeria considers that responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security lies with
the United Nations. We still believe that the Security
Council has a critical role to play in Somalia and that
the United Nations should provide a stronger mandate
and more resources to those willing to assist Somalia,
particularly the African Union. It is imperative that the
international community provide political, financial
and economic support to Somalia commensurate with
the magnitude of the challenges facing that country.
In conclusion, Algeria pledges its continuing
support for AMISOM, the African Union and the
United Nations in their efforts to bring peace and
stability to Somalia and a prosperous future for the
Somali people.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ethiopia.

10-53641

Mr. Bame (Ethiopia): I would like to express my
delegation’s gratitude to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
for his comprehensive report on Somalia (S/2010/447),
and my deep appreciation to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Mahiga, for his efforts to
engage with the main actors in the peace process. I
would also like to thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Kenya for his detailed briefing on
developments in Somalia and on the concrete efforts of
the subregional organizations, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) and the African
Union, in stabilizing that country.
Ethiopia has been doing whatever is necessary to
ensure the success of the peace process in Somalia. Our
regional organization, IGAD, supports the Transitional
Federal Government (TFG) in its endeavours to ensure
peace and stability in Somalia. IGAD underlines once
again the critical need to provide the financial and
logistical support to enable the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM) to reach its authorized level of
8,100 troops.
The African Union Assembly, demonstrating its
commitment to peace in Somalia, endorsed the
decisions of the IGAD heads of State and Government
in July, including the decision to deploy an additional
2,000 peacekeepers to AMISOM immediately. My
delegation would like to stress the need for concerted
effort on the part of the international community to
assist the African Union in increasing its forces to the
level necessary to enable AMISOM to carry out its
mandated peacekeeping activities. Nevertheless, the
ultimate solution is to transform AMISOM into a
United Nations peacekeeping force.
Ethiopia calls for concrete action by the Security
Council aimed at stabilizing Somalia permanently by
helping the TFG and AMISOM to bring normalcy to
that war-ravaged nation. The international community
must continue to assist the TFG, the only legitimate
body that can bring sustainable peace, which must be
encouraged to show itself able to work credibly with its
partners and to deliver results. No one can pretend that
deploying military forces in isolation can resolve
Somalia’s problems. IGAD, Somalia’s neighbouring
States, the African Union and the TFG have all been
working to move the political process forward.
Ethiopia believes that the transitional federal
institutions should work to strengthen internal cohesion
while avoiding the tensions to which the country has

29

S/PV.6386

been prone in the past, obstructing the implementation
of the Transitional Federal Charter. We believe that the
political leaders should resolve disputes among
themselves and take tangible steps towards the
fulfilment of their commitments through genuine
consultation and dialogue. We applaud the
commendable and tangible results achieved thus far,
one of which has been the broadening of the peace
process in order to bring on board others who are
prepared to work for peace and stability in Somalia.
It is important to ensure that the training of
security forces is conducted in a more organized and
coherent way, restructuring the TFG’s security
institutions by making them more effective and
manageable, with proper command-and-control
structures. My delegation, while recognizing the
constructive consultations between the TFG and Ahlu
Sunnah Wal Jama’a, encourages the leadership of the
TFG to show the necessary determination to resolve to
work together. It is necessary to acknowledge that the
TFG has consistently made it clear that it is prepared to
talk to any and all groups that reject extremism and
violence. The United Nations should work to maintain
unity within the TFG.
Somalia continues to be the most dangerous
threat to regional and international security, due to the
failure of the international community to take timely
action when Al-Shabaab succeeded in galvanizing the
support of its partners. Ethiopia condemns the terrorist
attacks on civilians in Kampala and Mogadishu by
Al-Shabaab and its supporters. We would like to
emphasize that the Security Council must not abandon
Somalis to international terrorism. Al-Shabaab and its

30

allies, who are closely linked to Al-Qaida, must be
defeated. The United Nations and the regional
organizations and countries involved should move
forward in the struggle against the international
terrorist networks.
The Council is fully aware of Eritrea’s support
for extremist groups such as Al-Shabaab and Hizbul
Islam, which continue to enjoy substantial Eritrean
military and logistical backing. There is explicit
evidence of Eritrea’s continued involvement in the
transfer of weapons to Somalia. Eritrea has yet to be
deterred from violating the Council’s resolutions in its
ongoing support for terrorists and efforts to destabilize
countries in the region.
Ethiopia considers that any investigation of
human rights violations in Somalia should be
undertaken within the mandate of the Human Rights
Council, and particularly by the Independent Expert on
the human rights situation in Somalia. We believe that
the efforts at the United Nations level to fight impunity
within the Djibouti peace process should be Somaliowned.
In conclusion, my delegation reiterates that the
Council should work to re-hat AMISOM to United
Nations peacekeeping operations.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m.

10-53641
