S/2022/258

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
23 March 2022
Original: English

Letter dated 22 March 2022 from the Permanent Representatives
of Ireland, Mexico and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General
Ireland and Mexico, as Co-Chairs of the Informal Expert Group on Women and
Peace and Security of the Security Council and in close cooperation with the United
Kingdom, would like to share the summary note of the following meeting of the
Informal Expert Group on the situation in Myanmar (see annex).
We would be grateful if the present letter and its annex could be circulated as a
document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Geraldine Byrne Nason
Permanent Representative of Ireland to the United Nations
(Signed) Juan Ramón de la Fuente Ramírez
Permanent Representative of Mexico to the United Nations
(Signed) Barbara Woodward
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom to the United Nations

22-04337 (E)

280322

*2204337*

S/2022/258

Annex to the letter dated 22 March 2022 from the Permanent
Representatives of Ireland, Mexico and the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General
Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security of the
Security Council
Summary of the meeting on Myanmar held on 4 March 2022
On 4 March 2022, the Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security
held a meeting on the situation in Myanmar. The group was briefed by the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General on Myanmar, Noeleen Heyzer. The meeting
concluded with an overview of key recommendations provided by the United Nations
Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN -Women) and
additional observations shared by the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
Questions from Council members
Members of the Security Council asked questions about the role of women’s
rights organizations and human rights defenders among pro testers and the
pro-democracy movement, the planned joint platform of the United Nations and the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) on women and peace and security,
and the integration of gender issues and perspectives into the multi-track strategy of
the Special Envoy, the five-point consensus of ASEAN and the delivery of
humanitarian assistance. Council members also asked for ideas regarding ways in
which the international community could support the work of women’s organizations
in the current environment, amplify women’s voices in reconciliation efforts or
political dialogue, address the continued reports of conflict-related sexual violence
and violence against women in detention, and avert the regression of development
gains and its impact on women’s employment, education or food security.
Main points raised in the meeting
• In the year since the military takeover interrupted Myanmar’s democratic
transition, armed conflict has escalated across the country, and a decade of
development gains has been reversed. The number of people in need of
humanitarian assistance and protection has grown from 1 million to 14.4
million, and half of the country’s population is now below the poverty line.
Since the coup, more than 1,500 people have been killed, and half a million
people have been newly displaced, in addition to nearly 400,000 internally
displaced persons in Chin, Shan, Kachin and Rakhine States and more than
900,000 Rohingya refugees in Bangladesh.
• Immediately following the takeover, women had a very visible leadership role
in peaceful protests and the civil disobedience movement, largely initiated by
health-care workers and other civil servants, most of whom were women.
• Despite provisions on quotas for women’s participation in the Nationwide
Ceasefire Agreement of 2015, the number of women participating in political
processes has declined in recent years. However, this trend has been reversed in
the opposition movement after the coup. Some 30 per cent of high -level
positions in the National Unity Government established in April 2021 are
occupied by women, an increase compared with women’s representation in the

2/5

22-04337

S/2022/258

Government led by the National League for Democracy before the military
takeover.
• The Special Envoy has developed a multi-track strategy to deal with the
multidimensional crises in Myanmar, focusing on the following four areas:
(a) humanitarian and protection needs; (b) return to civilian rule; (c) effective and
democratic governance (based on accountability and justice); and (d) durable
solutions for the Rohingya. To achieve these objectives, she emphasized the
importance of a Myanmar-led process, reflective of the will and aspirations of the
people, supported by a well-coordinated international strategy grounded in
regional unity, with ASEAN at the centre along with neighbouring countries.
• The Special Envoy has put women at the centre of all her efforts, including her
extensive consultations with key stakeholders since taking on the role in
mid-December, such as with women’s civil society organizations, especially
those most affected. In one of her consultations with more than 500 women
community leaders in Rakhine State, many noted how they had come together
across ethnic and religious divides to promote social cohesion, alleviate
intercommunal tension and provide coronavirus disease (COVID -19) pandemic
and humanitarian-related support to marginalized groups, collectively
overcoming patriarchal barriers.
• The Special Envoy is also advancing the women and peace and security agenda
through cooperation between the United Nations and ASEAN, including by
co-facilitating a United Nations-ASEAN platform on women and peace and
security with the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia with a view to
advancing the protection agenda at the local level, especially for women and
young people most affected by the conflict, and amplifying the work and voices
of local women’s groups and women leaders, in line with ongoing policy
discussions at ASEAN, the General Assembly and the Security Council, in order
to sustain international attention and mobilize more political and funding support.
• In 2021, growing calls for inclusive, effective and democratic governance across
gender, ethnic and religious divides signalled a generational transformation in
Myanmar society. These signs of societal transformation were already evident
among young people in urban centres but became much more pronounced across
Myanmar, as seen in protests and the civil disobedience movement against the
military takeover. Women have played a leadership role in these movements,
and men have welcomed and supported women’s agency, including by wearing
women’s clothes to demonstrate solidarity.
• However, prospects for inclusive and constructive dialogue, or even “talks about
the talks”, are unlikely in the current context. Positions have hardened, with all
sides resorting to violence as the only perceived solution.
• The pandemic and the deterioration of the security situation after th e military
coup have had a significant impact on women’s employment and on sectors in
which women constituted the majority of workers or had a prominent role, such
as the garment industry, the hospitality sector and the civil service. In addition,
many girls have dropped out of school and may not return. Moreover, the
trafficking of women and girls has increased sharply.
• A significant percentage of women’s organizations have had to shut down owing
to insecurity, repression, new rules and registration procedures, and the collapse
of the banking system. Many of the women in organizations that were historically
focused on advocacy had to flee or go into hiding, while those that stayed in the
country focus only on service delivery and emergency response, with no ability or
opportunity to participate in any political process or express themselves openly.
22-04337

3/5

S/2022/258

• The humanitarian country team in Myanmar has systematically integrated gender
equality and sex- and age-disaggregated data into the humanitarian needs
overview and humanitarian response plan, and the Myanmar humanitarian country
team applies a gender marker to all its projects. However, implementation is a
challenge, as the whole United Nations system is struggling to operate because of
widespread insecurity and significant bureaucratic hurdles, including the lack of
permission to operate in many areas or even enter the country in many cases.
• The Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict has received reports of the use of rape, gang rape and
penetration with objects in detention settings against political prisoners,
participants in the civil disobedience movement and lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender and intersex activists, and a continuing trend of conflict -related
sexual violence by the Tatmadaw, including in recent clashes, with unwanted
pregnancy resulting in certain cases. Reports of gender-based hate speech and
reprisals against women human rights defenders have increased since the coup
of February 2021, in a climate of shrinking civic space.
• Access to gender-based violence services and reproductive health care is more
limited than ever. The authorities have not agreed to the proposed deployment
of a Women Protection Advisor in line with Security Council resolutio n 2467
(2019), and the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) is therefore
coordinating the monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements on conflict related sexual violence. The authorities have disseminated an action plan to
address such violence, pursuant to the joint communiqué of 2018, but the plan
was not coordinated with the United Nations or civil society and is not guided
by a survivor-centred approach, as a result of which, for example, safeguards
for victims, witnesses and their representatives are absent.
• Patterns of sexual violence have been mentioned in the annual reports of the
Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual violence since 2010, and the
Tatmadaw has been listed as a perpetrator of such violence since 2018. There
are reports that some of the same military divisions employed in Rakhine against
the Rohingya in 2017 have been used to repress the pro -democracy movement
across the country. The lack of accountability since 2017 has led to successive
waves of violence and further displacement, and has inhibited voluntary, safe
and sustainable returns.
• Meanwhile, Rohingya refugees in Cox’s Bazar, Bangladesh, risk becoming “a
forgotten crisis within a forgotten crisis”, eclipsed by other conflicts. Rohingya
women cannot formally access employment, are largely excluded from camp
leadership structures, are vulnerable to high levels of violence within the camps,
including sexual violence, and have little recourse other than traditional justice
mechanisms, which often result in victims being forced to marry the rapists, and
children born of rape risk being left in legal limbo.
Recommendations
The following recommendations were made by UN-Women, as the secretariat
of the Informal Expert Group: 1
__________________
1

4/5

These recommendations are suggestions from United Nations participants in this meeting,
including the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
(UN-Women) and the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary -General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, or from the background note prepared by UN-Women as the secretariat of
the Informal Expert Group ahead of the meeting, rather than recommendations of the Informal
Expert Group as a whole or Council members.
22-04337

S/2022/258

The Security Council should hold an open meeting and invite women from
Myanmar civil society to brief members. In addition, if the Security Council proposes
the adoption of a resolution or presidential statement, language such as the following
could be considered:
• Recognizes the leading role of women in the peaceful protests following the
military takeover, and the essential contribution of women’s civil society
organizations in relief and recovery efforts, and calls for women’s full, equal
and meaningful participation in all aspects of the political process.
• Strongly condemns the violence against peaceful protesters, including women
and girls, and calls for the immediate release of all those that have been arrested
because of their affiliation or role in the protests, including women human rights
defenders.
• Calls for immediate and unhindered access for independent monitors to the
territory of Myanmar, including for the Independent Investigative Mechanism
for Myanmar.
• Calls for the lifting of movement restrictions affecting the Rohingya and for safe
and unimpeded humanitarian access to all people in need, with due attention to
the differentiated needs of women and girls.
• Calls for the full implementation of the joint communiqu é of 2018 and the
deployment of women’s protection advisers, in line with Security Council
resolution 2467 (2019), to enhance collective efforts to address conflict-related
sexual violence and hold perpetrators accountable.
In addition, Council members could:
• Provide long-term flexible funding to women-led civil society organizations,
especially at the local level, and find channels to fund the informal women -led
networks providing humanitarian relief.
• Consistently call out and condemn attacks against women human rights
defenders and express solidarity and support.
• Engage meaningfully with women’s civil society organizations in all discussions
about ways to enhance accountability and advance international justice.
• Support the Special Envoy’s efforts to support and engage systematically with
women, especially at the local level, and collaborate with ASEAN and the United
Nations on advancing the women and peace and security agenda in Myanmar.
• Urge ASEAN to prioritize women’s meaningful participation in all diplomatic
efforts to end the crisis, and consult widely on its joint women and peace and
security platform with the United Nations.
The Co-Chairs thanked all participants and committed to follow up on the
important issues raised at the meeting.

22-04337

5/5
