S/PV.6796

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6796th meeting

Friday, 29 June 2012, 9.50 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Wang Min . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Sharifov
Mr. Alzate
Mr. Briens
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Zhukov
Mr. Mashabane
Mr. Kandangha-Bariki
Mr. Parham
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Central African region
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation of children and armed conflict
affected by the Lord’s Resistance Army (S/2012/365)
Report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa and on the Lord’s Resistance Army-affected areas
(S/2012/421)

12-39660 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1239660*

S/PV.6796

The meeting was called to order at 9.50 a.m.

I now give the floor to Mr. Moussa.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Central African region
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation
of children and armed conflict affected by the
Lord’s Resistance Army (S/2012/365)
Report of the Secretary-General on the activities
of the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa and on the Lord’s Resistance
Army-affected areas(S/2012/421)
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Central
African Republic to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s rules of procedure,
I invite Mr. Abou Moussa, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa, to participate in this
meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Ambassador
Francisco Caetano José Madeira, Special Envoy of
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission on
Lord’s Resistance Army Issues, to participate in this
meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2012/421, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the activities of the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa and on
the Lord’s Resistance Army-affected areas, as well
as document S/2012/365, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the situation of children and
armed conflict affected by the Lord’s Resistance Army.
I wish also to draw the attention of Council
members to document S/2012/481, which contains a
letter from the Secretary-General dated 25 June 2012
addressed to the President of the Security Council and
transmitting the regional strategy to address the threat
and impact of the activities of the Lord’s Resistance
Army pursuant to Security Council presidential
statement S/PRST/2011/21.

2

Mr. Moussa (spoke in French): Allow me to thank
you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to present to
the Security Council the second report (S/2012/421) of
the Secretary-General on the activities of the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA),
including the efforts undertaken by the Organization to
combat the Lord’s Resistance Army. Given the fact that
Ambassador Madeira, Special Envoy of the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission on Lord’s Resistance
Army Issues, is with us today, my statement on this
issue fill focus essentially on the United Nations
regional strategy to address this scourge.
For more than a year now, UNOCA has been working
in close cooperation with the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS), its member States
and other partners in an effort to overcome various
challenges faced by the subregion in the areas of peace,
security and development. Those challenges include
political governance, institutional weakness, managing
electoral processes, environmental degradation,
socio-economic development, the consequences of
the Libyan crisis, combating the proliferation of illicit
small arms and light weapons, and the cross-border
threats posed by armed groups such as Boko Haram and
the Lord’s Resistance Army. Thanks to the experience
we have gained on the ground, we have been able to
identify priority areas for UNOCA-ECCAS engagement
that will guide our efforts in the subregion.
(spoke in English)
As the secretariat of the United Nations Standing
Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central
Africa, we have also successfully facilitated the
functioning of that Committee, including the convening
of two ministerial meetings. Moving forward, we will
help the Committee to implement the counter-terrorism
road map that it adopted last December. We will
also support the Committee’s twentieth anniversary
celebrations.
UNOCA, together with the United Nations Office
for West Africa, has been actively engaged in facilitating
the implementation of resolution 2039 (2012), on piracy
and armed robbery in the Gulf of Guinea, in close
collaboration with ECCAS, the Economic Community
of West African States, the Gulf of Guinea Commission
and the African Union. Together, and as requested by
this body, we are working towards the holding of a
regional summit before the end of the year.

12-39660

S/PV.6796

The subregion has rich reserves of natural resources.
However, the effective management of those resources
and their judicious exploitation for the benefit of the
majority of the populations remains a major challenge.
A most encouraging development in the subregion is the
current healthy state of the economies of the countries
of Central Africa, with a reported average growth rate of
more than 5 per cent in 2011. In spite of that good news,
there are indications that, partly due to shortcomings in
economic governance, the benefits of that growth at the
macroeconomic level are yet to trickle down to the level
of the vast majority of the population.
During his visit to the subregion last February, the
Secretary-General highlighted the necessity of bridging
the widening gaps between the rich and the poor in some
Central African states. He urged Governments to “do
more to strengthen the social fabric by promoting social
equity and ensuring a better distribution of income”
and better prospects for sustainable growth, peace and
prosperity.
On 14 November 2011, I briefed the Council (see
S/PV.6657) on the tremendous suffering that the most
brutal criminal group in Central Africa, the LRA, was
inflicting on the local population. For over two decades,
this group has maimed, killed, kidnapped women and
children, and caused the displacement of more than
445,000 people. Following my briefing, at the end of
its meeting the Council adopted presidential statement
S/PRST/2011/21, in which it encouraged UNOCA, in
coordination with the United Nations Office to the
African Union, to engage with the United Nations
presences in the LRA-affected region and the AU to
develop a regional strategy to address the threat posed
by the LRA. In that regard, we consulted extensively
with the Governments in the affected countries,
national and regional actors and the wider international
community to develop a coordinated strategy.
The strategy, which has been submitted to
the Council, focuses on five key objectives. They
include, first, support for the operationalization and
full implementation of the African Union regional
cooperation initiative against the LRA; secondly,
enhancing efforts to promote the protection of civilians;
thirdly, expanding disarmament, demobilization,
repatriation, resettlement and reintegration (DDRRR)
activities to cover all LRA-affected areas; fourthly,
promoting a coordinated humanitarian and child
protection response in all LRA-affected areas and;
lastly, supporting LRA-affected Governments in the

fields of peacebuilding, human rights, the rule of law
and development, so as to enable them to extend State
authority across their territories. Once the strategy is
endorsed, the United Nations and its partners will need
to agree on its implementation plan.
The strategy goes beyond military operations and
DDRRR. It addresses the plight of the victims to ensure
their social and economic reintegration into their
respective communities. However, the strategy must
only represent the beginning of vigorous attention by
the Council to address the LRA issues, in order to put
an end to these atrocities once and for all. Its successful
implementation will depend on the level of cooperation
and engagement among the countries affected, and on
the mobilization of resources to address funding gaps.
In spite of the recent capture of one of its senior
commanders and its significantly diminished
capability, the LRA remains extremely dangerous and
retains the capacity to inflict considerable suffering on
the population. In that regard, I appeal to the Security
Council and the wider international community to
actively support the implementation of the United
Nations regional strategy and the AU Regional
Cooperation Initiative. It is also imperative to ensure
that the LRA’s source of funding is investigated.
UNOCA is committed to continuing to support the
countries of the subregion in their efforts to foster peace
and security. In that regard, UNOCA will continue to
support subregional initiatives to address the major
challenges to peace and security in Central Africa, in
particular the implementation of the regional strategy
on the LRA, measures to curb the threat posed by piracy
and armed robbery at sea in the Gulf of Guinea, and
support to the activities of the United Nations Standing
Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central
Africa.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Moussa for his statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. Madeira.
Mr. Madeira: I greet the Security Council on
behalf of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, Mr. Jean Ping, and wish to thank the
United Nations, particularly the Security Council and
the Secretary-General, for their continued commitment
to supporting the African Union and other international
efforts aimed at eliminating the threat of the Lord’s
Resistance Army (LRA). I also wish to express our

12-396603

S/PV.6796

gratitude for the concrete United Nations support
being channeled through its missions, the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan and the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO); its offices — the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA), the United Nations Office to the African
Union (UNOAU) and the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic;
and humanitarian agencies in order to respond to the
threat of the LRA and its impact on the countries
affected, particularly the Central African Republic, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Republic of
South Sudan. That support has effectively enhanced
implementation of the African Union-led Regional
Cooperation Initiative for the elimination of the Lord’s
Resistance Army.
I wish to stress that although successive military
operations have largely disabled the LRA command,
the rebels’ ability to commit atrocities against civilians
has remained undiminished. The 11 June report of the
Secretary-General on the activities of UNOCA and
on areas affected by the LRA (S/2012/421) accurately
depicts the current situation vis-à-vis the LRA.
However, I wish to underline the efforts made so far
by some key partners of the African Union in the fight
against the LRA.
The ongoing United States-backed military
operations, especially in the Central African Republic,
have sustained pressure on the LRA, keeping the rebels
constantly on the run. Those operations contributed to the
capture by Ugandan troops on 12 May of the self-styled
Major General Caesar Acellam Otto, a one-time number
four in the LRA command hierarchy; the capture by
Central African Republic troops on 22 May of two LRA
combatants; and the killing on 16 June of two other
LRA combatants by Ugandan troops, who also rescued
seven civilians who had been abducted. Furthermore,
MONUSCO, the United States Government and various
non-governmental organizations are supporting these
actions with psychological operations in the form of
come-home radio messages and air-dropped leaflets in
local languages, aimed at encouraging mass defections
by LRA elements. When it becomes fully operational,
the African Union-led Regional Cooperation Initiative
is expected to bolster those efforts, particularly through
military operations, so as to heighten pressure on the
LRA, leading to more captures, surrenders, defections
and the eventual elimination of the entire group.

4

At this juncture, allow me to acknowledge the
enormous support and commitment the European Union
has demonstrated towards the Regional Cooperation
Initiative on the LRA. The European Union has been
providing funds to support the African Union (AU)
efforts to eliminate the LRA since 2010.
This meeting gives me the opportunity to apprise
the Council of some key issues concerning the Regional
Cooperation Initiative on the LRA. The first ministerial
meeting of the joint coordination mechanism on the
LRA, held in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, on 8 May, adopted
concrete measures and made important decisions on
the next steps to be taken in implementing the African
Union-led Regional Cooperation Initiative. They
include the full operationalization of the regional task
force headquarters and the three sectors; coordination
between the task force and the United Nations missions
and offices on the ground; and the convening of a
support forum to mobilize resources for the Cooperation
Initiative. In addition, the 321st meeting of the AU
Peace and Security Council, held in Addis Ababa on
22 May, extended authorization for the implementation
of the Initiative for 12 months.
The major objectives of the African Union-led
Initiative are strengthening the capacity of the affected
countries to effectively respond to and neutralize the
LRA threat; facilitating the delivery of humanitarian
assistance to the affected communities and creating
an environment conducive to the stabilization and
rehabilitation of the affected areas. Those objectives,
particularly the latter two — relating to humanitarian
assistance, the protection of civilians, support to
former combatants for disarmament, demobilization,
repatriation, resettlement and reintegration, and the
long-term recovery needs of those affected — resonate
with those of the United Nations system on the ground
and have thus been well articulated in the comprehensive
regional strategy on the LRA.
The key components and structures of the initiative
are the joint coordination mechanism — an ad hoc
political body composed of the Ministers of Defence of
the four LRA-affected countries, with a secretariat in
Bangui and chaired by the African Union Commissioner
for Peace and Security — whose task is dealing with
the general political aspects, providing strategic
direction and coordinating with all stakeholders in
the fight against the LRA; a 5,000-strong force with
its headquarters in Yambio, South Sudan; and three
operational sectors, in Nzara in South Sudan, Dungu in

12-39660

S/PV.6796

the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and Obo in the
Central African Republic.
Regarding the status of the implementation of the
Regional Cooperation Initiative, we can state that since
the authorization in November 2011 of the African
Union-led Initiative by the African Union Peace and
Security Council, the following efforts have been
accomplished.
The command and control architecture of the
regional task force, which had not been upon decided
and thus remained a potential impediment to operations,
was adopted on 8 May at the first ministerial meeting
of the Joint Coordination Mechanism. The regional
task force headquarters has been fully staffed with 30
officers, including a civilian humanitarian adviser, a
civilian human rights adviser and a police officer to
provide advice on the rule of law and ensure that the
activities of our soldiers in the LRA-affected areas and
their interaction with the affected communities and
LRA elements are conducted in strict respect of human
rights and the rule of law. They have all undergone
induction.
A joint team comprising military officers from the
African Union regional task force headquarters, the
UNOAU, the European Union and the United States of
America are currently conducting a technical assessment
mission in the sectors to evaluate their capabilities,
challenges and needs for effective operations. The
process for the adoption of major technical support
documents, notably standard operating procedures,
rules of engagement, common measures on the
treatment of LRA combatants and victims, and policy
on civilian protection are on track.
On the political and diplomatic front, I have
undertaken jointly with my colleague the Special
Representative and Head of the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa, Mr. Abou Moussa, to
encourage the missions to engage the leadership of the
LRA-affected countries to maintain their commitment
or, where necessary, urge them to renew cooperation on
the LRA issue.
At the sidelines of those missions, we have often
engaged representatives of cooperating international
partners to galvanize international support for the
regional cooperation initiative against LRA. We also
undertook a joint mission to N’Djamena in April,
within our strategic objective of seeking the diplomatic
support of the neighbours of the LRA-affected countries

to block the possible escape of the LRA members into
new areas in those countries. Consultations are ongoing
with authorities of the Republic of the Sudan for a
similar mission to Khartoum.
The effective implementation of the African
Union-led initiative is, however, being undermined
by certain critical challenges, for which we appeal
for international support. Those challenges include
predictability of financial and material resources and
logistical support for the Joint Coordination Mechanism
secretariat and the Office of the Special Envoy for
the LRA Issue, the regional task force headquarters
operations and the operational units tracking the LRA
in the respective sectors.
The operational units require concrete support
in terms of appropriate training, harmonized
communication systems, food rations, medical support,
air and ground mobility, munitions, fuel and lubricants,
inter alia, to enable them to undertake robust military
operations against the LRA so as to induce defections
or the surrender and capture of LRA combatants as well
as the rescue of LRA abductees.
I wish to inform the Security Council that, on
22 November 2011, the African Union Peace and Security
Council declared the LRA a terrorist organization and
requested the Security Council to do likewise. I take this
opportunity to formally request the Security Council,
through you, Mr. President, to consider the request of the
African Union Peace and Security Council and declare
the LRA a terrorist organization. I also wish to echo
the African Union Peace and Security Council request
of 22 May 2012 to the Security Council to consider
modalities for enhancing its support to the African
Union-led international efforts, inter alia, by adjusting
the mandates of the United Nations peacekeeping
missions in the LRA-affected countries. In that regard,
I wish to reiterate the need to make available an air
mobility network within the three sectors.
I wish to appeal further to the Security Council for
support for resources to mitigate the aforementioned
challenges to the effective functioning of the Joint
Coordination Mechanism secretariat and Office of
the African Union Special Envoy for the LRA Issue
in Bangui, operations of the regional task force/joint
operations centre headquarters in Yambio as well as
the sector headquarters and their operational units in
Nzara, Dungu and Obo.

12-396605

S/PV.6796

We applaud the continued political engagement
of the United States on the LRA issue, particularly
for having deployed the approximately 100 military
personnel to the region in October 2011 to provide
logistical assistance, planning and intelligence. We
thank the European Union for the substantial and
sustained support to the African Union-led regional
cooperation initiative against LRA. That support has
proven to be essential in the operationalization of the
different structures of the initiative. We also recognize
and appreciate the efforts of the Members of Parliament
of the United Kingdom who debated the LRA issue and
urged their Government to do everything in its power
to arrest Kony. We welcome those efforts and request
more from other States Members of the United Nations,
so as to further enhance the current global momentum
against Kony and the LRA. In that regard, I urge the
Security Council to help us deny the LRA any external
sources of support, including safe haven for their
sympathizers who continue to issue statements from the
diaspora in support of the terrorist group.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Ambassador Madeira for his statement.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for scheduling today’s important meeting
of the Security Council. Let me begin also by thanking
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Abou
Moussa for his briefing and for the valuable contribution
that he makes to peace and security in the Central
African region. I also wish to thank the Special Envoy
of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission on
Lord’s Resistance Army Issues, Ambassador Madeira,
for his very helpful briefing this morning. His presence
here today is a demonstration of the strong coordination
between the United Nations and the African Union on
that important topic. The United Kingdom encourages
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA) to continue to coordinate the work of the
United Nations, the African Union and the States
affected by the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) to
counter the LRA threat.
As Mr. Moussa and Ambassador Madeira have
just reminded us, the LRA remains an unprincipled
and violent threat to civilians across Central Africa.
The atrocities it commits have serious humanitarian
and human rights consequences. Council members and

6

Special Representative Abou Moussa heard graphic
accounts of those atrocities in an Arria-formula
meeting last week with some of those directly involved
in working with the victims.
The United Kingdom condemns in the strongest
terms the LRA’s continued violations of international
law and human rights law. The LRA’s campaign has the
potential to cause further instability in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Republic of South Sudan
and the Central African Republic, and to hamper the
efforts of those countries to progress towards peace and
security. Removing the threat of the LRA is important
in terms of creating and consolidating a secure and
stable environment in the affected countries.
The release of the United Nations regional
strategy on the Lord’s Resistance Army is a welcome
step towards achieving that aim. The international
community must now ensure that there is an appropriate
and coordinated international response to the problem.
We need a unified response from the LRA-affected
countries, the African Union and the United Nations
political, development, humanitarian and peacekeeping
missions in those countries.
In that regard, the United Kingdom welcomes the
work that the African Union has undertaken towards
the implementation of its regional task force, about
which we have just heard from Ambassador Madeira.
The United Kingdom urges the full deployment of
troops across the region as soon as possible.
The United Nations regional strategy must now be
implemented fully and quickly. I encourage UNOCA to
develop a costed implementation plan for the strategy,
outlining priority actions and articulating the results
that will be achieved. It is important as soon as possible
to identify and explain to the broader donor community
the resource gaps.
The United Kingdom also commends the important
work of the United Nations peacekeeping missions
in protecting civilians. Continued and improved
coordination and information-sharing between these
missions and with other stakeholders will further
enhance these efforts. This is why the United Kingdom
has supported an increase in the capacity of the
information cell in northern Democratic Republic of
the Congo, which will improve information exchange
between the missions.

12-39660

S/PV.6796

I am pleased to see that important work such as the
successful demobilization, disarmament, repatriation,
resettlement and reintegration programme is being
expanded across the entire LRA-affected region. I urge
the United Nations to deliver consistent levels of support
for this programme across the region and to assess and
respond to recent changes in amnesty laws in the region
as far as they affect the programme.

their subregion, as witnessed at the summit meeting
held in January. South Africa commends the excellent
economic growth rates registered by the countries OF
the region despite the current difficult economic and
financial climate. This notwithstanding, efforts must
be employed to ensure that this growth translates into
poverty alleviation and benefits the majority of the
vulnerable and marginalized communities.

I now turn to UNOCA’s wider role in other security
issues across Central Africa. The United Kingdom
remains concerned about the increased levels of
instability in the region. I welcome the enhanced
regional collaboration to counter these threats, and
would encourage expansion and intensification of
this cooperation. UNOCA will have an important role
to play in supporting upstream conflict prevention
by pre-empting tensions in the region and mediating
between parties.

We remain convinced that economic development
and security are mutually reinforcing, and we therefore
commend the work of UNOCA in supporting States
of the region in strengthening conflict prevention and
peacebuilding and countering cross-border threats.
We particularly commend the countries of the region
for conducting their elections in a peaceful manner.
As noted by the Secretary-General (S/2012/421), the
concern remains that elections-related violence could
be a source of instability in the absence of transparent,
legal, participatory and inclusive processes.

The United Kingdom also recognizes the leadership
that the United Nations is showing on maritime security
and the positive role played by Central African States.
A coordinated regional response is important in this
area too. In this regard, we welcome the Economic
Community of Central African States and Economic
Community of West African States maritime security
memorandum of understanding. Regional dialogue
should cover issues beyond just piracy and include
illegal fishing, illegal oil bunkering, weapons, people
and narcotics trafficking.
Lastly, I thank Council members for their support
for the draft presidential statement that the United
Kingdom delegation has prepared and that you, Sir, will
shortly issue on the Council’s behalf.
Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): We thank
your delegation, Mr. President, for facilitating this
discussion today. My delegation would like to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Abou Moussa, for his comprehensive briefing on
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA) and the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA).
We also thank the Special Envoy of the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission on LRA issues,
Ambassador Francisco Madeira, for his useful briefing
to the Council.
Regarding the situation in Central Africa, we
are pleased with the continued efforts of the political
leadership of the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS) to address the threats affecting

We are equally concerned about the impact
of insecurity in the Sahel in the follow-up to the
Libyan crisis on peace, stability and socio-economic
development in the Central African region. The
proliferation of weapons and the spread of transnational
organized crime and terrorist groups continue to pose a
threat to the security of the region. Equally worrisome
in this regard are reports that Boko Haram is now
operating beyond the borders of Nigeria.
My delegation is pleased with the high level of
cooperation taking place between UNOCA and the
United Nations Office for West Africa, as well as other
United Nations presences in the region, in addressing the
common security and socio-economic challenges of the
subregion. The lessons learned could enhance greater
effectiveness and efficiency of both regional presences.
This collaboration has also extended to other regional
bodies such as ECCAS, the Economic Community of
West African States and the Commission of the Gulf of
Guinea to address maritime security challenges facing
the region.
UNOCA has an important mandate in working
with the United Nations peacekeeping missions
in the affected areas, the United Nations Office to
the African Union and the African Union (AU) to
facilitate cooperation in countering the threat posed
by the LRA. Collaboration with the relevant regional
and subregional organizations is of paramount
importance. Over the past year, the United Nations and

12-396607

S/PV.6796

the AU have undertaken a number of joint initiatives,
including visits to countries affected by LRA activities.
These collaborative approaches have assisted the two
organizations in strengthening the international resolve
to combat the scourge of the LRA.
The activities of the LRA remain a serious threat to
peace, security and stability in the region, with grave
humanitarian consequences. South Africa is concerned
about the devastating effects of this armed group
and its continued activities in a number of African
countries, including the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Uganda, South Sudan and the Central African
Republic. The brutality of these activities continues to
haunt thousands of innocent civilians, including women
and children, and has resulted in massive displacements
of people and an acute humanitarian crisis.
The African Union has declared the LRA a terrorist
organization, and accordingly the Security Council
has had to deal with the LRA as such. South Africa
commends the ongoing military cooperation between
the countries affected by LRA activities in addressing
this challenge.
In this regard, my delegation welcomes the
official launching of the African Union-led Regional
Cooperation Initiative against the LRA on 24 March,
including a joint coordination mechanism, a regional
task force and a joint operations centre. The Initiative
will, inter alia, strengthen the operational capabilities
of the countries affected by the atrocities of the LRA
and facilitate the delivery of humanitarian aid to
affected States. Ambassador Madeira has elaborated
on the modalities of the Initiative. It will be vital for
the international community to provide all necessary
support to the Initiative, particularly in logistical,
financial and technical terms, so as to facilitate the
effective functioning of the different components of
the Initiative and build the capacity of the armed and
security forces of the affected countries.
We reaffirm that military action against the LRA
should be conducted in a manner that seeks to minimize
injury to civilians, and be in compliance with the
applicable international law, including international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law. South
Africa wishes to underscore that these military
operations should be part of a broader strategy that
should include the granting of amnesty, policies for
facilitating defections and reintegrations, and arrests
of LRA commanders indicted by the International

8

Criminal Court. In this regard, we welcome the arrest
of a senior commander of the LRA, Caesar Acellam
Otto.
Finally, my delegation wishes to express its
appreciation for the work done by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Abou
Moussa, and his team, and we wish him well in his
ongoing endeavours. If UNOCA is to be able to
implement all its plans and programmes for the region,
it is important that it be allocated the resources it needs.
My delegation supports the draft presidential
statement that will be adopted by the Council shortly.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset, I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
this meeting to discuss the activities of the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA),
particularly in the context of the threat posed by the
Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA). I would also like to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Abou Moussa, and Ambassador Madeira for their
briefings.
We have taken note of the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2012/421) on UNOCA and the LRA and on a
regional strategy for the LRA-affected areas.
The countries of Central Africa are making steady
progress in overcoming the negative effects of decades
of instability and conflict. The region has seen overall
political stability. Timely elections have been held in
several countries, which have further strengthened
democratic institutions. Countries are pursuing
economic reform, which has resulted in robust economic
growth in the region. They are also cooperating with
regional and foreign partners in addressing their
common challenges, such as the proliferation of
weapons, transnational organized crime and terrorism.
The African Union and the Economic Community of
Central African States have also continued to play a
crucial role in addressing these problems in partnership
with UNOCA and the United Nations Office to the
African Union.
Despite those positive trends, the countries
of the region continue to grapple with the effects
of conflicts of the past. Overall socio-economic
indicators still remain poor and the precarious security
and humanitarian situation in the Sahel is adversely
impacting on the region. Activities of terrorist groups
such as Boko Haram, armed groups and transnational

12-39660

S/PV.6796

crime networks, illicit drug trafficking, and maritime
piracy and robbery at sea in the Gulf of Guinea continue
to threaten the security and stability of the region.
It is in this context that the activities of UNOCA
assume significance, particularly in the areas of
conflict prevention, early warning and addressing
socio-economic challenges. We commend UNOCA
and the Special Representative and Head of the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa, Mr. Abou
Moussa, for their active engagement with national
Governments and with regional and subregional
organizations. UNOCA should further strengthen that
collaboration and assist the efforts of Governments and
organizations in the region so that regional cooperative
frameworks developed to deal with those common
challenges are fully implemented.
The focus of the Council should lead to galvanizing
the international community to provide adequate
resources for the national and regional endeavours,
particularly in strengthening national capacities with
regard to civil administration, police and security
forces, security sector reform and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes and
socio-economic development. Given the fragility of
political institutions in several countries, it is also
important for national and regional authorities to pay
attention to the need for inclusive political processes,
including electoral reforms.
Piracy in the Gulf of Guinea is a major threat to
maritime navigation, trade and economic activities in
several countries in Central and Western Africa. We
have noted the progress made towards a coordinated
approach to address the problem, including the
establishment of a multinational coordination centre for
maritime safety and security in Equatorial Guinea. We
hope that the proposed summit-level meeting will be
held soon to work out a regional strategy.
It is a matter of serious concern that the LRA
activities have increased this year, particularly in the
Central African Republic and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The LRA remains a potent threat and its
criminal activities have uprooted over 445,000 persons
from their communities in the Central African region,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, South Sudan
and Uganda. While countries like Uganda, with support
from regional and foreign partners, have undertaken a
number of measures to address the challenge posed by
the LRA, a lot remains to be done. In that connection,

we have taken note of UNOCA’s efforts and the launch
of the African Union-led regional cooperation initiative
against the LRA earlier this year. We hope that the
African Union will continue to work closely with the
affected countries so that the regional task force may be
expeditiously deployed in the three identified sectors.
We agree with the Secretary-General’s view that
any effective strategy on the LRA should focus on
strengthening the capacity of national authorities,
including their security forces, to expand the authority
of the State, and focus on overall socio-economic
development in the affected areas. International
humanitarian,
development
and
peacebuilding
assistance to the LRA-affected areas should address the
underlying causes for activities of armed groups. The
national programmes for disarmament, demobilization,
repatriation, resettlement and reintegration activities
should be supported with the provision of adequate
resources and be reinforced by a long-term plan
for employment generation among the affected
communities. It is also important that serious efforts
be made to eliminate the remaining active groups and
target the leadership of the LRA to bring them to justice.
External assistance to the affected countries should be
apolitical in nature and respect national sovereignty in
policy as well as operational matters.
In that connection, it is important that United
Nations missions in the region should not be burdened
further without augmentation of their resources in
manpower and material. Without a commensurate
increase in resources, the expansion of mission
mandates will not result in operational effectiveness.
In conclusion, India stands ready to contribute
to efforts to address the challenges of the countries
of the Central African region, particularly in the
fields of capacity-building and human resource and
socio-economic development.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
this debate. We were fortunately prepared for it by the
Arria-formula meeting held last week at the initiative of
Portugal and the United Kingdom.
I would also like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa, Mr. Abou
Moussa, and the Special Envoy of the Chairperson of
the African Union Commission on Lord’s Resistance

12-396609

S/PV.6796

Army Issues, Ambassador Francisco Caetano José
Madeira, for their very thorough briefings.

ultimately thwart the LRA’s destabilization strategy
while complying with international humanitarian law.

Morocco welcomes the important gains achieved by
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA), which have come barely one year after
its effective launching, in the areas of coordination
and cooperation between States and organizations of
the subregion, but also between the United Nations
agencies and missions. Based on our belief that only
effective and united regional cooperation will provide
lasting responses to the challenges facing the Central
African countries, we commend the strengthening
of cooperation between the UNOCA, the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) and
the secretariat of the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region. The support for strengthening
subregional institutions must continue to be a priority
for UNOCA.

In that context, we would like to commend the
mobilization of UNOCA to provide effective regional
cooperation at the governmental level, at the level of
international and non-governmental organizations,
and also in terms of civil society. The protection
of civilians must continue to be at the centre of any
effort undertaken against the LRA, and measures such
as strengthening and expanding the regional radios
stations throughout the four countries affected by the
LRA should be encouraged. The success of the process
of disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
resettlement or repatriation and national reconciliation
and the prosecution of persons responsible for such
crimes should also continue to be one of the priorities
of countries of the region and of the entire international
community.

With regard to the fight against transnational
organized crime, the security challenges from the Sahel
region, and the phenomenon of piracy in the Gulf of
Guinea, Morocco commends the efforts of UNOCA to
help to establish regional responses to those challenges
via strengthened cross-regional and interregional
cooperation. We specifically welcome the cooperation
established between the UNOCA and the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the commitment to
work together to counter the common threats affecting
the security and stability of those two regions.

We took note with great interest of the regional
strategy crafted by the United Nations to respond to
the threat posed by, and the impact of the activities
of, the LRA. We took note in particular of the five
pillars for strategic action, and we noted with interest
the importance attached to the issue of the social and
economic development of the affected countries, which
is a prerequisite for the promotion of peace and stability
in the subregion.

With regard to piracy in the Gulf of Guinea, we
commend the efforts of the Office to facilitate, on the
one hand, the holding of the regional summit on piracy
in the Gulf of Guinea scheduled for December and, on
the other hand, the cooperation between the ECCAS,
ECOWAS and the Gulf of Guinea Commission.
Morocco supports the efforts of the regional Office
and is prepared to contribute to any initiative aimed at
curbing the current security threats to Central Africa
via our support to countries of the region and in the
framework of the ministerial conference of the African
States bordering the Atlantic Ocean.
Despite the positive gains made to counter the
activities of the Lord’s Resistance Army, that group
continues to destabilize and destroy the lives of thousands
of children, women and men throughout the Central
African region. We continue to believe that the close
cooperation of States in the region and the determined
mobilization of the international community will

10

To that end, Morocco will continue to cooperate
with the States of the region, specifically the Central
African Republic and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, in key areas of human development, including
health, education, agriculture and professional training.
Lastly, my country is pleased to contribute, by
means of a large contingent within the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, to helping to protect civilians
and ensure the delivery of humanitarian assistance and
the provision of medical services.
I should like, before concluding, to commend the
outstanding work undertaken by Mr. Abou Moussa,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
and his team and to assure them of our full support
as they carry out their mission. We also unreservedly
support the draft presidential statement prepared by the
delegation of the United Kingdom.
Mr. Sharifov (Azerbaijan): I should like at the
outset to thank the presidency for having convened

12-39660

S/PV.6796

this very important debate. We also thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Abou
Moussa, and the African Union (AU) Special Envoy,
Mr. Madeira, for their comprehensive briefings.

and the launching of the African Union-led regional
cooperation initiative. It should be noted that the
necessary funding is essential for the implementation
of both the strategy and the initiative.

We welcome the positive developments registered
in the region during the reporting period, especially the
conduct of peaceful elections, economic growth and
efforts to promote regional integration and cooperation.
However, cross-border threats, the flow of illegal
arms and the activities of armed groups and terrorist
organizations, especially Boko Haram, the increase in
piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf of Guinea, poverty
and trafficking in persons continue to raise concerns.

At the same time, we would stress the importance
of further strengthening cooperation among all
LRA-affected countries, in particular through the
Regional Task Force, to address those common regional
threats. We take positive note in this regard of the
agreement reached on information-sharing between
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Uganda this
March.

Incidents of piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf of
Guinea have risen significantly in recent times, so that
the area has the second most acute piracy problem on
the African continent. The increasing number of piracy
attacks, in addition to transnational organized crime,
including the trafficking of illicit weapons, constitute
a serious threat to peace, security and economic
development in both the coastal and hinterland States
of the region.
The measures and initiatives undertaken at the
national and regional levels to mobilize international
attention to this problem and enhance maritime
safety and security in the Gulf of Guinea should be
commended.
Insecurity in the Sahel region continues to have
a significant negative economic and social impact
on a number of Central African countries, and more
consistency and determination are needed in addressing
those potential and actual risks and threats.
We are also deeply concerned by the atrocities
committed by the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA),
which continue to pose a threat to regional security
and stability. The LRA bears responsibility for grave
violations against civilians, including killing, maiming,
abductions, sexual slavery, rape and the recruitment
and use of children, as well as the displacement of
445,000 people. We note the work of the United Nations
agencies, in particular the World Food Programme and
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, in providing humanitarian assistance to
this vulnerable group.
We welcome the development of the United Nations
regional strategy on the LRA, with the contribution of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa,

The recent decrease in the number of LRA attacks
brought about an improvement in the regional security
situation. In the context of that approach, State
authority, as well as disarmament, demobilization,
repatriation, resettlement and reintegration activities,
should be further strengthened in the LRA-affected
areas. Moreover, various programmes to reduce poverty
and create job opportunities should be implemented by
the respective Governments, with donor assistance.
The reintegration into society of the displaced persons,
LRA abductees and former combatants is also very
important.
Even successful national efforts cannot bring about
overall normalcy and ensure a comprehensive solution
if they are not supported by the United Nations system
and the broader international community. Therefore
the initiatives undertaken by the Governments of the
affected countries, as well as the efforts of the African
Union and other relevant regional and subregional
organizations, should be forcefully supported.
Mr. Cabral (Portugal): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this meeting on this
very important subject. I would like to start by thanking
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Abou
Moussa for the very comprehensive briefings on the
Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) and on United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA). I also
want to thank the Special Envoy of the African Union
for the LRA issue, Ambassador Francisco Madeira, for
his very important statement to the Council.
The LRA continues to pose a serious threat
to civilians in four affected countries. We remain
concerned by the fact that attacks against civilians in
LRA-affected areas were again on the rise in early
2012 and that more than 445,000 people are internally

12-3966011

S/PV.6796

displaced or living as refugees as a result of LRA
activities.
Portugal strongly condemns the continued
violations by the LRA of international humanitarian
law and human rights law, including the recruitment
and use of children, killing and maiming, rape, sexual
violence and abductions. We strongly urge the LRA to
put an end to those practices, to release all abducted
persons and to disarm, demobilize and surrender.
We also encourage all States to cooperate in order to
implement the International Criminal Court arrest
warrants for the three remaining LRA leaders in order
to bring them to justice.
The present situation clearly shows that the LRA
remains capable of having a terrible impact on civilian
populations and thus poses a continuing threat to regional
security, notwithstanding the fact that over the years the
group has seen its numbers reduced significantly as a
result of the steps taken by Governments in the region,
with the assistance of the international community.
It is crucial that all actors continue to be engaged
until the LRA threat is removed. In that regard, Portugal
welcomes the regional strategy developed by UNOCA,
in coordination with the relevant United Nations actors
and the African Union, to guide the efforts of the United
Nations, including the United Nations peacekeeping
missions in the region, and other stakeholders in support
of international efforts, led by the African Union, to
neutralize the threat posed by the LRA and to address
the impact of its activities in the four affected countries.
The implementation of that strategy is a crucial step
in order to translate the renewed attention given by the
international community to the LRA issue in the past
year into concrete results by attaining the five goals set
in the strategy, including the full implementation of the
African Union-led regional cooperation initiative.
We remain encouraged by the fact that the
four LRA-affected countries have confirmed their
willingness to contribute to the Regional Task Force
and to provide premises for the various components of
the regional initiative. We encourage them to further
strengthen regional cooperation in order to overcome,
with increased support from the international
community, the important challenges that lie ahead
regarding the implementation of the initiative, and
thus succeed in apprehending the top commanders
of the LRA and enhancing tactical coordination,
information-sharing and joint planning.

12

At the same time, it is fundamental that committed
efforts be deployed by all relevant actors in order
to fulfil the other strategic objectives set in the
regional strategy. These objectives are aimed at,
first, enhancing the protection of civilians; secondly,
expanding disarmament, demobilization, reintegration
and repatriation or resettlement activities to cover
LRA-affected areas; thirdly, promoting a coordinated
humanitarian and child-protection response in
those areas; and fourthly, providing support to the
Governments of LRA-affected countries in the domains
of peacebuilding, human rights, the rule of law and
long-term development, thus enabling them to extend
State authority throughout their territories.
Let me conclude with respect to the LRA by
underlining once again the importance of sustaining
the engagement of the Security Council on this issue.
Thus, we firmly support the adoption today of a
Security Council presidential statement, ensuring that
the Council will continue to closely follow this issue.
Portugal will spare no effort to continue to mobilize
the international community and to improve the United
Nations response to this scourge.
Let me now turn to UNOCA, whose work we
believe will contribute significantly to enhancing the
United Nations engagement towards the achievement
of peace and security in Central Africa. We highlight
the importance of UNOCA’s continuing its close
coordination with the Economic Community of
Central African States and the United Nations Office
for West Africa on relevant security challenges with a
great impact not only on the West and Central Africa
subregions, but to the entire international community,
including security and terrorism, the fight against drug
trafficking, piracy in the Gulf of Guinea, and illicit
flows of arms and fighters.
As far as the LRA is concerned, the main issue
linking the two comprehensive briefings we have had
the opportunity to hear today, we welcome the fact that
UNOCA will be responsible for overall monitoring and
reporting on the regional strategy on the LRA. Let me
conclude by reiterating strong support for UNOCA’s
innovative efforts addressed at helping to prevent the
emergence of new conflicts, resolving existing ones
by peaceful means, and promoting democratic and
accountable governance in the subregion of Central
Africa.

12-39660

S/PV.6796

Mr. Wittig (Germany): I wish to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Abou Moussa
for his briefing. Many thanks also go to Special Envoy
Madeira for his information on the African Union-led
regional initiative against the Lord’s Resistance Army
(LRA).
The humanitarian impact of the scourge of the LRA
is unspeakable. It depends not on the size of the LRA,
but on its massive use of violence, including sexual
violence against women and children, abductions
and horrifying attacks. It has uprooted hundreds of
thousands of civilians across the Central African
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and South Sudan. The ability of the LRA to operate
across national borders and to exploit weak State
authority in the region highlights the urgent need for
a comprehensive, coherent and coordinated approach.
The threat posed by the LRA to regional stability
needs to end. The human consequences of the LRA’s
atrocities need to be addressed. The protection of
children deserves our special attention, as the LRA
is synonymous with the brutal abduction and use of
children as child soldiers, porters, spies and sex slaves.
As Chair of the Security Council Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict, we will ensure a close
follow-up of the latest report of the Secretary-General
on the situation of children and armed conflict affected
by the LRA (S/2012/365) and strive for comprehensive
recommendations. We reiterate that a durable solution
to the LRA threat requires both military efforts, carried
out in compliance with international humanitarian and
human rights law, and non-military efforts, including
enhanced humanitarian aid and development measures.
It is against this backdrop that I would like to
highlight three points.
First, the Governments of Uganda, the Central
African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and South Sudan are ultimately responsible for ending
the LRA threat and for protecting their civilians. They
need to be in the lead. Their political commitment and
cooperation at the State, military and community levels
are indispensable. We therefore want to encourage them
to make the response to the LRA a national priority,
to further strengthen their collaboration, and to invest
all necessary resources in the implementation of the
African Union (AU) initiative against the LRA. We
commend the support that is provided in this regard by
the United States to the affected countries.

The successful rehabilitation and reintegration of
ex-LRA combatants could promote further defections.
We therefore want to also encourage the countries of
the region to put in place policies supporting defections,
including through comprehensive disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation or
resettlement (DDRRR) programmes, and to ensure a
common approach with respect to a legal framework
on the treatment of ex-LRA and abductees who have
escaped from the LRA.
Secondly, we welcome the close collaboration
between Special Representative Abou Moussa
and Special Envoy Madeira in support of the AU
initiative against the LRA. We consider the African
Union involvement to be essential to strengthening
coordination, information-sharing and trust among the
four militaries of the LRA-affected countries. We also
encourage the African Union to prioritize the protection
of civilians and to implement a strategy in this regard.
All military efforts against the LRA need to put the
protection of civilians, notably also of children, front
and centre.
Thirdly, we strongly welcome and support the United
Nations regional strategy to address the LRA threat.
It provides a good basis for improving cross-border
mechanisms and regional inter-mission cooperation
in all relevant fields. We commend the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) for its
leading role in coordinating the strategy and all United
Nations actors for their contributions.
The cooperation between the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and the United
Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan to extend
MONUSCO’s regional LRA communication strategy is
a good example of enhanced inter-mission cooperation
that is already in place. Further efforts are needed. We
therefore encourage the swift implementation of the
strategy. This will require the full commitment of all
United Nations actors and external partners.
The successful implementation will also depend
on the further support of the international community.
Germany is committed to contributing to that end. Apart
from humanitarian assistance provided to LRA-affected
communities, we will support the expansion of
MONUSCO’s standard operating procedures for
DDRRR across the region. The project will also provide
support for sensitizing LRA combatants with the aim of

12-3966013

S/PV.6796

encouraging defections. All activities will also include
capacity-building for national actors, including civil
society.

concerned, and we welcome the efforts made by their
Governments, the various United Nations missions and
all partners to achieve that outcome.

UNOCA’s follow-up of the regional strategy will
be important and needs to remain a priority. The
Security Council should be kept informed accordingly
by a report of the Secretary-General, as suggested in
the draft presidential statement prepared by the United
Kingdom delegation, which we fully support.

The current peaceful trend we see in various
countries of the region should not, however, lead us
to cease to express our great concern at the ongoing
fighting in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, in particular in North Kivu. That situation
poses a great threat to the stability of the entire region.
The fighting, which is pitting the armed forces of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo against the so-called
M-23 Movement, is significantly undermining all the
efforts made in recent years to bring lasting stability
to that part of the country. This is also at the heart of
the worrying situation concerning the deterioration
in relations between the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Rwanda. Given that especially troubling
situation, Togo urges both countries to avoid any action
that could lead to a direct confrontation. We also call on
them to resume a genuine and frank dialogue without
delay, with a view to safeguarding regional peace and
security.

Turning finally to UNOCA’s wider role, we
commend Special Representative Moussa and UNOCA
for their contribution to peace and stability in the Central
African region. We support the work priorities set out
in the report of the Secretary-General, in particular
support for the capacity-building of the Economic
Community of Central African States in the field of
early warning and conflict prevention, enhancing
maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea, and for the
AU-led efforts to address the LRA threats. These areas
should remain at the core of UNOCA’s activities. We
welcome the established working relations between
UNOCA and the United Nations Office for West Africa
and the envisaged joint initiatives on terrorism and
illicit flow of weapons across the two subregions. Given
UNOCA’s limited resources, it will remain crucial to
prioritize its work programme and to focus on specific
activities.
In closing, I want to express our support for the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
UNOCA, including for UNOCA’s mandate renewal in
August.
Mr. Kandangha-Bariki (Togo) (spoke in French):
Allow me, first of all, to thank Mr. Abou Moussa,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa (UNOCA), as well as His Excellency Ambassador
Francisco Caetano José Madeira, Special Envoy of the
Chairperson of the African Union on Lord’s Resistance
Army Issues.
For several years now, the countries of the Central
African subregion, with substantial support from the
international community, have been untiring in their
effort to rebuild a regional architecture for peace and
security. Such a strategy has certainly not yet produced
the expected results; but it has made it possible to
ensure stability in several of the region’s States. In
that regard, my country welcomes the atmosphere of
calm that currently prevails in most of the countries

14

My country believes that one of the ways to
decisively address the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is to carry out security sector
reform, including a disarmament, demobilization,
repatriation, resettlement and reintegration programme
(DDRRR). Both security sector reform and DDRRR
are essential to the consolidation of peace and security.
The countries of Central Africa, but also those of
West Africa, today face such new threats to security
as piracy at sea, armed robbery along the shores of the
Gulf of Guinea and trafficking in small arms as well
as other sophisticated weapons. Those cross-cutting
threats to security are a source of great concern. The
require us to mobilize in a major way, respond robustly
and carry out close cooperation among concerned
countries of the region.
Togo is pleased that the Security Council has
responded quickly to this situation by adopting various
resolutions, including resolution 2039 (2012), which
was adopted on 29 February. The commitment of the
leaders of West and Central Africa to combat this
scourge should be reflected in the decisions they take
at the regional summit devoted to piracy at sea. My
country welcomes UNOCA’s initiatives in this regard
and urges it to provide further assistance to the States of
the region in order to ensure the success of the summit.

12-39660

S/PV.6796

The Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA), in addition
to being an armed group responsible for the worst of
atrocities, especially against women and children, who
are routinely kidnapped and forced to commit atrocities,
as well as girls, who are used as sexual slaves, is also
a serious threat to the peace and stability of various
countries in Central and Eastern Africa, in particular
Uganda, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Central African Republic and South Sudan, among
others.
Although, thanks to the concerted efforts of the
Governments concerned and by the international
community, there was a decrease in 2011 in the nuisance
posed by this terrorist group, it is nevertheless still the
case that it remains active in various areas, including in
Orientale province in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, where many deadly attacks by this group have
been recorded in recent months.
This climate of insecurity is only serving to worsen
the humanitarian problems being experienced by the
region. In that regard, I would refer to the existence of
the 445,000 persons displaced as a result of the LRA’s
activities who are facing hunger and malnutrition. We
encourage the countries of the region to work to ensure
security for humanitarian organizations in order that
they can come to the aid of those hundreds of thousands
of displaced people.
We welcome the resolute determination of
affected countries to join their efforts in order to more
effectively combat the LRA. The strengthening of the
early-warning system should help make it possible to
exchange information and act in a concerted manner.
We also welcome the recent arrest of senior LRA
leader Caesar Acellam Otto by Ugandan armed forces
in the Central African Republic. This is unquestionably
a significant gain in pursing LRA fighters. While Togo
agrees that amnesty for a given number of the LRA
fighters could contribute to resolving the issue, we
nevertheless believe that the group’s senior leaders and
all those accused of serious crimes should answer for
their actions before the law.
Moreover, we welcome the resolute response by the
African Union in combating the LRA. On 24 March,
the Union put in place a military force of 5,000 in Juba,
the capital of South Sudan, whose mission is to put a
definite end to the group’s activities, including tracking
and intercepting it’s leader, Joseph Kony, wanted by the

law at the international level for his outrages against
children in Central Africa.
Joint efforts by the African Union and UNOCA,
with the support of regional and international actors,
as part of a regional strategy to combat the LRA,
will certainly help to more effectively address the
menace posed by this group. In that regard, we would
like to thank organizations and countries such as the
European Union and the United States, as well as all
partners and donors, who are currently providing major
logistical and financial support to combat the LRA. My
delegation would like to take this opportunity to launch
an urgent appeal for greater efforts on the part of the
international community in overcoming the security
and humanitarian challenges posed by the LRA for
several years now.
In conclusion, Togo strongly supports the draft
presidential statement that will most likely be adopted
at the end of this meeting.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
I thank Special Representative Moussa and African
Union Special Envoy Madeira for their statements this
morning.
The Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) has plagued
Central Africa for far too long. The United States
commends Special Representative Moussa and the
United Nations for the comprehensive regional strategy
devised to address the threat posed by the LRA once
and for all. The real test of the strategy will be whether
it translates into concrete action on the ground. The
United States encourages United Nations missions
in the region to help implement it and calls on other
nations to address the gaps and areas for improvement
that the United Nations has outlined.
The United States, in partnership with the African
Union (AU) and the United Nations, supports the
Governments of the Central African Republic, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, South Sudan and
Uganda in their efforts to apprehend Joseph Kony and
the top LRA commanders. Two months ago, President
Obama announced that the United States will continue
the deployment of a small number of United States
military advisers who are assisting the forces of the
Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, South Sudan and Uganda in pursuing the
LRA and protecting local populations.

12-3966015

S/PV.6796

We welcome the significant progress made in
weakening the LRA and commend Uganda on the
capture of LRA senior commander Caesar Acellam
Otto last month. The number of people reported killed
by LRA attacks is low compared to previous years
and most attacks are focused on looting food and
supplies, suggesting that the LRA is in survival mode.
Nevertheless, we must not forget that the LRA has
been weakened before and has re-emerged when the
pressure on it is reduced. Since the majority of reported
LRA attacks and abductions occur in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the efforts of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) in coordination
with the Congolese Government to increase focus on the
LRA and help protect civilians are especially critical.
More must be done to ensure that the LRA cannot
gain breathing room in any part of the region. A future
free of the LRA will require the continued resolve and
stronger collaboration of regional Governments, and we
welcome the AU’s initiative aimed at helping to foster
increased cooperation.
The United States believes that, along with military
pressure, encouraging and helping members of the LRA
to surrender is critical to weakening the organization.
The United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
the Central African Republic, MONUSCO and the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan have already begun
to expand disarmament, demobilization, repatriation,
resettlement and reintegration activities across all
LRA-affected areas. In the weeks since Caesar Acellam
Otto’s capture, a few LRA fighters have surrendered
peacefully. The United States is working with United
Nations missions and military forces in the region to
expand communications, including by distributing
leaflets and making radio broadcasts urging LRA
fighters to defect. We join regional Governments in
calling on the remaining fighters and abductees in the
LRA to surrender peacefully and return home. To assist
in that effort, the United States is funding programmes
aimed at addressing the psychological and social needs
of former abducted children and helping them reunite
with their families and communities.
As we support the region’s efforts to dismantle
the LRA and rehabilitate its abductees, we must
continue to support the communities besieged by the
LRA threat. The strategy of the United Nations rightly
emphasizes the protection of civilians and humanitarian
response. The United States funds programmes to help

16

LRA-affected communities develop protection plans
and connect with other communities. We also provide
humanitarian assistance that targets 240,000 people
across the LRA-affected region.
Beyond that of the LRA, the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) has a
difficult set of challenges to address. Piracy and armed
robbery at sea affect the peace and security of West and
Central Africa. We are pleased to see that UNOCA and
the United Nations Office for West Africa are making
progress on the Council’s request earlier this year for
support to States and subregional organizations in
convening a joint summit on piracy and armed robbery
at sea in the Gulf of Guinea, and in developing a
comprehensive strategy to address that threat.
In conclusion, we would like to commend the
thousands of United Nations peacekeepers, observers
and humanitarian and human rights workers for their
dedication and sacrifice as they work to promote peace
in Central Africa.
Mr. Alzate (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA), Mr. Abou
Moussa, for his comprehensive and instructive remarks.
I would also like to take this opportunity to highlight
the efforts and energy that he has brought to launching
UNOCA’s work. Similarly, I would like to thank the
Special Envoy of the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission on Lord’s Resistance Army Issues,
Ambassador Francisco Caetano José Madeira, for his
informative briefing.
In recent years, Central Africa has made
considerable progress in consolidating its democratic
political systems, strengthening its institutions,
achieving economic growth and establishing
cooperation mechanisms that enable it to provide
coordinated responses to the various cross-border
problems affecting States in the subregion. We very
much welcome the fact that three Central African
countries have launched electoral processes, and that
the average economic growth for 2011 was 5.2 per cent
and is expected to reach an even higher level in 2012.
Similarly, we should highlight the dynamism of the
national debates on political, electoral, economic and
human rights reform.
Despite such progress, as the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2012/421) explains, national authorities must

12-39660

S/PV.6796

be supported so that they can establish frameworks that
will enable them to develop and strengthen national
and regional institutions and capacities so that they can
address the various challenges that have the potential
to jeopardize the security and stability of the countries
and the region as a whole.
In that context, UNOCA has a particular role to play
in formulating regional approaches aimed at addressing
the security problems affecting Central Africa. To that
end, the support and closely coordinated efforts of the
entire United Nations system are crucial to making a
reality of the motto “Delivering as one”. UNOCA plays
a very important role in channelling and promoting
dialogue and exchange between the subregion and the
United Nations system.
Electoral issues, systems for protecting human
rights, the various manifestations of transnational
organized crime, piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf
of Guinea and the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons are priority areas on which UNOCA must
continue to focus the attention and coordination of the
various United Nations agencies and programmes, as
well as of the international community in general, with
the goal of promoting an approach based on cooperation
and on strengthening national and subregional
capacities.
While progress has been made in combating the
Lord’s Resistance Army, the group continues to pose
a serious threat to the security of countries in the
region, and its activities continue to have very bad
humanitarian effects on the population. Grave violations
of international humanitarian law and of human rights
are the key traits that define and characterize the actions
of one of the worst armed groups ever to have emerged
in history.

United Nations in support of the regional cooperation
initiative against the Lord’s Resistance Army led by the
African Union. Now is the time for the sustained and
comprehensive implementation of the strategy, with
equal importance to be attached to all of its components.
Achieving lasting and definitive success against the
Lord’s Resistance Army will require long-term political
commitment, the provision of sufficient resources and
the effective coordination of all stakeholders with the
aim of achieving quantifiable, feasible objectives.
Particular attention must be paid to addressing the
precarious living conditions of the population dwelling
in the areas affected by the presence of the Lord’s
Resistance Army. There is a need for the implementation
of robust economic development programmes that will
improve social and economic indicators and which
will enable the population to live in an environment
conducive to their well-being.
Finally, we wish to express our support for the draft
presidential statement that has been prepared on the
issue.
Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): We would like to thank
Special Representative Abou Moussa for his briefing
and for his invaluable work as the Head of the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA).
We also extend our gratitude to the Special Envoy of
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission on
Lord’s Resistance Army Issues, Ambassador Francisco
Caetano José Madeira, for his statement.

We welcome the actions undertaken by the Central
African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, South Sudan and Uganda. We very much
welcome the support and cooperation that has been
provided by the African Union as led by Special Envoy
Francisco Caetano José Madeira, the United States of
America and the European Union in order to meet the
challenges posed by the Lord’s Resistance Army.

The report of the Secretary General on the
activities of UNOCA and on areas affected by the
Lord’s Resistance Army (S/2012/421) highlights several
challenges being faced by the subregion, including a
fragile security situation, the proliferation of weapons,
the menace of transatlantic crime, the issue of piracy
in the Gulf of Guinea, and threats posed by terrorism
and the activities of armed groups, including the Lord’s
Resistance Army (LRA). As noted by the report, those
challenges have been further exacerbated due to an
influx of illegal arms and combatants in the region as
part of the fallout of the Libyan crisis. Addressing those
cross-cutting challenges requires greater collaboration
and coordination at the regional and subregional levels.

In the same vein, we are pleased to acknowledge
the further development of the United Nations regional
strategy to address the threats and impact of the
activities of the Lord’s Resistance Army, which is a
fundamental tool designed to guide the actions of the

Against that backdrop, the work of UNOCA
remains important for the peace and stability of the
subregion through mediation and the provision of good
offices, ensuring a coherent and coordinated United
Nations system response to challenges faced by the

12-3966017

S/PV.6796

subregion and strengthening the capacity of subregional
organizations to address regional peace and security
challenges.
We are deeply concerned at the increased attacks
against civilians by the LRA and the resulting
displacement of populations in the Central African
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
South Sudan. The threat posed by the LRA requires
a coordinated regional and international response
entailing a comprehensive approach aimed not only
at eliminating and bringing to justice the remaining
leadership of the LRA, but also towards strengthening
the State capacity of the relevant countries and
addressing the long-term developmental needs of the
LRA-affected areas.
In that regard, we welcome the development by
UNOCA, in collaboration with the relevant stakeholders,
of the United Nations regional strategy to address the
threat and impact of the activities of the LRA. We
hope that the strategy will provide a strong basis for
a comprehensive response to the threat posed by the
LRA. We also welcome the launching of the African
Union-led regional cooperation initiative against LRA
and the commitment of the LRA-affected countries to
contribute troops to the regional task force under the
initiative.
The successful implementation of the initiative
hinges on the availability of adequate and timely
resources and on building the requisite capacities
of the militaries in the LRA-affected countries. The
international community should provide the resources
needed for the successful implementation of the
initiative, in line with the priorities identified by the
African Union and consistent with the principle of
national ownership.
Pakistan will continue to support all efforts for
durable peace and stability in Central Africa and for
countering the threat posed by the LRA to the subregion.
Mr. Zhukov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
We are grateful to Mr. Moussa and Mr. Madeira for
their briefings.
We share the assessments and conclusions contained
in the reports of the Secretary-General (S/2012/365 and
S/2012/421). We note some progress in consolidating
democratic processes in a number of States in the
subregion, including the peaceful holding of elections
and the orderly transition of power. We also welcome

18

the efforts of Central African countries to encourage
regional integration and cross-border cooperation.
A serious threat to peace and stability continues
to be posed by the work of armed groups and the
uninterrupted flow of weapons and combatants as a
result of the negative impact of the Libyan crisis. In
this regard, we attach great significance to the efforts
to strengthen security in countries in the subregion,
including the signing of the Kinshasa Convention for
the Control of Small Arms and Light Weapons. Of
no lesser importance are measures taken by States in
the Gulf of Guinea to combat armed piracy in coastal
waters, including the preparation of a regional summit
on this issue, with the participation of all interested
parties.
We are concerned by the growth in the activity of
the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA). We have seen more
than 50 attacks on civilians in the first three months of
this year alone. Due to looting, approximately 450,000
people are still refugees and internally displaced persons
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Central
African Republic and South Sudan. The work of this
group is seriously destabilizing the military, political
and humanitarian situation in the affected areas, and it
undermines the efforts at their post-conflict recovery.
We call for a comprehensive approach to handling
this issue, which calls for the implementation of
military, political, socio-economic, humanitarian and
outreach measures. That would allow us to eliminate
the breeding ground for the work of the Lord’s
Resistance Army, including by means of strengthening
State institutions and alleviating poverty and mass
unemployment. We believe it is important to take
steps to extend State authority to remote areas and to
ensure sustainable socio-economic development there.
We believe it is equally urgent to steadily implement
disarmament, demobilization, repatriation, resettlement
and reintegration programmes for ex-combatants and to
strengthen and effectively reform the security sector.
We welcome the growing cooperation of States
in the subregion in regional and international
organizations and with other parties interested in
combating this group. We note the official launching in
the spring of 2012 of the corresponding initiative by the
African Union (AU), which calls in particular for the
establishment of an operational force of 5,000 soldiers
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Central
African Republic, South Sudan and Uganda.

12-39660

S/PV.6796

We believe that the regional United Nations strategy
to counteract the LRA, which the Council has developed
through the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa (UNOCA) and with the AU and other partners,
will help broaden the coordination of collective efforts
in this area. That document, which is in our view solid,
charts the full range of interrelated goals, objectives
and activities to combat that militia and to eliminate the
consequences of its criminal activity for the countries
in the subregion.
We note the contribution of UNOCA to the
collective efforts to combat the LRA and the key role it
has in preventing conflicts, ensuring peace and security,
peacebuilding and strengthening the coordination of
the United Nations work and the work of regional and
subregional organizations in Central Africa.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like to thank Mr. Abou Moussa for the
informative briefing that he has given us concerning
the work of his office and for his report on the areas
affected by the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA). We also
thank Ambassador Francisco Caetano José Madeira for
the very useful information he has given us.
We welcome the measures adopted by the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA)
to facilitate regional initiatives and coordinate the
activities undertaken by the entities of the United
Nations to prevent conflicts and help build peace in the
Central African region. UNOCA has an important role
to play. We commend the determination of UNOCA to
work closely with the United Nations Office for West
Africa (UNOWA) in order to tackle the serious security
problems that face those two subregions. The joint
efforts of UNOCA and UNOWA will be indispensable
in dealing with the negative repercussions of the
conflict in Libya for Western and Central Africa and for
insecurity in the Sahel region. We call upon UNOCA
to continue its efforts in order to enhance coordination
of the United Nations missions that are working in
the region, and to promote cooperation with regional
organizations such as the Economic Community of
Central African States and the African Union.
As for the Lord’s Resistance Army, my delegation
remains concerned, of course, by the devastating
effects that this armed group and its current activities
continue to have in the areas within which it operates.
The brutality of its activities continues to threaten

thousands of innocent civilians, including women and
children.
We therefore support the regional strategy presented
by UNOCA in cooperation with the African Union to
combat the initiatives of the Lord’s Resistance Army,
improve efforts to promote the protection of civilians by
establishing mechanisms for humanitarian assistance
and for the protection of children in all of the affected
areas, and provide assistance to the Governments that
are affected by this rebel group. We encourage the
authorities of each of the affected countries to lend
their support and cooperation to this strategy for the
benefit of their peoples, who for decades now have had
to suffer under the scourge of this armed group.
Once again, we vigorously condemn the violations
that have been committed and that unfortunately
continue to be committed by the Lord’s Resistance
Army and we express our solidarity with the victims.
Guatemala has also been a direct victim of the attacks
perpetrated by that armed group. In January 2006,
eight Guatemalan peacekeeping officers who had been
deployed in the Democratic Republic of the Congo lost
their lives in Garamba National Park when they were
ambushed by members of the Lord’s Resistance Army.
We still hope that one day the perpetrators of those acts
will be brought to justice. For that reason, we urge for
the execution of the arrest warrants that were issued by
the International Criminal Court for the three leaders
of the Lord’s Resistance Army who have been charged
with, among others things, war crimes and crimes
against humanity. We encourage all States to cooperate
with the Court in order to execute those warrants and
to bring the perpetrators of those atrocities to justice.
Finally, we would like to express our support for
the draft presidential statement to be adopted today.
Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his reports
(S/2012/365 and S/2012/421) and for developing the
regional strategy on the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA)
as requested by the Security Council in its presidential
statement of 14 November 2011 (S/PRST/2011/21).
I would also like to thank Mr. Abou Moussa, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa,
and Ambassador Francisco Caetano José Madeira,
Special Envoy of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission on Lord’s Resistance Army Issues, for
their briefings.

12-3966019

S/PV.6796

The initiatives implemented up to now by the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA)
show the vigor of that recently created Office. A
number of political and security challenges remain in
Central Africa and require a pooling of efforts by all
stakeholders. We welcome the efforts made by UNOCA
to that end.
The fight against piracy in the Gulf of Guinea
is also a source of concern for the Security Council.
We welcome the upcoming summit of heads of State
on piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf of Guinea,
which is made possible by support from UNOCA. The
holding of that summit, as requested by the Council
in resolution 2039 (2012), will allow participants to
develop a regional anti-piracy strategy.
Efforts to combat all forms of transnational
organized crime must also be pursued and, in that
regard, we welcome the signing between UNOCA
and the Economic Community of West African States
of a cooperation framework defining priority themes
for partnerships, such as political governance and
combating weapons proliferation.
With regard to supporting democracy in the
region, we reiterate the need for the holding of free
and transparent elections to establish lasting peace in
Africa. We encourage UNOCA to continue to support
national efforts on that issue.
Among the challenges of peace and security in
Central Africa, the Lord’s Resistance Army remains
a subject of major concern. We would like to thank
UNOCA for developing the United Nations regional
strategy, which complements the existing mechanisms
through specific objectives and measures and will
allow us to strengthen the coherence and coordination
of United Nations activities and of other stakeholders.
Given the ongoing threats alluded to by a number
of speakers, efforts made up to now must be pursued
and consolidated in a coordinated fashion. In terms of
security, our priority must be to ensure the protection
of civilians. We support the numerous initiatives of
partners on the ground to establish early warning
mechanisms.
Once again, we reiterate our full support for the
work done by the troops of our partners in Central
Africa. We also encourage the defection of rebels. In
that regard, the existing programmes of disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and resettlement or

20

repatriation (DDRRR) must be extended to all affected
areas. Particular focus should be put on reintegration
with the establishment of appropriate welcoming
structures. We support the strategy proposal whereby
the offices and missions of the United Nations must
develop a common approach for the DDRRR process
and establish standard procedures for welcoming
children who were previously enlisted.
At the same time, ongoing efforts to arrest and
bring to justice the top leaders of the Lord’s Resistance
Army (LRA), including Joseph Kony, must be pursued.
We encourage States concerned to strengthen their
cooperation with the International Criminal Court in
that regard.
France supports all of those efforts through its
contribution to the Peace Facility for Africa of the
European Union, which approved granting €1.2 million
to the African Union at the end of 2011. France also
bilaterally supports the States affected by the LRA by,
for example, contributing significantly on an ongoing
basis with the Central African Republic on military
matters. We support in particular the capacity-building
of the Central African armed forces. We also provide
humanitarian assistance to the populations affected by
the attacks and conduct socio-economic reintegration
programmes for child soldiers in the four countries
concerned.
In conclusion, we encourage States affected by
the LRA that have a lead role to play to maintain their
efforts with determination. We are at their side. We must
not let up in our efforts to sustainably put an end to the
threat of the LRA and comfort the civilian populations.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
China.
Currently, the overall political situation in Central
Africa is stable. Economic development has achieved
results and countries of the region are continuing with
the integration process. China finds that gratifying.
We note, at the same time, that efforts to achieve
lasting peace and sustainable development in Central
Africa still face many challenges, with the region’s
weak economic foundation and rampant transnational
organized crime, which seriously undermine social
stability. In particular, the Libyan crisis caused the
proliferation of arms in the Sahel region as a result
of arms smuggling, which threatens the peace and

12-39660

S/PV.6796

security of some countries in the region. China is very
concerned about that.
China hopes that the international community
will pay more attention to central Africa and provide
effective help. We are willing to continue to play an
active and constructive role in that regard.
China strongly condemns the Lord’s Resistance
Army (LRA,) which continues to move around in
many countries, causing instability and damage. We
are seriously concerned by the humanitarian problems
caused by LRA activities. We support the countries of
the region in their efforts to combat the LRA, welcome
the relevant African Union cooperation initiative and
appreciate the regional strategy formulated by the
United Nations to combat the LRA. We hope that various
actors in the international community will enhance
communication, coordinate action and guarantee the
provision of sufficient resources to ensure the effective
implementation of both the initiative and the strategy.
China appreciates the efforts made by the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA)
to maintain regional peace and security in that area and
will continue to support the work of UNOCA and the
Special Representative Moussa.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
The Council has before it the text of a draft
presidential statement on behalf of the Council on the
subject of today’s meeting. I thank the Council members
for their valuable contributions to the draft statement.
In accordance with understanding reached among
the members of the Council, I shall take it that the
members of the Security Council agree to the statement,
which will be issued as a document of the Security
Council under the symbol S/PRST/2012/18.
It is so decided.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Central African Republic.
Mr. Doubane (Central African Republic): As this
is the second time that I am taking the floor this June
to address the Council, allow me, Mr. President, to
commend you for the outstanding manner in which you
are guiding the work of the Council.
The presentation of the report (S/2012/421) of
the Secretary-General on the activities of the United

Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA)
and on areas affected by the Lord’s Resistance
Army provides the delegation of the Central African
Republic, of which I am the head, a further opportunity
to first commend the Secretary-General for his clear
and concise depiction of the situation in Central Africa,
and, secondly, to thank his Special Representative,
Mr. Abou Moussa, for the dedicated manner in which
he is leading his mission in the subregion. I would like
also to convey my gratitude to Mr. Francisco Madeira,
Special Envoy of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission on Lord’s Resistance Army issues, who
is also working tirelessly to eradicate the scourge of
the LRA in those countries that are the victims of
the atrocities perpetrated by that group of bandits
and criminals. Finally, I should like to congratulate
Mr. Guélengdouksia Ouaidou on his election to the post
of Secretary-General of the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS), which is a subregional
partner.
The Central African Republic is addressing the
Council today so as to convey a message in its capacity
as, first, a country that is a victim of the LRA; secondly,
as a fragile country of the subregion that is racked by
increasing insecurity; and, thirdly, as a member of
the international community, in order to mobilize that
community to pay closer attention to the situation that
prevails there.
Since 2008 the LRA has been killing, robbing
and plundering, and recruiting women, children and
men in the east, south-east and north-east parts of my
country, the Central African Republic. We would recall
once again that we share no border with Uganda, nor
do we share any common history with that brotherly
State. The people of the Central African Republic
therefore continue to wonder what the real motives
for that aggression are. By way of illustration, in the
year 2012 alone the LRA has carried out 20 attacks,
and its actions have resulted in numerous deaths and
abductions, displaced 20,400 people and left in their
wake 5,000 refugees and 3,000 children kept out
of school — all of which is taking place against the
backdrop of a shredded socio-economic fabric.
That impoverished area, where life is precarious, is
profoundly destabilized, which further complicates the
delivery of assistance and other humanitarian efforts
intended for the benefit of the victims and the local host
populations. Today the greatest hope of these weary
people is to see this scourge ended once and for all, so

12-3966021

S/PV.6796

that peace — the prerequisite for development — can
return once and for all.
Mr. Kony and his band of barbarians must be
neutralized. They must be arrested and tried for their
countless unspeakable crimes perpetrated against
peaceful citizens. That will lead to the release of our
children, allowing them to return home to their families,
schools and games.
Allow me to take this opportunity to respond to the
many letters that we have received from schoolchildren
worldwide drawing the attention of the Government of
the Central African Republic to the alarming issue of
children abducted in conflict areas, in particular by the
LRA. Here and now, we reiterate to them — and in doing
so support the position of Germany — that we have heard
them, that the situation is being duly addressed and
that we will spare no effort in order to ensure that our
Government, international organizations — the United
Nations in particular — UNICEF and the International
Committee of the Red Cross work together to resolve
this issue. Let me say it once again: children belong
with their families, in school or on the playground.
In that way women, the pillars of our society, freed
from the yoke of the sexual servitude to which they
have been condemned, will also be able to rejoin their
families.
On the basis of those aspirations, the highest
authorities of my country are sparing no effort to end
this harsh rebellion, working jointly and in a coordinated
manner with the defence and security forces of the
subregion.
Here we wish, on behalf of all the people of the
Central African Republic, to express our gratitude for
the efforts made by the United Nations, the African
Union, ECCAS, the European Union, France and the
United States Government, whose military advisers are
actively working side by side with us on the ground. We
wish also to thank the agencies of the United Nations
system and the non-governmental organizations, both
national and international, which every day are working
for the benefit of the local populations, displaced
persons, refugees and other victims.

In this struggling subregion, in a world that is
fraught with many dangers, closer attention should be
paid to this part of Africa, which is shaped like a gun,
with the trigger, unfortunately, at the very heart of the
continent. Supporting the peace process and helping to
stabilize the countries of the subregion is like taking
out life insurance for the stability of our continent;
supporting the efforts of the subregion is to lay the
foundations for holistic and long-lasting development.
The LRA is a terrorist movement. It is the perpetrator
of trans-border crimes. It impedes development, and for
all of those reasons it must be combated. Mr. Kony and
his men are vile criminals, and there can be no tolerance
for them. We therefore call with all our hearts for the
mobilization of the international community as a whole
so as to put an end to this mockery, which is an affront
to our civilized world.
Central Africa, and my country in particular, aspires
to and desires peace so to enable our development. The
Council’s commitment to stand by our side is all the
more necessary as it is in keeping with the aspirations
and objectives of our Organization.
The President (spoke in Chinese): We are drawing
near to the end of the work of the Council for this month.
On behalf of the Chinese delegation, I should like to
thank all the members of the Council, in particular my
colleagues the Permanent Representatives, the Deputy
Permanent Representatives and their teams. My thanks
also go the Secretariat for all the support it has provided
to facilitate our work. Indeed, we had a very busy
month. We reached consensus on some major issues.
Without the support and hard work of delegations and of
the Secretariat, including the interpreters, translators,
conference officers and sound engineers, we would not
have been able to complete our work on our own.
As China wraps up its presidency, I should like, on
behalf of the Council, to wish the Colombian delegation
a successful month of July.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.

22

12-39660
